WT01-B20-1IA087-000632-B001-16http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-05-09.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082849 text/html 10952HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:28:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:52 GMTContent-length: 10736 NORML News - May 9, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. May 9, 1996 Federal Judge Speaks OutAgainst Drug War Endorses Program To Stop Arresting Marijuana Consumers April 25, 1996, Waterville, ME: Ahigh-ranking federal judge criticized America's current anti-drugefforts while speaking before students at Colby College, reported TheAssociated Press. Calling our drug war strategies a "losingbattle," Chief Judge Juan Torruella of the First CircuitU.S. Court of Appeals proposed that America seriously rethink itsmethods and goals, and suggested that the establishment of anational pilot program to alleviate marijuana-relatedprosecutions might be a first step in the right direction. At minimum, "a shift has to be made in the funding for drugenforcement toward an intense educational campaign," hesaid. Torruella, who went on the federal bench in 1975 and joined theappeals court in 1984, called for a national debate on the drugissue. In addition, he said that an independent national commissionshould be empaneled to analyze alternative approaches to curbingdrug use. Currently, any legitimate debate on the issue isclouded by political "rhetoric" and anti-drug "hysteria,"he claimed. Torruella likened this attitude to the zealotryexhibited by anti-communists during the McCarthy era. Torruella was also critical of the ways in which he felt drugprosecutors and law enforcement officials have run rampant overthe bill of rights. "You can't have one Constitutionfor the good guys and another Constitution for the badguys," he said. Torruella has served as chief judge of the First Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals since 1994. Federal Medical Marijuana Bill AttractsAdditional Sponsors May 1996, Washington, DC: Three moremembers of Congress, including one Republican and the House'sonly Independent, have recently signed on to a federal bill (H.R.2618) that would permit physicians to prescribe marijuana as atherapeutic agent for seriously ill patients. With the additionof the recent signees, U.S. Reps. Bernard Sanders (I-VT), GeorgeBrown (D-Calif.), and Brian Bilbray (R-Calif.), the total numberof co-sponsors now stands at sixteen. "Slowly but surely, more and more members of Congress arecoming forward to show their support for medical marijuanalegislation," stated NORML Deputy Director Allen St.Pierre. "This is a bill that deserves full bi-partisansupport and prompt federal action." The inclusion of Bilbray brings the total number of Republicanco-sponsors to three. Republican support of thislegislation is critical if the bill is to move forward in aRepublican controlled Congress. Currently, H.R. 2618 is simultaneously pending before twosubcommittees: the House Judiciary Committee, Subcommittee onCrime and the House Commerce Committee, Subcommittee on Healthand Environment. This past March, NORML ExecutiveDirector Keith Stroup, Esq. testified before the Subcommittee onCrime and encouraged Chairman Bill McCullom (R-Fla.) -- a formertwo-time co-sponsor of federal medical marijuana legislationhimself -- to hold additional hearings regarding medicalmarijuana. H.R. 2618 was introduced in Congress last fall by Rep. BarneyFrank (D-Mass.) to amend federal law to allow seriously illpatients to have legal access to marijuana for medicinalpurposes. If passed, the bill would allow doctors toprescribe marijuana to individuals suffering from "glaucoma,AIDS wasting syndrome, muscle spasms from certain spasticdisorders including multiple sclerosis, paraplegia, andquadriplegia, or the nausea associated with cancer chemotherapyor radiology." Presently, only eight patients areallowed to receive marijuana legally from the federal government. The effectiveness of medicinal marijuana has been endorsed by anumber of scientific and medical associations including the American Public Health Association,the Australian Commonwealth Department of Human Services andHealth, the National Academy of Sciences, and the National Nurses Society onAddiction. For more information about H.R. 2618 or medical marijuana,please contact either Allen St. Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML@ (202) 483-5500. Navajo Hemp Crop Under Fire From Feds May 1, 1996, Navajo Nation, AZ: Plans for a widescale planting of industrial hemp on AmericanIndian soil have met opposition from federal officials who arguethat any planting or harvesting of hemp would violate federallaw. Presently, Navajo Nation President Albert Hale is awaitinga legal opinion from the tribe's Justice Department before goingforward with the project. This past March, a ceremonialplanting of industrial hemp seeds by the Coalition for Hemp Awareness(CHA) took place on Native American soil following the unanimouspassage of a resolution by the Nation to allow for hempcultivation to occur on sovereign soil. Often described as "marijuana's misunderstood cousin,"industrial hemp is from the same plant species (Cannabissativa) that produces marijuana. Unlike marijuana,however, industrial hemp contains only minute traces of THC, thepsychoactive ingredient that gives marijuana its medicinal andeuphoric properties. Regardless, DEA spokeswoman DanaSeeley still maintains that federal laws forbidding thecultivation of marijuana also apply to hemp. "We arehopeful that they will not [go forward with their plans],"she said. Seeley noted that the DEA will continue tomonitor the situation closely and may take action if anylarge-scale test plots of hemp are planted. After decades of unemployment, leaders of the Navajo Nation feelthat hemp cultivation will invigorate the local economy. The Navajo Nation Hemp Project "is formulated to provide [a] bio-regionallocal industry that will create jobs and enhance the agriculturalbase," stated CHA spokeswoman Christie Bohling. "With the many attributes and by-products of this natural renewableresource, the Navajo Nation will become self-sufficient in [its]ability to provide many of its own necessities." Currently, industrial hemp is grown legally throughout much ofEurope and Asia and can be used to produce a variety of productssuch as cosmetics, textiles, paper, paints, plastics, and animalfeed. For more information regarding the Navajo nation Hemp Project,please contact CHA @ P.O. Box 9068, Chandler Heights, AZ85227. For further information or for a copy of the Navajonation resolution, please contact either Allen St. Pierre or PaulArmentano of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Drug Czar Admits Most People Who ExperimentWith Drugs "Walk Away" Without Problems May 1, 1996, Washington, D.C.: During a recent speech at the National Press Club, new Drug CzarBarry McCaffrey made several remarks that cast doubt on thevalidity of the "gateway theory." McCaffrey stated that out of the 90 million Americans who haveexperimented with illegal drugs, only 3 million are currentaddicts. In addition, he stated that the "overwhelmingmajority" of Americans who use illegal drugs simply"walk away and sa[y] it's not for me." "In my mind, the Drug Czar is simply acknowledging what weat NORML have already known," said Allen St.Pierre. "Federal statistics tell us time and timeagain that the bulk the Americans who experiment with illicitdrugs experiment solely with marijuana and do not progress toharder drugs or run into drug-related problems later inlife." -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-2IA087-000632-B001-43http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-05-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082900 text/html 10635HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:28:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:57 GMTContent-length: 10419 NORML News - May 2, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. May 2, 1996 White House Unveils New Drug Strategy April 29, 1996, Cora Gables, FL: Amidst a wave of media fanfare, President Clinton and Drug CzarBarry McCaffrey unveiled a new 10-year anti-drug strategy thispast Monday in Miami. The program asks for a record high$15.1 billion budget to initiate a "decade-long commitment"to reduce drug use in America. Although both the President and the Drug Czar emphasized that thenew strategy is chiefly focused on "motivat[ing] America'syouth to reject illegal drugs and substance abuse," a comprehensivebreakdown of the 1997 budget request illustrates that the plan'slargest component remains domestic law enforcement. According to the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP),the President is requesting $8.3 billion in fiscal year 1997 fordomestic enforcement. In addition, McCaffrey admitted that the new 1996 Clintonanti-drug strategy is essentially the same as those of previousadministrations. "Everything in this strategy isalready being done," he told reporters in Miami. "I don't think the drug strategy has new tricks in it." In a follow-up conference this past Wednesday in Washington,D.C., McCaffrey reiterated this point. This strategycontains "no sudden surprise attacks," he said. "[We] recognize that there is no silver bullet." McCaffrey added that he sees the new approach as a"permanent commitment to young people" and wasoptimistic that "there is no reason why we can't returnAmerica to a ... pre-Vietnam era level of drug use." When asked by the moderator what he felt about the idea of legalization,McCaffrey called the notion "nonsense." "The federal government's war on drugs has risen from a $1.5billion yearly battle in 1981 to $15.1 billion battletoday. During that time, America has experienced millionsof casualties and very few gains," said NORML DeputyDirector Allen St. Pierre. "The Clintonadministration's latest proposals are simply an escalation of thesame policies that resulted in the arrest of nearly one-halfmillion marijuana smokers in 1994 alone." For more information on the 1996 National Drug ControlStrategy or the just-released Gallup Poll: A Look at HowAmerican's View the Country's Drug Problem, please contact AllenSt. Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML @(202) 483-5500. For additional information, please contactthe Drug Policy Foundation @ (202) 537-5005. Update: Judge Suspends Sentence AgainstQuadriplegic Who Used Marijuana As Medicine April 18, 1996, Toledo, OH: DanielAsbury, a quadriplegic who grew marijuana to alleviate reoccurringpain and muscle spasms, has been given a two-year suspendedsentence by Lucas County Court Judge Ruth Ann Franks. Asbury, who was found guilty of trafficking in marijuana despiteexpert testimony by NORML Board member Dr. John Morgan onthe use of marijuana and pain management, must now refrain fromusing cannabis if he wants to stay out of jail. "This court does not condone the use of marijuana,"Franks said. "This court has sent people to thepenitentiary for using marijuana. ... But I believe this isa unique case. "The evidence is clear that you were using this drug formedicinal purposes." However, any further use may land Asbury in jail. "Essentially, David Asbury's future -- like the futures ofthe tens of thousands of patients who use marijuana as a medicine-- is limited to two options: suffer in pain or risk arrest andjail," said NORML Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre. Asbury suffered a broken neck 15 years ago and began to usemarijuana as a therapeutic agent after prescription drugs provedineffective at controlling his pain. "I need it,"Asbury told the court. "It's the only thing that makesme feel better." For more information on the case of Daniel Asbury, pleasecontact John Hartman of Northcoast NORML @ (216) 521-9333. NORML Chapter's Marijuana Measure To BePlaced On City Ballot April 27, 1996, Traverse City, MI: An initiative put forth by the Traverse City NORML chapter toreduce marijuana penalties has the necessary number of signaturesto be placed on the city ballot. The petition seeks to makepossession, use, or sale of less than one ounce of marijuana inTraverse City punishable by a maximum penalty of $100 and up toten hours of community service for a first-time offender. The road to the ballot has been a rocky one for marijuanaactivists. Chapter organizers' 1994 initiative drive wasrejected by the city commission despite having well over therequired number of signatures, because it allegedly conflictedwith state law. This year's petition was devoid of legal problems,but faced severe opposition from city commissioners who inDecember unanimously passed a resolution asking residents not tosign the petition. Bill Bustance, president of the Traverse City NORML Chapter, toldlocal media that he feels that there is a good chance that themeasure will be approved by voters. "We're just askinga simple question," he said. "We're not asking:'Are you for marijuana or are you against marijuana? or 'Ifyou're for NORML or against NORML?' ... We'reasking: 'Do you want to throw people in prison at a cost of$30,000 per year or do you want to enact fines and communityservice that will go directly to the community?" For more information, please contact Bill Bustance of TraverseCity NORML @ (616) 264-9565. Update: Cincinnati Buyers Club FounderPleads Not Guilty To Felony Pot Charges April 29, 1996, Covington, KY: Richard Evans, founder of the Greater Cincinnati Buyers Club --one of an estimated 30 underground clubs located across thecountry that supply marijuana as a therapeutic agent to seriouslyill patients who possess a physician's recommendation -- pled notguilty on Monday to three felony counts of trafficking marijuanawithin 1,000 yards of a school in connection with a February raidby law enforcement officers on the club's headquarters. Evans' home, which is located in close proximity of a school,served as the headquarters for the Cincinnati club. Evansinformed NORML last February that he had two marijuanaseedlings growing at the time of the bust. "[This case] will have national implications," statedattorney and marijuana activist Gatewood Galbraith, one of threelawyers representing Evans in the case. "I think themood of the nation is: Why not let these people have theirmedication." Galbraith maintains that he intends tolaunch a full-scale attack on Kentucky's anti-marijuana laws. "The resolution of this case could set an example for alllegal treatment of Buyer's Clubs in the future," he said. For more information on this case, please contact RichardEvans of Americans for Compassionate Use @ (606) 431-8719. In addition, Gatewood Galbraith is asking for contributions tohelp offset expenses associated with bringing in expert witnessessuch as NORML Board members Dr. Lester Grinspoon and Dr. JohnMorgan to testify in this case. Mr. Galbraith may becontacted via e- mail @: gatewood@mis.netor gatewood.com -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-3IA087-000632-B001-69http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-04-25.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082914 text/html 11634HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:29:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:01 GMTContent-length: 11418 NORML News - April 25, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. April 25, 1996 Medical Marijuana Initiative Heads ForCalifornia Ballot April 23, 1996, Santa Monica, CA: Proponents of a state-wide initiative to legalize marijuana formedical use report that they have collected over 750,000signatures, well over the number necessary to place it on theNovember 1996 California ballot. Supporters were elated by the success of the signature-gatheringdrive and noted that a last week blitz of over 140,000 signaturesvirtually guaranteed that Californians will have an opportunityto vote on the issue this year. A final validation of theestimated 750,000 signatures is expected in five to eightweeks. The number of signatures required to qualify theinitiative for the 1996 ballot is 433,269. California's medical marijuana initiative came about in responseto Governor Pete Wilson's decision to veto legislation passed bythe California Legislature in 1995 that would have allowed forthe controlled compassionate use of marijuana for those diagnosedby a physician to be suffering from the diseases of AIDS, cancer,glaucoma, and multiple sclerosis. The 1996 initiative maintainsthat any patient who possesses a valid doctor's recommendationshould be allowed to use marijuana as a therapeutic agent withoutfear or risk of prosecution. If the initiative is passed byCalifornia voters this fall, the measure will become lawimmediately and cannot be vetoed. "The issue here is simple; sick people should not bearrested for using medicine that their physicians recommend tothem," said California NORML coordinator Dale Gieringer. For more information, please contact either Dale Gieringer ofCalifornia NORML @ (415) 563-5858 or Dennis Peron of Californiansfor Compassionate Use @ (415) 621-3986. Vermont Senate Approves Hemp Legislation: However, State Still A Long Ways Away From Cultivation April 18, 1996, Montpelier, VT: Anamended version of legislation that had been previously approvedby the House to permit the development of a domestic hempindustry in Vermont was passed by the Senate by a 15-10vote. The amended measure reportedly "narrows thefocus" of the bill (H.783) and now must be re-approved bythe Rouse before being sent to the governor. Because themeasure failed to receive two-thirds majority support in theSenate, it is expected be vetoed by Gov. Howard Dean who remainsopposed to any efforts to legalize industrial hemp. "It is a terrible message to send to children," wroteDean in an April 8 letter to hemp-activist, Colorado Sen. LloydCasey (D- Northglenn). Rep. Fred Maslack (R-Poultney), a chief proponent of thelegislation, told NORML that the House is going to takeits time and "let things develop" before rushing toapprove the amended legislation. Maslack stated that Housebackers are considering several options at this time, includingtrying to override Dean's expected veto of the bill and/ortacking the controversial legislation onto an economicdevelopment bill considered sacred to the governor. "It's not over 'til it's over," Maslack told the AssociatedPress. Kathleen Keenan, chairwoman of the House Commerce Committee, toldthe AP that she sees hemp as an "economic developmentissue," but noted that "it has enough merit to standalone." Keenan further added that she was uncertainhow committed Dean was to the economic development bill andcautioned that he may, in fact, veto it with the hemp provisionincluded. Keenan's warning has little affect on the bill's proponents,however, who consider the latest round of political one-upmanshipa "positive" note. The approval from the Senatewas "one more step in the process," said Maslack. "[It's] not the first step [and it's certainly] not the laststep," but it's definitely a step in the right direction. For more information on the latest status of the Vermont hempbill, please contact the House Clerk's Office @ (802)828-2247. Rep. Fred Maslack may be contacted via e-mail at: fmaslack@leg.state.vt.us $250 Million Appropriation Request From NewDrug Czar Stresses Source Reduction, Interdiction April 1996, Washington, DC: NewWhite House Drug Czar, General Barry McCaffrey, has submitted arequest to Congress for an additional $250 million to combatdrugs. Not surprisingly, the majority of the requestedfunding ($202 million) is to be used to beef up theadministration's source-reduction and domestic interdictionprograms. For example, the proposal's largest financial allotment,$98 million, is requested to upgrade surveillance aircrafts topatrol known drug source countries such as Columbia andPeru. In addition, $27 million is to be spent on domestic enforcement,including marijuana eradication, and $13 million is allotted tothe DEA for "classified programs." Cincinnati Buyers Club Founder To FaceFelony Drug Charges April 19, 1996, Covington, KY: Richard Evans, founder of the Greater Cincinnati Buyers Club --one of an estimated 30 underground clubs located across thecountry that supply marijuana as a therapeutic agent to seriouslyill patients who possess a physician's recommendation -- has beencharged with three felony counts of trafficking marijuana within1,000 yards of a school in connection with a February raid by lawenforcement officers on the club's headquarters. Evans' home,which is located in close proximity of a school, served as theheadquarters for the Cincinnati club. Evans informed NORMLlast February that he had two marijuana seedlings growing at the timeof the bust. Evans was subpoenaed to testify before the Kenton County GrandJury on April 19 and questioned about his involvement in thebuyer's club. Evan's plead the Fifth Amendment and was latertaken to Kenton County Jail. He was released on $5,000 bondand will be arraigned on Monday. "I am sick of living in a country where I can't befree," Evans adamantly summarized at a press conferencefollowing the raid last February. "Give me liberty or giveme death. We are going to have a cannabis buyer'sclub." For more information, please contact Richard Evans ofAmericans for Compassionate Use @ (606) 431-8719 or AttorneyGatewood Galbraith @ (606) 281-6909. Woody Harrelson Withholds Taxes To ProtestIndustrial Hemp Prohibition April 17, 1996, Denver, CO: Appalledat the recent defeat of a bill that would have allowed Coloradoto become the first state to legally grow industrial hemp sinceWorld War II, Hollywood actor and hemp activist Woody Harrelsonhas withheld $10,000 of his taxes to protest the government. "I know I'm only a pampered actor with no room to complain,... but the fact is I care," Harrelson wrote in a two pageproclamation. Previously Harrelson, who has commercialinterests in a hemp clothing company, had pledged his support forthe Colorado hemp bill by affirming that he "will personallyguarantee that all hemp produced in Colorado will be purchased atfair market prices." The legislation was recentlykilled by the House Agriculture Committee by a 8-5 vote. According to a story that ran in USA Today, Harrelsonsaid that he's been quietly fighting on behalf of industrial hempand other environmental causes for years. He even slippedpresident Clinton a letter regarding hemp cultivation while theyboth attended actor Ted Danson's wedding, the feature noted. In response to Harrelson's action and to commemorate his effortson behalf of the Colorado Hemp Production Act of 1996, theColorado Hemp Initiative Project (CO-HIP) has declared July 23 tobe Woody Harrelson Appreciation Day. "Mr. Harrelsonhas shown great courage and integrity in speaking out in the nameof the [environment,] said CO-HIP's Laura Kriho. "As awell known and talented actor, his fame has brought mediaattention to issues like the salvage logging rider and theindustrial hemp movement. We hope he continues to be avocal supporter." For more information, please contact CO-HIP @ (303) 784-5632. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-4IA087-000632-B001-101http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-04-18.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082926 text/html 16091HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:29:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:06 GMTContent-length: 15875 NORML News - April 18, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. April 18, 1996 DEAth In Colorado Hemp Cultivation Killed By House Agriculture Committee April 11,1996, Denver CO: Legislation (SB 67) that would have allowed Colorado to becomethe first state to legally grow industrial hemp since World WarII was killed by the House Agriculture Committee by a stunning8-5 vote. The vote came as a surprise to many who had watchedsupport for domestic hemp legislation grow in recent weeks,including gaining approval from the full Senate. Many witnesses attribute the outcome to a collective show offorce from law and drug enforcement officials. During thefour hour hearing, twelve law enforcement officials testified againstthe bill, including regional DEA representative Greg Williams andColorado Bureau of Investigation Director Carl Whiteside. Among their arguments, law enforcement testified that there is nodifference between industrial hemp and marijuana and that passingthe Hemp Industrial Production Act would send the wrong messageto young people. "In the minds of many, ... [supportfor] this will be perceived as a weakening of our anti-marijuanamessage in our society," stated Special Agent Williams. "Fear and intimidation" scared off support for thisbill in the Committee, said the bill's sponsor, Senator LloydCasey (D-Northglenn). Hemp activist Laura Kriho of theColorado Hemp Initiative Project (CO-HIP) agrees. Theemotional pressure and scare tactics used by these law enforcementagencies effectively strong-armed the state legislature, forcingthem to vote for the police and against the farmers ofColorado." One legislator who voted against the measure, Rep. Russell George(R-Rifle), explained in an interview immediately after thehearing how the testimony of law enforcement influenced his decision. "The key factor in making up my vote was when the ... DEA... testified and said that under no circumstances would [they]issue any kind of registration or permit," he said. "That meant anything else we did with this bill was a wasteof time and was moot because the bill itself said that ...farmer[s] couldn't go forward without a DEA registration." The presence of the DEA at the hearing was especially troublingto both Casey and hemp proponents who noted that, prior to theApril 11 hearing, representatives from the agency had beencooperative with the bill's backers. In the past, the DEAin Colorado had "appeared helpful," noted Kriho. "We had even been told that ... the DEA in Washington, D.C.[was] in the process of reviewing policies related to industrialhemp production. ... [However,] after the DEA testimony atthe hearing, I believe it is safe to say that the DEA is notworking with hemp proponents." Despite this setback, activists remain positive that domestichemp cultivation in Colorado remains a tangible goal. "We [still] have a lot of momentum and a lot ofsupport," Kriho stated. "We are now in theprocess of evaluating our strategies and determining our coursesof action. We have several interesting options and areexcited to be able to pursue them." Unfortunately,though, any future efforts to legalize industrial hemp inColorado will be without the efforts of either Lloyd Casey orReps. Steve Acquafresca (R-Cedaredge) and Bill Jerke (R-Lasalle), all of whom are stepping down after this year'ssession. When asked by NORML if Casey foresees any legislatorsin Colorado willing to carry the torch after he leaves, theSenator's only response was: "I hope so." For more information on industrial hemp in Colorado, pleasecontact CO-HIP @ (303) 784-5632. For more information aboutthe industrial uses for hemp, please contact either Allen St.Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML @ (202)483-5500. Medical Marijuana Initiative Enters FinalWeek Activists Expect To Have Necessary Number Of Signatures April 18, 1996, Santa Monica, CA: Aninitiative to legalize the medical use of marijuana appears tohave the necessary number of signatures to place it on theNovember 1996 California ballot, reports Californians forCompassionate Use. "When organizers across the state turned in their respectiveestimates ... of signatures gathered for the Compassionate UseInitiative of 1996, the [total] came to over 500,000,"reported the CCU on April 12, one week before the deadline. The number needed to qualify the initiative for the 1996 ballotis 433,269. Activists note that an additional 120,000 to 140,000 signatureswere anticipated to have been gathered during the drive's finalweek. Such a figure would be well over the amount needed to compensatefor any errors or invalid signatures. California's medical marijuana initiative came about in responseto Governor Pete Wilson's decision to veto legislation passed bythe California Legislature in 1995 that would have allowed forthe medical use of marijuana. If the initiative is passedby California voters this fall, the bill will become lawimmediately and cannot be vetoed. The 1996 initiative has been endorsed by the cities of SanFrancisco, Oakland, and West Hollywood; the Santa Cruz and MarinBoards of Supervisors; the California Nurses Association; the LosAngeles AIDS Commission; the California Multiple SclerosisSociety; the Orange County Register, and many other health andcommunity leaders and organizations. For more information, please contact Dennis Peron ofCalifornians for Compassionate Use @ (415) 621-3986. Supreme Court Hears Arguments On CivilForfeiture April 17, 1996, Washington, D.C.: Oral arguments were heard before the Supreme Court in a case thatmay determine whether seizing property from criminally prosecuteddrug dealers constitutes double jeopardy under the United StatesConstitution. "Civil forfeiture has never been deemed so punitive ... asto constitute a prosecution or punishment under the[Constitution's] double jeopardy clause," contended JusticeDepartment lawyer Michael Dreeben on behalf of the Clintonadministration. The attorney urged the Court to overturntwo double-jeopardy decisions in which federal appeals courts inMichigan and California found civil forfeiture following acriminal prosecution to be unconstitutional. "[This] is, in my mind, the single most important caseinvolving the government's forfeiture authority in the area ofnarcotics, and possibly other areas," said Attorney LawrenceRobbins of Washington, D.C., one of two attorneys arguing againstthe government's controversial, double-barreled anti-drugstrategy. "If this looks like a punishment ... what then is the reasonfor not treating it like punishment," asked Justice WilliamH. Rehnquist during the procedures. Under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution, noone may be "subject for the same offense to be twice put injeopardy of life or limb." The Supreme Court hasinterpreted this provision to prohibit multiple punishments forthe same crime. The Court is expected to rule on this issue sometime in June. For more information forfeiture, please contact F.E.A.R.(Forfeiture Endangers American Rights) @ (415) 388-8128. The organization can also be contacted on the Internet @ http://www.fear.org/ Cincinnati Buyers Club Founder To Face GrandJury April 17, 1996, Covington, KY: Richard Evans, founder of the Greater Cincinnati Cannabis BuyersClub -- one of an estimated 30 underground clubs located acrossthe country that supplies marijuana as a therapeutic agent toseriously ill patients who possess a physician's recommendation --has been subpoenaed to testify before the Grand Jury of Kenton,Kentucky on April 19 in connection with a February raid by lawenforcement officers on the club's headquarters. Although Evansadmits to having had two marijuana seedlings growing at theheadquarters at the time of the bust, officials failed to seizethe plants or issue a warrant for his arrest. Evans anticipates that the state's latest action is an attempt tointerrogate him about details of the club's activity, such asmembership and suppliers. Evans informs NORML thathe has been advised and intends "to take the Fifth" attomorrow's hearing. Evans further insists that he will begina hunger strike if the State decides to incarcerate him followingtomorrow's proceedings. "I am sick of living in a country where I can't befree," Evans adamantly summarized at a press conference lastFebruary. "Give me liberty or give me death. Weare going to have a cannabis buyer's club. For more information on the Cincinnati Cannabis Buyer's Clubplease contact Richard Evans of Americans for Compassionate Use @(606) 431-8719 or Attorney Gatewood Galbraith @ (606) 281-6909. California Assembly Committee Votes ForTougher Pot Penalties April 16, 1996, Sacramento, CA: TheCalifornia Assembly Public Safety Committee slammed the door ondrug reformers by soundly defeating a bill to lessen penaltiesfor medical marijuana and approving another measure to increasemarijuana prison sentences. The committee, whose complexion has shifted sharply to the rightwith the Republican takeover of the Assembly this year, turned adeaf ear to the pleas of medical marijuana patients, physicians andAIDS support groups by rejecting a medical marijuana billsponsored by Rep. John Burton (D-San Francisco). The Burtonbill (AB 2120) was a heavily watered-down version of legislation introducedlast year by Assemblyman John Vasconcellos to allow for theprescribed use of marijuana for the sick and terminally ill. Despite the bill's concessions, Burton's proposed legislation wasdefeated handily by a vote of 7-1, signifying a major reversal inthe committee's attitude regarding medical marijuana. Inthe past, the committee had been receptive toward the medicalmarijuana issue and had approved legislation allowing for it'suse three years in a row. This year, Burton's measure wasactively opposed by the California Narcotics OfficersAssociation, the Governor's Department of Health, and AttorneyGeneral Lungren, who argued that the legislation undercut theestablished system of drug regulation. Meanwhile, the committee eagerly approved a measure introduced byAssemblyman Charles Poochigan (R-Fresno) to enhance prisonsentences by three years and up for marijuana convictionsinvolving a kilogram or more. Two Democrats joined Republicans inapproving the bill, which was strongly backed by the NarcoticsOfficers and District Attorney's associations. "The committeeappeared indifferent to the costs of imprisoning more offendersfor non-violent crime," stated California NORML StateCoordinator Dale Gieringer, who had opposed the measure. "Throughoutthe day, it routinely approved all other penalty enhancementbills with no regard as to whether the offenses were violent,serious, or victimless. Drug-law reformers hope to derail AB 2764 in theDemocratic-controlled State Senate, Gieringer noted. For more information, please contact Dale Gieringer ofCalifornia NORML @ (415) 563-5858. Assemblyman Vasconcellos Introduces MedicalMarijuana Bill For Second Year In A Row April, 1996, Sacramento, CA: California Assemblyman John Vasconcellos, who last year introduceda medical marijuana bill that made it all the way to theGovernor's desk before being vetoed, has once again introduced ameasure that would spell some relief for users of medical marijuana. This year's measure would allow a person suffering from AIDS,cancer, multiple sclerosis, or glaucoma to offer their medicalcondition as a defense in a California courtroom if charged withcultivation or possession of marijuana. The bill will beconsidered by the California Assembly Public Safety Committee onApril 23. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-5IA087-000632-B001-136http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-04-11.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082957 text/html 11510HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:29:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:11 GMTContent-length: 11294 NORML News - April 11, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. April 11, 1996 Missouri Hemp Bill Heard Before SenateAgriculture Committee April 3, 1996, Jefferson City, MO: Abill (SB 972) to allow for the legal cultivation of industrialhemp in Missouri was heard before the Senate AgricultureCommittee. Introduced by Sen. Jerry Howard (D-Dexter), thelegislation permits licensed growers to cultivate industrial hemp fora variety of commercial uses. Although no vote was taken by the committee, those attendingreport that the hearing was positive and signified a step in theright direction. In all, four witnesses testified in favorof the bill and no witnesses opposed it. Because the legislation was introduced late in this year'slegislative session, there is little hope of it being approved in1996. Nevertheless, hemp proponents are encouraged thatthis hearing will provide a "running start" for theintroduction of a similar bill in 1997. We are "laying the groundwork for next year," saidMissouri NORML President Dan Viets, Esq., whose office providedSen. Howard with background materials regarding the uses of industrialhemp. Viets added that Howard has been"encouraged" by the favorable response his bill hasreceived. According to the Colorado Hemp Initiative Project (CO-HIP), oneMissouri farmer has already applied for a DEA permit to grow hempand is hopeful that the legislature will at least pass aresolution supporting industrial hemp research before thecompletion of this year's session. For more information on the Industrial Hemp Production Act of1996, please contact either Dan Viets @ (573) 443-6866 or theOxford Hemp Council @ (573) 785-8711. Vermont Hemp Bill Meets UnexpectedOpposition In Senate April 10, 1996, Montpelier, VT: Legislation that had been previously approved overwhelmingly bythe House to permit development of a domestic hemp industry inVermont has been temporarily derailed by the Senate. Following hearings in the Senate Agriculture Committee, the bill(H.783) was passed by a 4-2 vote. However, the bill waspassed with an "adverse report" and is now"ordered to lie" in Senate. According to aspokesman for the Vermont Legislative Council, bills"ordered to lie" are in limbo, but may be called backto the floor for further debate at any time if the bill receivesa majority vote from the full Senate to do so. Approving legislation with an adverse report is "hardly everdone," said Rep. Fred Maslack (R-Poultney), one of theinitial proponents of the hemp cultivation bill. Maslackfurther added that law enforcement officials, the bill's chiefopponents, recently testified at informal hearings before the SenateJudiciary Committee against the legislation. Law enforcement "has no business being there," heargued. "[They] have no objections [that are] germaneto the issue. What bearing does [their] testimony have onlicensed activity?" Vermont's legislature is scheduled to recess later this month. For the latest information on the status of H.783, pleasecontact the Vermont Legislative Council @ (802) 828-2231. For a first hand account of the Senate Agriculture Committee hearings,please e-mail Joel Williams @: epgorge@sover.netor contact the Colorado Hemp Initiative Project (CO-HIP) @ (303)784-5632 for details. CO-HIP is located on the Internet @: cohip@darkstar.cygnus.com Tax Stamp Legislation Under Fire In Arizona April, 1996, Phoenix, AZ: A 1983 lawallowing individuals to attain licenses from the state to deal inand pay taxes on cannabis is under fire from state officials whoargue that the legislation is tantamount to legalizingmarijuana. Recently, a bill introduced by Rep. ScottBungaard (R-Glendale) calling for the repeal of Arizona's taxstamp legislation was approved in the Senate Government ReformCommittee by a 6-1 vote. The bill (H2367) now moves to thefull Senate. According to Committee Chairman Stan Barnes, 55 people signed upto testify in opposition to Bungaard's amendment, includingArizona NORML President Peter Wilson. Wilson ignited the stamptax controversy this past November when Northwest Phoenix JusticeCourt Judge John Barclay dismissed marijuana possession chargesagainst him because of evidence that he is licensed by the stateto sell cannabis. Basing his decision on constitutionalprohibitions against double jeopardy, Judge Barclay concludedthat Wilson could not be prosecuted because of (punitive) taxeshe had previously paid to the Arizona department of revenue tosell and possess cannabis. "I think by possessing a license and paying the tax, youshow an attitude that is different than a criminalattitude," said Wilson's attorney and NORML LegalCommittee member, Michael Walz, speaking in favor of maintainingthe current legislation. "What you have is a countyattorney saying on the record he is 100 percent confident [Mr.Wilson's case] will be reversed on appeal. If that is reallytrue, then there is no reason for this legislation. And infact, what it does is deprive the state of Arizona ofpotentially, millions of dollars in revenue." "The license and tax requirements were never intended todecriminalize the sale of marijuana," countered Rep.Bungaard. "I want to send a clear message that druguse of any kind in this state is illegal and unacceptable." Despite the recent momentum to repeal the tax stamp legislation,AZ4NORML member Bill Green doubts Bungaard's measure will passthis year. "If by some chance it gets passed withoutus noticing, we plan to file a referendum with the Secretary ofState. We will bill it as a protest vote for legalmarijuana. For more information, please contact AZ4NORML @ (602)395-0353. The organization can also be accessed on theInternet @: http://www.amug.org/~az4norml/ Teacher To Sue After Losing His Job Over 20Year Old Pot Charge April 10, 1996, Chicago IL: Asubstitute teacher who was recently dismissed from work after abackground check revealed a misdemeanor for marijuana possessionin 1974 is suing school officials to get his job back, accordingto an Associated Press report. High school substitute Michael Maynard, 42, argues that theschool's policy of firing teachers guilty of crimes includingdrug misdemeanors -- but not murder -- is arbitrary and does notgive teachers a chance to defend themselves. Maynardpleaded no contest in 1974 when a traffic stop revealed a smallamount of marijuana. "If they're not going to disqualify Bill Clinton from beingpresident, it's hard to see how they can disqualify this man frombeing a teacher," said employment lawyer Lynne Bernabel tothe AP. Health Committee's Recommendations ToDecriminalize Marijuana Scrapped After Political Backlash April 10, 1996, Denver, CO: Controversial proposals made by a state health-planning group todecriminalize small amounts of marijuana and createneedle-exchange programs as ways to "reduce costs associatedwith criminality and transmittable diseases associated withillicit drug use" have been abandoned because of the threatof political fallout. The two recommendations were included in a report released by theDenver Human Services Planning Committee, a 32-memberorganization formed by the 1994 legislature to help improve the deliveryof health services in Colorado. The proposals came under fire in recent weeks after a newsfeature in the Rocky Mountain Times outlining theproposals incited a wave of controversy. Consequently, thecommittee voted to abrogate the recommendations late last month. "We decided ... that this is not worth thecontroversy," said committee member Phil Hernandez. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-6IA087-000632-B001-159http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-04-04.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083013 text/html 11120HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:30:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:15 GMTContent-length: 10904 NORML News - April 4, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANALAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. April 4, 1996 Colorado Senate Gives Green Light ToDomestic Hemp Cultivation March 30, 1996, Denver CO: Legislation (SB 67) that would allow Colorado to become the firststate to legalize the growing of industrial hemp was approved bythe full Senate by a 18-15 vote. The move surprised many who felt that the controversiallegislation would likely fall three or five votes shy of amajority. "I feel like I've been through a wringer,but I'm very happy," said the bill's sponsor, Sen. LloydCasey (D-Northglenn), in an interview with the Rocky MountainNews. A similar bill was introduced by Casey in 1995,but only received one vote of support in its first committee. The Colorado Industrial Hemp Production Act permits the plantingof no more than 40 acres of industrial hemp (defined by the billas marijuana containing no more than 0.5% THC) in Colorado in1996 for agricultural, commercial, and scientific research. The legislation allows for full scale hemp production to begin in1998 and has been endorsed by the Colorado Farm Bureau, the ColoradoState Grange, and the National Federation of Farm Bureaus. The bill has also received support from Hollywood actor and hempbusinessman Woody Harrelson. The bill now moves to the more conservative House where Reps.Steve Acquafresca (R-Cedaredge) and Bill Jerke (R-Lasalle) haveagreed to help carry the legislation. Often described as "marijuana's misunderstood cousin,"industrial hemp is from the same species that producesmarijuana. Unlike marijuana, however, industrial hemp hasonly minute amounts of delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), thepsychoactive ingredient that gives marijuana its medical andeuphoric properties. Industrial hemp is currently grownlegally through much of Europe, Asia, and parts of Canada toproduce a variety of products such as textiles, paper, composites,paints, cosmetics, and animal feed. For more information on this bill, please contact the officeof Senator Lloyd Casey @ (303) 866-4865 or the Colorado HempInitiative Project @ (303) 784-5632. For more informationon the value of industrial hemp, please contact either Allen St.Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML @ (202)483-5500. District Attorney To Take No Further ActionIn Medical Marijuana Distribution Case April 3, 1996, New York, NY: TheManhattan District Attorney has agreed to take no further actionin its prosecution of Johann Moore for distributing marijuana formedical purposes and to dismiss all charges against him in sixmonths. Judge William Mogulescu explained in open court that thisdecision by the District Attorney's office constituted an extremedeviation from their internal policies which require that alldefendants must plead to the indictment in all cases of marijuanasales. Judge Mogulescu further added that he believed theDistrict Attorney's action to be tantamount to an acknowledgmentby that office of the legitimacy of medicinal marijuana and ofthe validity of Moore's claim that his distribution of marijuanaas medicine constituted a justification for his actions. Immediately after the court proceeding where Moore consented tothe six month deferred prosecution, he informed reporters that heintends to continue to provide marijuana to those with a legitimatemedical need. Moore's attorney and President of the National Association ofCriminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL), Robert Fogelnest said, "Iapplaud the District Attorney's office for their ultimately makingan intelligent and humane judgment in the disposition of thiscase." "I hope that this will pave the way for a more enlightenedpolicy regarding the distribution of marijuana for medicaluse," added Moore's other attorney, Ruth Liebesman. Both Liebesman and Fogelnest are members of the NORMLLegal Committee. Moore is a longtime New York City drug reform activist and is thefounder of the city's underground cannabis buyer's club -- one ofan estimated 30 clubs that currently operate and distributemedical marijuana to seriously ill patients who possess adoctor's recommendation. He was arrested last August fordistributing marijuana and was charged with criminal sales in thefourth degree. "The statement made by the District Attorney in this case isa strong one," said NORML Deputy Director Allen St.Pierre. "It appears that they -- like the D.A.'soffices in San Francisco, Oakland, and Santa Cruz have donepreviously -- wish to make the prosecution of buyer's clubs andthose involved in the distribution of marijuana for medicinal usethe state's lowest priority." For more information on the Johann Moore case, please contacteither Attorney Robert Fogelnest or Ruth Liebesman @ (212)683-8000. For more information on cannabis buyer's clubs,please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @(202) 483-5500. California Reports Record Numbers OfMarijuana Prisoners April 1, 1996, San Francisco, CA: The number of marijuana offenders in California state prisons hasincreased to its highest level in history, according to thelatest statistics from the Department of Corrections. As ofDecember 31, 1995, 1,572 prisoners were serving time for marijuanafelonies, up 18 percent from one year previously. The new figures appear to belie recent claims that the war onmarijuana in California has let up. California now has twoand a half times more marijuana prisoners than in the earlyl970s, before possession was decriminalized from a felony to amisdemeanor, and 15 times as many marijuana prisoners as at therecord low in 1980. An unknown number of additionalprisoners are serving time in county jails. Nonetheless,recent surveys indicate that marijuana usage is rising --especially among adolescents -- suggesting strongly that harshpenalties are not an effective deterrent in marijuanaconsumption. For more information, please contact Dale Gieringer ofCalifornia NORML @ (415) 563-5858. Prosecutors Seek To Seize Frequent-FlierMiles Of Man Convicted Of Marijuana Trafficking April 3, 1996, Baltimore, MD: In anaction that appears to be a first for the nation, federal prosecutorsare attempting to seize 117,705 frequent-flier miles of aconvicted marijuana trafficker. "I think it's ingenious," said U.S. Attorney Lynne A.Battaglia, whose office recently filed the forfeitureclaim. Prosecutors maintain that the miles should beconverted into plain tickets and given to law enforcementagencies. A federal judge will decide whether the miles should beconsidered as assets and confiscated under forfeiture laws. Recently, the Supreme Court upheld a Michigan ruling that allows prosecutorsto seize property used in a crime even when the owner was not aparticipant. USA WEEKEND QuickPoll Indicates Majority OfAmericans Favor Marijuana Decriminalization March 31, 1996: Seventy-four percentof the more than 6,200 individuals who responded to a USA WEEKENDpoll said they favored decriminalizing marijuana. Theoutcome came as a surprise to many who felt that the USA WEEKENDfeature: Why more kids are into pot greatly sensationalizedthe issue. "The results of this poll indicates that a clear majority ofAmericans favor marijuana decriminalization," said NORMLDeputy Director Allen St. Pierre. "The results of theUSA WEEKEND QuickPoll mimics the outcomes of similar pollsconducted recently by Parade Magazine and AmericaOnline. A significant number of Americans are fed-up withthe government's war on marijuana consumers." -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-7IA087-000632-B001-189http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-03-28.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083029 text/html 14599HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:30:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:20 GMTContent-length: 14383 NORML News - March 28, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 28, 1996 Federal Medical Marijuana Attracts Bi-Partisan Support First Two Republicans Sign On To Bill March 29, 1996, Washington, DC: Four additional members of Congress, including one member of the House Judiciary Committee, Subcommittee on Crime, and two Republicans, have recently signed on to a federal bill (H.R. 2618) that would permit physicians to prescribe marijuana as a therapeutic agent for seriously ill patients. The recent signees, U.S Reps. Joseph Kennedy (D-Mass.), Steven Gunderson (R-Wis.), Zoe Lofgren (D-Calif.), and Tom Campbell (R-Calif.) bring the total number of co-sponsors to thirteen. The support of the recent co-sponsors is critical for a variety of reasons. The addition of Reps. Gunderson and Campbell gives the bill its first taste of bi-partisan support and could potentially persuade several other Republicans -- including House Speaker and former co-sponsor of medical marijuana legislation Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) -- to sign on to H.R. 2618. In addition, the support of Republicans is necessary if the bill is to move forward in a Republican controlled Congress. Rep. Lofgren's support is also crucial. Currently, H.R. 2618 is pending before the Subcommittee on Crime. As a member of this committee, Lofgren can encourage Chairman and former two-time co-sponsor of medical marijuana legislation, Bill McCollum (R-Fla.), to hold additional hearings on medical marijuana and possibly bring the bill to a vote. H.R. 2618 was introduced in Congress last fall by Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.) to amend federal law to allow seriously ill patients to have legal access to marijuana for medicinal purposes. If passed, the bill would allow doctors to prescribe marijuana to individuals suffering from "glaucoma, AIDS wasting syndrome, muscle spasms from certain spastic disorders, including multiple sclerosis, paraplegia, and quadriplegia, or the nausea associated with cancer chemotherapy or radiology." Currently, only eight patients are allowed to receive medical marijuana legally from the federal government. For more information about H.R. 2618 or medical marijuana, please contact either Allen St. Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Funding For Study On Medical Marijuana Allocated In Washington State Budget March, 1996, Olympia, WA: Washington State University and the state Department of Health will start looking for ways to make medicinal marijuana available to the seriously ill, under strict controls, though two appropriations provided in this year's operating budget. The funding for the study came through the efforts of state Senators Jeanne Kohl (D-Seattle) and Bob McCaslin (R-Spokane). The two senators co-sponsored a bill (SB-6744) that was used as a model for the appropriations provided in this year's budget. The funds will be used by Washington State University, in conjunction with the state Board of Pharmacy, and the state Department of Health to conduct research on cultivating marijuana in a tamper-free environment. The study will also determine the appropriate organization to manufacture and distribute the drug for medical use. The second appropriation will be used to fund a clinical study administered by the state Department of Health under the controlled substance abuse therapeutic program, in statute since 1979. The study will be limited to patients under a physician's care. Only patients receiving chemotherapy and/or radiation treatments, or suffering from glaucoma, AIDS or HIV related illnesses, multiple sclerosis, or other life threatening illnesses would qualify for the study. Results of a statewide public-opinion poll directed by local political consultant Sharon Gilpin the weekend of March 2nd-3rd indicated that the public supports the use of marijuana for medicinal purposes. The statewide survey of 400 voters found that 75 percent favored making marijuana available for patients if prescribed by a doctor. Gilpin said the results were a complete surprise. "I know the people in the Northwest tend to be compassionate, but the high number was totally unexpected," she said. Gilpin said people who are concerned about the rising cost of health care are willing to look at alternatives to the high cost of fighting diseases such as AIDS and cancer. "This is a great start that will lead to what we hope is a promising finish," said Dr. David Edwards, an Olympia physician and medical coordinator for the Washington Hemp Education Network (WHEN), an agency working on informing the public of the potential benefits of medicinal marijuana. "I expect the results to have a positive effect in our effort to provide organic marijuana to patients under strict medical guidelines." Medical marijuana activist and founder of the Green Cross Cannabis Buyers Club, Joanna McKee, said she is confident the study will confirm what other tests have shown: the positive effects of medicinal marijuana. "The medical community is so focused on using chemicals to combat illness, they ignore a simple, organic solution that's readily available," she said. "This test will provide the answer to those who still question the effectiveness of THC." Sen. McCaslin said if the results of the state study on THC is similar to others conducted, organic marijuana could be a boon for the seriously ill. "It will not only aid them in their physical recovery, it could prove to be a psychological boost as well," he said. Kohl said the study is the first step towards getting needed medicine to those who desperately need it. "If the synthetic drug is not working for a patient, it only makes sense they should be able to have access to organic marijuana." Activists should be advised that the medicinal marijuana appropriations could potentially fall victim to a section-item veto by the governor. However, Sen. Kohl's office tells NORML that she has been assured by the governor's staff that he will not take such action. For more information or for the latest status on the Washington state medical marijuana appropriations, please contact Sen. Jeanne Kohl's office @ (206) 285-1869 or the office of Sen. Bob McCaslin @ (360) 786-7606. Domestic Hemp Cultivation Bill Heads To Colorado Senate March 22, 1996, Denver, CO: Legislation (SB 67) introduced by Sen. Lloyd Casey (D-Northglenn) to allow Colorado to become the first state to grow industrial hemp in almost 40 years is heading for the Senate floor. In a move that stunned both proponents and opponents alike, the Senate Appropriations Committee voted 5-4 to send the bill to the full Senate for debate. A similar bill was introduced by Casey in 1995, but only received one vote of support in its first committee. "We're talking about not just growing, but about the textile mills, the paper mills, [and] the food-processing products. We're talking about all the value-added things that can result from this," explained Casey. The Colorado Industrial Hemp Production Act permits the planting of no more than 40 acres of industrial hemp (defined by the bill as marijuana containing no more than 0.5% THC) in Colorado in 1996 for agricultural, commercial, and scientific research. The legislation allows for full scale hemp production to begin in 1998 and has been endorsed by the Colorado Farm Bureau, the Colorado State Grange, and the National Federation of Farm Bureaus. The bill has also received support from Hollywood actor and hemp businessman Woody Harrelson. Working diligently over the past year to gather support for this bill is the Colorado Hemp Initiative Project (CO-HIP), a grassroots organization of activists who have donated their time to volunteer on this campaign. CO-HIP notes that the bill currently has support in the Senate, but is probably three to five votes shy of a majority. Nevertheless, the group remains confident that the bill will pass the Senate and is actively pursuing the help of farm organizations and professional lobbyists to drum up support among legislators. Colorado's legislative session ends on May 8, 1996. For more information on this bill, please contact the office of Senator Lloyd Casey @ (303) 866-4865 or CO-HIP @ (303) 784-5632. For more information on the value of industrial hemp, please contact either Allen St. Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Washington State Medical Marijuana User Found Guilty Of Drug Possession And Manufacture Charges March, 1996, Tacoma, WA: A Pierce County resident who used marijuana to alleviate pain and seizures stemming from head injuries he suffered in a 1988 motorcycle accident was found guilty of charges that he possessed and manufactured marijuana. His sentencing is set for April 10. Jess Williams, aka Fat Freddy, claims that he grew marijuana to combat the symptoms of his injury after discovering that cannabis worked more effectively than any conventional prescription drugs. Law enforcement agents who raided Williams home maintained that Williams possessed more plants than necessary for personal use. Williams attorney, NORML Legal Committee member Jeffrey Steinborn, asserts that he will appeal the decision. "This case is a long way from over," he says. William's case had risen to the forefront of the battle for medical access to marijuana in Washington State. While Steinborn admits that an acquittal would not have invalidated the law, he maintains that a "not guilty" verdict might have made prosecutors wary of bringing similar cases to trial. Previously, medical marijuana user Ralph Seeley won a declaratory judgment from Pierce County Superior Court Judge Rosanne Buckner affirming that a cancer patient's need to use marijuana as a medicine overrides the state's interest in outlawing its prescription. Some activists who attended William's trial noted that they felt the jury might have ruled differently had the defendant suffered from cancer or glaucoma. Williams was the "Freedom Fighter" of the month for the May issue of High Times magazine. For more information on William's case, please contact Attorney Jeffrey Steinborn of Seattle @ (206) 622-5117. Rally For Medical Marijuana To Be Held This Saturday March 28, 1996, Sacramento, CA: A rally to bring awareness to the medical efficacy of marijuana and gather support for an initiative to allow doctors to prescribe marijuana as a therapeutic agent will take place on March 30 on the north steps of the Capitol in Sacramento. Coordinated by activist Peter Keyes -- an independent organizer for Californians for Compassionate Use (CCU) -- the rally will be held from 12 p.m. to 6 p.m. and will feature a variety of bands, disc jockeys, and speakers. Tentatively scheduled to appear include hemp activist and author of "Hemp: Lifeline to the Future," Chris Conrad and San Francisco Cannabis Buyer's Club Director, Dennis Peron. For more information on this event, please contact Peter Keyes of Speed Up The Process @ (916) 484-4176. For more information on the California medical marijuana initiative, please contact Dennis Peron of Californians for Compassionate Use @ (415) 621-3986. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-8IA087-000632-B002-18http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-03-22.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083040 text/html 2452HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:30:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:23 GMTContent-length: 2237 NORML News - March 22, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 22, 1996 Correction NORML erroneously reported in it's Weekly Press Release (March 21, 1996) that Court TV will be televising the trial of New York City Medical Marijuana Club coordinator Johann Moore.&nbps; At present, the trial court has not yet approved Court TV (or any of it's affiliated programming) to televise this notable and important legal challenge to a significant aspect of cannabis' prohibition. NORML apologizes to Mr. Moore, Court TV, and it's affiliates for any confusion caused by NORML's reporting error. NORML and other organizations in the cannabis reform community strongly implore Court TV and other media outlets to cover this interesting and complex trial. For more details on the case of Johann Moore, please contact Cures-not-Wars @ (212) 677-4899.&nbps; For more information on Cannabis Buyers Clubs, please contact Allen St. Pierre of N0RML @ (202) 483-5500. -End- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-9IA087-000632-B002-47http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-03-21.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083052 text/html 10428HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:30:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:27 GMTContent-length: 10212 NORML News - March 21, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 21, 1996 Industrial Hemp Planted On American Indian Soil March 17, 1996, Navajo Nation, Arizona: A scheduled planting of industrial hemp seeds by the Coalition for Hemp Awareness (CHA) took place on test plots of American Indian soil. The initial planting came about following a resolution passed unanimously by the Navajo Nation to allow for hemp cultivation to occur on sovereign soil. Following meetings with both the Vice President and the Director of Agriculture of the Navajo Nation, CHA spokesman Christie Bohling told NORML that support for the hemp cultivation project is "overwhelming beyond our wildest dreams." Bohling notes that adverse weather and a lack of seeds limited CHA's spring planting to a small "ceremonial celebration," but adds that a widescale planting is scheduled for the end of April. The Navajo Hemp Project began in 1992 when activists Jim Robinson and Tom and Carolyn McCormick moved to the reservation for the purpose of introducing hemp cultivation on sovereign soil. Currently, well over 30,000 acres of Navajo nation land has been allocated for hemp cultivation. In addition, CHA states that the organization is close to securing approval for similar cultivation projects from ten other tribes located across the United States. This will enable CHA the opportunity to grow hemp in a variety of "different [climates and] environments," Bohling explains. The Coalition for Hemp Awareness was founded in 1991 to incite the rapid return of cannabis hemp as an agricultural crop. CHA is a political advocacy network group that assimilates and disseminates hemp information to both politicians and the public. For more information on the Coalition for Hemp Awareness or the Navajo Hemp Project please contact CHA @ (602) 988-9355. DC NORML, Virginia Activists Thwart Prohibitionist Movement In Virginia March 19, 1996, Crewe, VA: A dazzling array of tough new anti-drug proposals failed to pass the Virginia General Assembly this week. The measures were opposed by a drug-law reform coalition that included members of DC NORML, Virginians Against Drug Violence, and Virginia's Cannabis Action Network. The measures would have increased marijuana penalties, permitted drug testing of high-school students, and given courts the broad authority to continue cases despite improper procedures or incomplete lab results. "This year we had a real show of force," said activist Lennice Werth of Virginians Against Drug Violence. "[We had] lots of anti-prohibitionists showing up at the state house to voice their dissatisfaction with this kind of legislation." Among bills defeated outright were measures to include marijuana seeds and stems as evidence to increase marijuana penalties (SB34, SB58, HB96, HB169); allow courts to continue cases that have been dismissed due to improper procedures (HB646, SB53); add a $1,000 additional fine for possession or distribution charges to go to local authorities (HB1002), and permit the drug testing of high school students (HB949, HB950, HB579). A measure that was not killed, but amended, was legislation that would have greatly expanded the use of military for drug law enforcement, particularly for searching private property. Werth notes that the amended bill limits use of the military to aerial surveillance only and called the revision "a substantial victory" for the drug reform movement. Some measures that passed the General Assembly despite the efforts of drug-law reformers include legislation to legalize double jeopardy (SB435, SJR73) and deny bail to drug offenders (HB504). Altogether, reformers monitored a total of 48 bills. For more information, please contact Lennice Werth of Virginians Against Drug Violence @ (804) 645-8816. Court TV To Televise Medical Marijuana Trial March 1996, New York, NY: The national cable television station Court TV will be televising the trial of Johann Moore. Moore is the coordinator of the New York City Medical Buyers Club, a small organization that supplies marijuana as a therapeutic agent to seriously ill patients who possess a doctor's recommendation. He was arrested this past August and charged with one count of felony sales. Moore's televised case will present testimony from a number of expert witnesses on the medicinal value of marijuana such as Harvard Medical School Professor and international authority on medical marijuana, NORML board member Dr. Lester Grinspoon, CUNY Medical School Professor and NORML board member Dr. John Morgan, and Dr. Tod Mikuriya. This will be the first ever televised trail regarding medical marijuana. The trial is expected to begin in early April. For more information on the case of Johann Moore, please contact Cures Not Wars @ (212) 677-4899. For more information on Cannabis Buyers Clubs, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Update: Charges Dismissed Against North Carolina Medical Marijuana User March 15, 1996, Sunny View, NC: All charges have been dismissed against Jean Marlowe, a medical marijuana user and vocal activist who was facing various drug charges including possession with intent to manufacture a controlled substance after law enforcement agents raided her home and discovered 50 marijuana seedlings. Marlowe, who is clinically disabled and admits to using marijuana at least three times a day to obtain therapeutic relief from three orthopedic conditions she suffers, told NORML that she successfully utilized the medical necessity defense. However, she adds that her fight is still far from over. "I [intend] to file suit against both the state and federal government for medical access to marijuana," she said. "Nobody should have to perform a criminal act to obtain a safe, natural medicine." For more information, please contact Jean Marlowe of the Marijuana Relegalization Movement @ (704) 625-2958. Medical Marijuana User, Quadriplegic Found Guilty Of Trafficking Charges March 15, 1996, Oregon, Ohio: Daniel Asbury, a quadriplegic who grew his own marijuana to alleviate reoccurring pain and muscle spasms, was found guilty of trafficking in marijuana over three times the bulk amount and could face a sentence of up to five years in prison. Asbury's sentencing will occur on April 18. The guilty verdict was a setback for marijuana reform advocates who had hoped to set a legal precedent in Ohio for the medical use of marijuana. John Hartman, President of Northcoast NORML, notes that the organization flew in NORML Board member and CUNY Medical School Professor Dr. John Morgan to testify as an expert witness on the use of marijuana and pain management. "For whatever reason, the jury [who found Asbury innocent on charges of cultivation] didn't find Daniel's medical necessity case strong enough to nullify [the trafficking charge,]" Hartman notes. Hartman adds that Asbury's defense was made more difficult because Ohio currently provides no medical marijuana defense in its body of established state law. Therefore, Asbury's defense was basically asking the jury to "find the compassion to rule over the law," Hartman said. Asbury suffered a broken neck 15 years ago and began to use marijuana as a therapeutic after prescription drugs proved ineffective at controlling his pain. Marijuana made me "fe[el] like a human being again," he said. For more information on the case of Daniel Asbury, please contact John Hartman of Northcoast NORML @ (216) 521-9333. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-10IA087-000632-B002-72http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-03-14.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083105 text/html 11748HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:30:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:34 GMTContent-length: 11532 NORML News - March 14, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 14, 1996 Oakland City Council Issues Resolution Supporting Medical Marijuana March 12, Oakland, CA: The Oakland City Council has unanimously passed a resolution (#72516) endorsing Rep. Barney Frank's (D-Mass.) federal medical marijuana legislation, supporting the activities of the Oakland Cannabis Buyers Club, and declaring the arrest of individuals involved with the medical use of marijuana to be a low priority for the city of Oakland. The main points of the resolution are as follows: Marijuana has been shown to help pain and discomfort in people suffering from a variety of illnesses including AIDS, cancer, glaucoma, multiple sclerosis, and chronic pain when no other medications have been effective. The illegal purchase of marijuana by people already suffering with chronic illnesses subjects them to further suffering in the form of potential arrest and prosecution. The Oakland Cannabis Buyer's Club provides a way for patients needing to purchase marijuana for medical use to do so with greater ease and less risk of arrest and prosecution. The City of Oakland wishes to declare its desire not to expend City resources in any investigation, detention, arrest, or prosecution arising out of alleged violations of state and federal law regarding the possession, cultivation, and/or distribution of marijuana for medical use. The Oakland City Council authorizes the City Manager to instruct the City's federal lobbyist to work in support of H.R. 2618 -- a bill in Congress that would amend the federal law to allow a physician to legally prescribe marijuana as a therapeutic agent to seriously ill patients. For more information on Oakland City Council resolution #72516, please contact Attorney Robert A. Raich @ (510) 420-1137. For more information on the Oakland Cannabis Buyer's Club please contact Jeff Jones @ (510) 832-5346. Twice As Many Defendants Imprisoned For Marijuana Possession Under Tough "Three Strikes" Law Than For Violent Crimes, Study Indicates March 6, 1996, San Francisco, CA: More than twice as many defendants have been sentenced to stiff prison sentences under California's "three strikes and you're out" law than have murderers, rapists, and kidnappers combined, according to a recent study by the Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice in San Francisco. Overall, the report concluded that 85 percent of those sentenced under the law had been convicted most recently of a non-violent offense. Of those 85 percent, 192 individuals were sentenced under the law after being convicted of marijuana possession while in custody (a felony offense in California) as compared to only 40 who were convicted of murder, 25 of rape, and 24 of kidnapping. To be prosecuted under the stringent California law, a defendant must have been convicted of at least one or more serious violent crimes in the past. However, the most recent offense need not be a violent crime -- only a felony. The law mandates double the normal sentence for anyone convicted of a second felony and life sentence for any individual convicted of a third felony. "People are going to jail in America for possessing marijuana," stated NORML's Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre. "As this report clearly illustrates, the sentences can potentially be for life. This sort of illogical and fiscally irresponsible mandatory sentencing must end." For more information on the numbers of marijuana users behind bars, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. For a copy of the Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice Report, please call (415) 621-5661. Vocal Medical Marijuana Activist, User Busted Following Television Appearance March, 1996, Sunny View, NC: A medical marijuana activist who had received extensive media coverage for her vocal support of the medicinal use of marijuana was recently arrested by law enforcement officials and charged with various drug charges including possession with intent to manufacture a controlled substance. Jean Marlowe, president of the Marijuana Relegalization Movement, told local newscasters in a television interview that she smoked marijuana at least three times a day to obtain therapeutic relief from three orthopedic conditions she suffers from: degenerative disc disease, reflect sympathetic dystrophy, and osteoarthritis. Days later, local law enforcement officials raided the Marlowe residence and found approximately 50 marijuana seedlings. Marlowe maintains that the seized seedlings were being grown for her own medical use and intends to sue both the state and federal government for legal medical access to marijuana. "No one sick or suffering should have to endure the added stress of living in fear of being searched, jailed, or prosecuted," Marlowe said. "I want this medicine available for every American citizen that needs it! Nobody should have to perform a criminal act to obtain a safe, natural medicine." To support her argument, Marlowe notes that she has letters from two separate physicians confirming her use of medical marijuana. In addition, Marlowe has an official notice from the Social Security Administration stating that "she ... relies on marijuana to relieve her symptoms and smokes three grams per day." "I will get medical access or an exemption to grow my own [cannabis] before I'm though," Marlowe affirmed. "How dare our legislators sit up there in Washington and bicker among themselves and treat the very citizens who put them [there] so very heartlessly. For more information, please contact Jean Marlowe @ (704) 625-2958. Washington State Activists File 1996 Hemp Initiative March 1996, Olympia, WA: A final version of the 1996 Washington Hemp Initiative has been approved by the Washington state Attorney General. If successful, the initiative, now known officially as Initiative 663, would require the state to replace existing policies prohibiting cannabis with a system of regulation and taxation similar to that of alcohol. The initiative has until July 8th to gather the 189,000 signatures from registered Washington voters necessary to place the bill on the upcoming ballot. The 1996 Hemp Initiative is a comprehensive initiative dealing with industrial, medicinal, and recreational hemp. Industrial hemp is defined by the initiative as having less than .5 percent THC and is to be regulated as a non-intoxicating agricultural commodity. Medicinal cannabis is allowed to be distributed by prescription from drug stores and pharmacies. Regulations regarding the use of recreational and/or intoxicating hemp (read: marijuana) are modeled after the laws regulating alcohol and permits adults over 21 to consume cannabis as long as they do so responsibly. In addition, minors will not be allowed where marijuana is grown, sold, or consumed. Tom Rohan, state coordinator for the initiative drive, notes that petition organizers have over 3,000 volunteers to help gather signatures. For more information, please contact the Hemp Initiative Hotline @ (206) 548-8043. A complete text of the 1996 Hemp Initiative is available on the Internet @ http://www.hemp.net/ Bill To Eliminate Arizona Tax Stamp Legislation Pulled For Time Being March 12, 1996, Phoenix, AZ: An amendment that would delete Arizona's cannabis tax and licensing program was pulled by the bill's sponsor, Rep. Scott Bungaard (R-Glendale). Bungaard plans to reintroduce the amendment next week. Bungaard's move to repeal Arizona's tax stamp legislation stems from a November 1995 ruling by Northwest Phoenix Court Justice Judge John Barclay that dismissed charges against Arizona NORML Chairman Peter Wilson because of evidence that he was licensed by the state to sell marijuana. Basing his decision on constitutional prohibitions against double jeopardy, Judge Barclay concluded that Wilson could not be prosecuted for possession of marijuana because of taxes he had already paid the Arizona Department of Revenue to sell cannabis. The state is currently appealing the decision. "Having this law gives the appearance that we have decriminalized [marijuana] use in this state," Rep. Bungaard said. "If the legislature allows Rep. Bungaard to submit a new bill, it will open this issue up to public debate within both the House and Senate," said Bill Green of Arizona NORML. "Our goal is to be well organized so that we [can] actively [lobby the legislature] at that time." For more information, please contact AZ4NORML @ (602) 921-2724. Information regarding Arizona Cannabis Tax Stamps can also be found on the Internet @ http://www.amug.org/~az4norml/ -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 .. ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-11IA087-000632-B002-101http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-03-07.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083127 text/html 10436HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:31:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:38 GMTContent-length: 10220 NORML News - March 7, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 7, 1996 NORML Testifies Before Congress Executive Director Keith Stroup Tells Subcommittee That "Far More Harm Is Caused By Marijuana Prohibition Than By Marijuana Itself" March 6,1996, Washington, DC: In a step forward for the marijuana reform movement, Congress invited NORML Executive Director Keith Stroup and two other reform advocates to testify on the subject of marijuana policy. Wednesday's congressional hearing marked the first time that Congress has made such overtures in more than six years. Testifying before the House Judiciary Committee: Congressional Subcommittee on Crime, Stroup urged the committee to put an end to federal policies that continue to arrest hundreds of thousands of adult marijuana users every year while, at the same time, maintaining NORML's opposition to adolescent drug use. "Marijuana smokers in this country are no different from their non-smoking peers, except for their marijuana use. Like most Americans, they are responsible citizens who work hard, raise families, contribute to their communities, and want a safe, crime-free neighborhood in which to live," he stated. "It's time we ended marijuana prohibition and stopped arresting and jailing hundreds of thousands of average Americans whose only 'crime' is that they smoke marijuana. This is a tragic and senseless war against our own citizens; it must be ended. Stroup also spoke in favor of amending federal law to allow patients access to medical marijuana with a doctor's prescription and urged the members of the crime subcommittee to promptly approve HR 2618 -- a federal bill currently before the subcommittee that would permit the medical use of cannabis. "Whatever you may feel about the war on drugs," Stroup summarized, "denying medical marijuana to seriously ill people should not be a part of it." Also appearing before the subcommittee to attest to marijuana's medical utility was Richard Brookhiser, Senior Editor for the National Review. In impassioned testimony, Brookhiser told of his own use of marijuana, with the full knowledge of his physicians, as a way to alleviate the violent nausea he suffered as the result of cancer chemotherapy treatments. "Because of ... marijuana, my last two courses of chemotherapy were almost nausea-free," Brookhiser recounted. "There was only one problem -- I had to become a criminal to do this." Representing the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL) was Attorney Jeralyn E. Merritt of Denver, Colorado. Merritt testified in favor of changes recently enacted by the U.S. Sentencing Commission and approved by Congress adopting a universal plant/weight ratio of 100 grams be used in marijuana sentencing. Merritt argued that efforts by some members of Congress to re-enact a 1000 gram per plant ratio for marijuana plants were not justified. "For Congress to step in now," she testified, "in the absence of new and compelling evidence that the [current law] is scientifically unsound or otherwise irrational, flies in the face of the authority granted to the [U.S.] Sentencing Commission." Appearing before the committee on an opposing panel were Stephanie Haynes, President of Drug Watch International, Dr. Eric A. Voth of the International Drug Strategy Institute, D.A.R.E. officer Donald Hayes of the Alexandria Virginia Police Department, and Tom Hedrick, Vice Chairman of the Partnership for a Drug Free America. All four speakers testified in favor of continuing to maintain strict penalties for the use of marijuana and encouraged Congress to strengthen their anti-drug efforts. In addition, both Ms. Haynes and Dr. Voth voiced their disapproval over the efficacy of medical marijuana and the introduction of HR 2618. Ignoring the fact that thousands of seriously ill patients risk arrest daily to acquire marijuana as a therapeutic agent for a variety of serious illnesses including glaucoma, cancer, and the wasting syndrome associated with AIDS, Voth testified that only "the pro-marijuana forces [continue to] drive the medical marijuana issue." Although NORML was encouraged by the opportunity to testify before the congressional subcommittee, the organization expressed concern that Subcommittee Chairman, Bill McCollum -- a former two-time co-sponsor of medical marijuana legislation himself -- refused to hear testimony from Harvard Medical School Professor and international authority on medical marijuana, Dr. Lester Grinspoon, M.D. "Because of the importance [NORML] place[s] on the need for medical marijuana, we had asked if we might have ... [Dr.] Lester Grinspoon ... present our testimony here today, but [we] were told by the committee that would not be possible," Stroup explained. "[However,] Dr. Grinspoon remains available should this committee elect to hear from him at some point." "The fact that the subcommittee allowed a medical doctor testify to the purported dangers of marijuana, but denied NORML the opportunity to present expert medical testimony on the therapeutic effectiveness of cannabis is truly unfortunate, said NORML's Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre. "Since the Subcommittee on Crime may be voting on proposed medical marijuana legislation in the near future, one can only hope that they will hold additional hearings at which time expert medical testimony on both sides of the issue will be accepted." For more information of the March 6 hearings before Congress, please contact either Allen St. Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. A Transcript of NORML's testimony is currently available on the Internet @ http://www.norml.org/ New Drug Czar Sworn In; Clinton Proposes Massive Expansion Of White House Anti-Drug Efforts March 6, 1996, Washington, DC: In a move that signifies a 180 degree departure from the President's previous decisions to downsize the Office of National Drug Control Policy, President Clinton recently asked Congress for $3.4 million in supplemental spending to expand the staff of the ONDCP from 25 to 150 individuals. This money would be in addition to the extra $250 million dollars already appropriated by the White House to beef up anti-drug efforts. "The general wants some troops to command," explained one White House official to the Washington Post on Clinton's sudden move to increase the ONDCP staff, "and Clinton wanted the general." Newly appointed drug czar, retired General Barry R. McCaffrey was sworn in to office yesterday. In addition to his title as drug czar, McCaffrey was granted a slot on the National Security Council. The former general was also given approval from the White House to carry over 30 former Pentagon staffers to his new operation. "According to the most recent FBI statistics, the federal government's war on drugs is primarily a war against marijuana users," explained NORML's Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre. "Clinton's latest effort to drastically increase the 'war' effort is yet another step in the wrong direction and a wasteful expenditure of valuable taxpayers dollars." For copies of retired General McCaffrey's resume and related articles, contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. NOTICE! NORML DEPUTY DIRECTOR WILL BE APPEARING LIVE ON AMERICA ON-LINE (AOL) THIS SUNDAY AT 10 P.M. EST. TO DISCUSS HOW CAMPUS ORGANIZATIONS CAN RALLY TO EFFECTIVELY REFORM MARIJUANA LAWS. THE 2 HOUR FORUM IS BEING SPONSORED BY THE ACLU AND MAY BE ACCESSED ON AOL BY ENTERING THE KEYWORD: "ACLU." INTERESTED PARTIES MUST THEN GO IN TO THE SECTION "ACLU LIVE" AND ENTER "FREEDOM HALL." -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-12IA087-000632-B002-133http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-02-29.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083139 text/html 15512HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:31:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:43 GMTContent-length: 15296 NORML News - February 29, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 29, 1996 NORML Issues Principles Of Responsible Cannabis Use February 29, 1995, Washington D.C.: The National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, the nation's oldest and largest interest group dedicated solely to marijuana law reform, has adopted a set of Principles of Responsible Cannabis Use. NORML maintains that when marijuana is enjoyed responsibly, subjecting users to harsh criminal and civil penalties provides no public health benefit and causes terrible injustices. For reasons of public safety, public health, economics, and justice, the prohibition laws should be repealed to the extent that they criminalize responsible marijuana use. The key points to the Principles of Responsible Use are as follows: Cannabis consumption is for adults only. Many things and activities are suitable for young people, but others absolutely are not. Children do not drive cars, enter into contracts or marry, and they must not use drugs. The responsible cannabis user does not operate a motor vehicle or other dangerous machinery impaired by cannabis. Although cannabis is said by most experts to be safer than alcohol and many prescription drugs with motorists, public safety demands that impaired drivers be taken off the road and that objective measures of impairment be developed and used, rather than chemical testing. The responsible cannabis user will carefully consider his/her setting and regulate use accordingly. The responsible cannabis consumer will be vigilant as to conditions -- time, place, mood, etc. -- and does not hesitate to say "no" when those conditions are not conducive to a safe, pleasant and/or productive experience. Use of cannabis, to the extent that it impairs health, personal development or achievement, is abuse and should be resisted by responsible cannabis users. Abuse means harm. Some cannabis use is harmful; most is not. That which is harmful should be discouraged; that which is not need not be. The responsible cannabis user does not violate the rights of others, observes accepted standards of courtesy and public propriety, and respects the preferences of those who wish to avoid cannabis entirely. Regardless of the legal status of cannabis, responsible users will adhere to emerging tobacco smoking protocols in public and private places. For more information on the Principles of Responsible Cannabis Use, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Vermont House Of Representatives Approves Hemp Cultivation Legislation February 29, 1996, Montpelier, Vermont: Legislation that proposes to permit development of a domestic hemp industry in Vermont (H.783) was approved by the House of Representatives by a voice vote today. The bill had received wide-scale bi-partisan support one day earlier when the second reading was approved by a 108-33 vote. The overwhelming number of votes in favor of the legislation would override the Governor's veto if he chooses to oppose it. In the past, Gov. Howard B. Dean has spoken out against hemp cultivation claiming that it would be tantamount to legalizing marijuana. The Vermont legislation is similar to a pending Colorado hemp bill introduced by Senator Lloyd Casey (D-Northglenn) and would authorize the University of Vermont to undertake research of industrial hemp production in the state. A key aspect of this research would include growing test plots of industrial hemp. The bill is expected to go to the Senate after session tomorrow barring any last minute calls for reconsideration. Legislators note that there appears to be little opposition for the proposal in the Senate. Sen. Thomas Bahre (R-Addison), chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee told the Vermont Times that he hopes to begin taking testimony on the bill as soon as March 18. "We want to seriously look at whether there is anybody out there to buy this fiber, and what its potential is to create manufacturing jobs," he said. "If it doesn't then I don't see a need to go any further. But, I do think this fiber has the potential to have land produce something that isn't producing milk." Often described as "marijuana's misunderstood cousin," industrial hemp is from the same plant species that produces marijuana. Unlike marijuana, however, industrial hemp has only minute amounts of delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive ingredient that gives marijuana its euphoric properties. Industrial hemp is currently grown legally throughout much of Europe and Asia and can be used to produce a variety of products such as cosmetics, textiles, paper, paints, plastics, and animal feed. For more information about industrial hemp, please contact either Allen St. Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Hemp To Be Planted On American Indian Soil February 17, 1996, Chandler Heights, AZ: The Coalition for Hemp Awareness (CHA) announced that the Navajo Nation has issued a resolution allowing for hemp cultivation to take place on American Indian soil. CHA has scheduled a spring planting to take place on March 17, 1996. The Navaho Hemp Project began in 1992 when activists Jim Robinson and Tom and Carolyn McCormick moved to the reservation for the purpose of introducing hemp cultivation on sovereign soil. The trio were so successful in their education campaign that the resolution was passed by the Navajo Nation with a unanimous vote of 30-0. Although over 30,000 acres of the Navajo Nation have been allocated for hemp cultivation, CHA's initial planting will be limited to a small seed bank crop. In addition, CHA states that the organization is close to securing approval for similar cultivation projects from ten other tribes located across the United States. The Coalition for Hemp Awareness was founded in 1991 to incite the rapid return of cannabis hemp as an agricultural base crop. CHA is a political advocacy network group that assimilates and disseminates hemp information to both politicians and the public. For more information on the Coalition for Hemp Awareness or the Navajo Hemp Project, please contact CHA @ (602) 988-9355 or write to: P.O. Box 9068, Chandler Heights, AZ 85227. CHA can be contacted on the Internet @ http://www.indirect.com/www/chaptrk/ Illinois Supreme Court Finds Cannabis Tax Stamps Unconstitutional February 15, 1996, Illinois: The Illinois Supreme Court has declared that the application of the state's Cannabis and Controlled Substances Tax Act in the case a defendant who had previously plead guilty to drug possession charges constitutes double jeopardy under the United States Constitution. This decision follows closely on the heels of similar rulings reached by both an Arizona trial court and the Indiana Supreme Court. Writing the opinion of the court, Justice Harrison rejected the state's argument that the application of the Illinois act is not contingent upon commission of a crime. "Under the Act, the only persons liable for the tax are 'dealers,'" the justice writes. "[T]o be a 'dealer' within the meaning of the statute, one must have carried out certain enumerated acts 'in violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act or the Cannabis Control Act,' both of which are criminal statutes. [Hence,] by the terms of the Act, criminal conduct is a prerequisite to tax liability. ..." ... [Consequently,] because the Department of Revenue cannot determine whether a person is a 'dealer' subject to the tax unless and until that person had been found guilty of the underlying criminal offense, the Cannabis and Controlled Substances Tax Act not only assumes that a crime has been committed, it also presupposes that the offending party has been arrested, charged and convicted. In this regard, the act ... [is] a form of punishment for double jeopardy." For more information on this case, please refer to Docket No. 77708 (Keith Robert Wilson v. The Department Of Revenue), filed February 15, 1996. For more information on cannabis tax stamps, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. California Medical Marijuana Initiative Heads Toward November State Ballot February 26, 1996, Santa Monica, CA: An initiative to legalize the medical use of marijuana appears headed for the November 1996 California ballot thanks to crucial last-minute financial support from a group of major donors. The new donations make it likely that supporters will garner the necessary number of signatures by the April 20 deadline to place the initiative on the ballot. Initiative organizers were elated by the gift and expressed confidence that voters would approve the measure. Polls indicate that a solid majority of Californians support the medicinal legalization of marijuana. The current medical marijuana initiative would guarantee the right of patients to use marijuana for medicinal purposes if they possess a physician's recommendation. Medical marijuana has remained illegal despite growing acceptance in the health care community of its efficacy in the treatment of cancer, glaucoma, AIDS, multiple sclerosis, chronic pain and muscle spasticity. Under current state law, Californians who cultivate marijuana for medicinal use may be subject to up to three years in state prison. The 1996 medical marijuana initiative has been endorsed by the cities of San Francisco, Oakland, and West Hollywood; the Santa Cruz and Marin Boards of Supervisors; the California Nurses Association; the Los Angeles AIDS Commission, the California Multiple Sclerosis Society, the California Seniors' Legislature, and many other organizations and public leaders. According to statements made to The New York Times by Dennis Peron, Director of the California Medical Marijuana Initiative, the all-volunteer signature drive has gathered approximately 200,000 signatures to date. The coalition must collect 600,000 signatures by April 20 to place the initiative on the November ballot. For more information, please contact either Dale Gieringer of California NORML @ (510) 540-1066 or Scott Imler of Californians for Compassionate Use @ (310) 314-4049. Cincinnati Buyers Club Founder Takes Offensive Following Police Raid February 29, 1996, Covington, KY: Richard Evans, founder of the Greater Cincinnati Cannabis Buyers Club -- one of an estimated 30 underground clubs located across the country that supplies marijuana as a therapeutic to seriously ill patients who possess a physician's recommendation -- has taken the offensive since his home was raided by police on February 16. Evans' home served as the headquarters for the club which distributed marijuana to approximately 30 patients. Evans and his attorney, marijuana activist Gatewood Galbraith, held a press conference on the Covington courthouse steps at the Kenton County Municipal Building to protest the police action. "If they want to make this the battle [for medical marijuana clubs,] then we're ready to do battle," Galbraith told the press. "Only a fascist nation would keep this premiere medicine from the hands of seriously ill patients ... for whom it is the best therapy." Even though Evans' house was raided over one week ago and marijuana was confiscated, law enforcement officials have yet to produce a warrant for Evans' arrest. Even so, Evans' case and subsequent press conference have drawn an exceptional amount of favorable press coverage including features in the Kentucky Post, Cincinnati Post, Cincinnati Enquirer, and at least two television news stations. Covington police have refused to comment on the situation. "I am sick of living in a country where I can't be free," summarized Evans. "Give me liberty or give me death. We are going to have a cannabis buyers club." For more information on the Cincinnati Cannabis Buyers Club, please contact Americans for Compassionate Use @ (606) 431-8719. For more information on medical marijuana and cannabis buyers clubs, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-13IA087-000632-B002-152http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-02-22.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083147 text/html 14982HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:31:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:32:48 GMTContent-length: 14766 NORML News - February 22, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 22, 1996 Law Enforcement Raids Cincinnati Buyers Club February 16, 1996, Covington, KY: The home of activist and medical marijuana user Richard Evans has been raided by law enforcement officials. Evans' house served as the home base for the 9-year-old Cincinnati Cannabis Buyers Club. Evans, who was not home at the time of the raid, subsequently checked himself into a local hospital to combat onsetting symptoms of manic depression -- a medical condition which he is treated for. Evans stayed at the hospital throughout the weekend and intends to turn himself over to local authorities. Evans informed NORML that he still has "no idea" what charges may be pending against him, but speculated that he may be facing felony offenses for two marijuana seedlings that were present in his home. Ironically, witnesses report that law enforcement officers failed to seize the seedlings. The Cincinnati Buyers Club is one of an estimated 30 underground cannabis buyers clubs located throughout the country. The Cincinnati CBC has an eight member board of directors and distributes marijuana to approximately 30 patients. NORML will attempt to update this story next week. For more information on Richard Evans' case, please write to: Americans for Compassionate Use, P.O. Box 2175, Covington, KY 41012. Missouri Medical Marijuana Bill Unanimously Passes Senate Public Health Committee February 15, 1996, Jefferson City, MO: A medical marijuana bill (Senate Bill 573) introduced by State Senator Joe Mosley has unanimously passed the Senate Public Health Committee. The bill states that "no criminal or civil penalty shall apply to any person for the act of possessing marijuana provided that ... a [physician] certifies in writing that the person is under professional care [and] ... needs marijuana as part of a therapeutic regimen. Missouri NORML Coordinator Dan Viets says that he is pleased with the committee's recommendation to the Senate to pass the bill. However, he added a note of skepticism regarding a last minute amendment to the bill that instructs the University of Missouri to conduct research on the efficacy and safety of whole-smoked cannabis to that of the synthetic-THC drug Marinol. "I hope this doesn't bog the bill down and undermine the overall purpose of the legislation: to stop seriously ill individuals from going to prison for their medical use of cannabis," Viets said. The bill will now go to the Senate floor for a vote. For more information, please contact Dan Viets of Missouri NORML @ (314) 443-6866. Hemp Businessman Sentenced To More Than 8 Years In Prison February 15, 1996, Minneapolis, MN: Hemp activist and founder of the U.S. Hemp Company, Arlin Trout, was sentenced to more than eight years in prison after being found guilty of conspiring to possess more than 100 kilograms of marijuana. Trout accused the prosecution of utilizing paid informers and snitches to frame him and labeled himself a political prisoner who is being targeted for his beliefs. Arlin's wife, Cathy, will now be left to run the successful clothing business and raise the Trout's six children on her own. Prior to his sentencing, Trout gave an impassioned speech to U.S. District Judge James Rosenbaum. "I was charged and convicted of conspiring to sell a plant that grows wild in this region and [that] once provided legal jobs for Minnesota. This plant is the oldest, safest source of food, fuel, fiber and medicine on Earth and has infinite industrial and medicinal value to society. "... Fear and ignorance guided by greed and blind ambition created the prohibition of hemp. I am morally and intellectually compelled to resist these forces. When the American people find out what hemp is and why it's really illegal, may they deal with this government as harshly as it has dealt with me. Although Trout's supporters applauded Arlin's bold speech, Judge Rosenbaum was unmoved and sentenced Trout to the maximum sentence recommended under the U.S. sentencing guidelines. When asked if she felt that her husband's speech may have increased the length of his sentence, Cathy Trout responded, "Why not stand up for your rights? One day in jail is too long. You can't be expected to admit you're wrong when you don't believe you are. You've got to live with yourself. Besides, the extra time isn't going to destroy the fact that I love him and his children love him, and no matter how long he's in [prison], that won't change." Despite Trout's incarceration, he is reportedly planning to run as the United States vice presidential candidate for the 10-year-old Grassroots Party. For more information on this case, please contact either Cathy Trout of U.S. Hemp @ (602) 983-7065 or The Grassroots Party of Minnesota @ (612) 722-4GRP. Additional text relating to Trout's trial is available on the Internet at: http://www.winternet.com/~grp/ America Online Poll Reports That 91 Percent Of Americans Favor Marijuana Decriminalization February 19, 1996: An informal poll conducted on America Online following this past Monday's debate between former Drug Czar Lee Brown and NORML Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre reveals that 91 percent of those responding favored decriminalizing marijuana. A second poll conducted the following day, asked the question: Is the drug war failing? Of the respondents who answered, 92.8 percent said "yes. A transcript of the February 19 debate is currently available on NORML's homepage @ http://www.norml.org/ Public Hemp Display Under Attack From Local Residents February 21, 1996, Norman, OK: A month long hemp display arranged by the University of Oklahoma NORML chapter is under fire from parents and local officials. The three case exhibit, currently on display at The Norman Public Library, advocates the legalization of the hemp plant for industrial and agricultural purposes. On display are various products made from hemp such as hats, shoes, and backpacks as well as a caption next to a picture of former President George Washington encouraging farmers to: "Grow hemp." School patron Robert Coffman, who said he was representing other parents, recently criticized the display at a City Council meeting and argued that such an exhibit was inappropriate for children. In addition, Mayor Bill Nations reports that he has had at least a dozen calls from people opposed to the exhibit. Nations admits that both city and library officials had tried to prevent UO NORML from running the exhibit. Tony Smith, a member of UO NORML, states that the library has received an equal number of compliments as well as complaints from patrons regarding the controversial exhibit. He further argues that children should be allowed to view the exhibit so they can learn about the historical and industrial uses of the hemp plant. "We teach our children that we have a free country where dissenting opinions can be expressed," Smith says. "Our children are well-informed about the government's position on marijuana. Our exhibit in a public forum demonstrates that we ... live in a country where freedom of expression exists." For more information, please contact Eric Copenhaver of University of Oklahoma NORML @ (405) 366-7610. Man Held In Texas Jail Begins Hunger Strike To Protest Incarceration For Marijuana Possession February 21, 1996, Macogdoches County, TX: A native of New York who was arrested in Texas for possessing a minor amount of marijuana has announced that he has begun a hunger strike while in jail to protest Texas' harsh stance on marijuana possession. Robert Magill of Buffalo informs NORML that he is in his third day of a hunger strike to bring attention to the severity of Texas laws regarding marijuana possession. Magill is currently being held on a $1500 bond and is scheduled to be arraigned on February 27. Magill explained to NORML that he was in the process of hitchhiking to California and does not possess the necessary funds to bail himself out of jail. He notes that under New York state statutes, he would have faced only a minor fine for possessing marijuana. Magill intends to continue his hunger strike at least until his arraignment. Marin County Police Chief Supports Medical Marijuana Initiative February 14, 1996, Fairfax, CA: Jim Anderson, a long-time police chief for the town of Fairfax is one of the latest law enforcement officials to speak out in favor of California's current medical marijuana initiative. "I believe there is adequate unbiased and scientific evidence that marijuana does have medicinal benefit. When we consider the associated consequences of other prescription drugs it seems illogical to exclude marijuana as another alternative available to physicians for prescription. ..." "... Even if there are no other benefits than relief of pain or stimulation of appetite, there appears to be a legitimate place for marijuana in the wide array of legally prescribed drugs. The legalization of marijuana for medicinal purposes seems to strike a reasonable balance between the abuse and illegal use of the drug and its legitimate medicinal value that could be available through prescriptive use. "With the increased public attention on my own support of the medicinal use of marijuana, I find that many other conservative persons share this belief. ...Marijuana is not the street degenerate that ravages society." Anderson has been employed in law enforcement and public safety since 1964 and has been a police chief for 14 years. He is also a member of the U.S. Army Reserve with rank of Lieutenant Colonel. The Californians for Compassionate Use coalition is attempting to place an initiative on the 1996 general election ballot that would allow doctors to prescribe marijuana as a therapeutic agent. The coalition needs to collect 600,000 signatures by April 20 to place the initiative on the November ballot. For more information, please contact Dennis Peron of Californians for Compassionate Use @ (415) 621-3986. Marijuana Reformers Demonstrate In New Zealand February 20, 1996, Wellington, New Zealand: According to a Reuters news feature, an estimated 250 people demonstrated outside of New Zealand's parliament for the legalization of marijuana. The demonstrators were members of the Aotearoa (New Zealand) Legalize Cannabis Party. Spokesman for the party, Mike Finlayson, told supporters that the government should get out of people's lives and concentrate police resources on fighting violent crime. The marijuana-reform group estimates that half a million New Zealanders use the drug. Police made 11 arrests during the protest after several of the demonstrators lit marijuana cigarettes. The eleven individuals were detained for possession of marijuana and obstructing police. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-14IA087-000632-B002-180http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-02-15.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083313 text/html 10548HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:31:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:21 GMTContent-length: 10332 NORML News - February 15, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 15, 1996 Update: Judge Drops Charges Against Medical Marijuana User Todd McCormick February 13, 1996, Bryan, OH: Judge Anthony Gretick has dismissed drug charges against medical marijuana user and activist Todd McCormick. McCormick, who has a prescription from a physician in Holland to use cannabis as a medicine, was arrested this past summer when Ohio State Patrolmen discovered in excess of thirty pounds of marijuana in his van. Judge Gretick ruled that state troopers had illegally searched McCormick's vehicle and ordered that the evidence be suppressed. It is expected that the state will appeal Gretick's verdict. Since the beginning of this case, McCormick has maintained that the search had been illegal and that the marijuana seized was intended solely for medical use and not for sale. McCormick, 25, is the founder of the San Diego Compassionate Use Club in California and was driving to his home state of Rhode Island to establish a similar club when he was arrested. McCormick's case garnered national headlines this past fall when it was revealed that Judge Gretick was considering allowing McCormick to have legal access to cannabis while in jail. For much of his life, McCormick has used marijuana as a therapeutic to alleviate pain associated with a rare strain of cancer he suffers from known as histiocytosis X. While in Holland, McCormick received a prescription for the use of 1 to 10 grams of marijuana daily from Dr. R. T. Trossel of the Preventive Medicine Center in Rotterdam. "I'm sure he can't live without it," Trossel notes, "because he becomes completely paralyzed. ...I am convinced [that] there are no other drugs that would give him the same relief. He's tried them all ... [and] ... this seems to have the best effect on him." McCormick, who had recently been residing in the Netherlands, states that he is pleased with Gretick's ruling and plans on returning to Rhode Island shortly. He notes that he is considering filing charges against the state of Ohio. For more information, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500 or Don Wirtshafter of The Ohio Hempery @ (800) BUY-HEMP. Medical Marijuana Sentence Reduction Bill Introduced in California February 5, 1996, San Francisco, CA: State Assemblyman John Burton (D-San Francisco) has introduced legislation (AB 2120) that would provide some relief for patients who choose to cultivate marijuana for medicinal purposes. The bill (AB 2120) would reclassify such personal cultivation and use of medical marijuana as a misdemeanor, thereby allowing judges to grant a wide variety of sentencing alternatives. Currently, marijuana cultivation in California is categorized as a felony offense and those found guilty may be subject to up to three years in state prison. The medical sentence reduction bill is scheduled to be heard before the Public Safety Committee of the State Assembly in March. Burton's bill represents the fourth year in a row that the state legislature has attempted to reconcile the continuing demand from the medical community for access to medical marijuana. "This bill is a real ... effort to relieve the suffering of thousands of seriously ill people," says Dennis Peron, Director of Californians for Compassionate Use. "This is surely the least we can do." The Californians for Compassionate Use coalition is currently attempting to place a medical marijuana initiative on the 1996 general election ballot by collecting 600,000 signatures by April 20, 1996. For more information, please contact Dennis Peron of CCU @ (415) 621-3986. Hemp Legislation Gathers Steam With Vermont Legislators February 9, 1996, Montpelier, Vermont: Legislation that proposes to permit development of a domestic hemp industry in Vermont was passed by the House Agriculture Committee in a 7-3 vote. Modeled closely after a Colorado hemp bill, Vermont's legislation (H.783) would allow limited test cultivation of industrial hemp to take place at the University of Vermont for the next two years. The bill will go before the house floor for a second reading on February 20. "There is nothing on the radar screen that has nearly the magnitude of economic benefit that hemp has for our farmers," states Rep. Fred Maslack (R-Poultney), one of The bill's primary supporters. "The federal government has no business interfering with state legislation." Maslack notes that the hemp issue is a bi-partisan issue with "momentum in the house." For more information on the status of this bill, please contact the Vermont Legislative Council @ (802) 828-2424. Wait Till Next Year: Hawaii House Agriculture Committee Postpones Voting On Hemp Cultivation Bill Until 1997 February 12, 1996, Honolulu, Hawaii: The House Agriculture Committee has voted to postpone deciding on a bill that would allow Hawaii to cultivate industrial hemp until "more scientific information" can be gathered. Legislation introduced by state Rep. David Tarnas would amend the state law to authorize the production, possession, and commerce of non-psychoactive industrial hemp in Hawaii. Tarnas maintains that the cultivation of industrial hemp in Hawaii could provide local farmers with a prosperous economic and environmental future. "Hawaii has the opportunity to capture a significant market share as the first hemp production in the U.S.A.," he wrote this past November. Less enthusiastic were the members of the House Agriculture Committee who decided to hold off acting on Tarnas' bill until the 1997 legislative session. The committee's main concern appeared to be over the question of cross-pollination, stated an aid of Rep. Tarnas who attended the hearings. Law enforcement officials testified that marijuana growers would be able to grow psychoactive strains of cannabis alongside of non-psychoactive hemp. Hemp proponents denied this claim and argued that the growth of high grade marijuana was not possible in such close proximity to industrial hemp. An aid of Rep. Tarnas maintains that he will "absolutely" reintroduce hemp cultivation legislation next year. In the meantime, the House of Representatives has released a concurrent resolution (H.C.R. 28) requesting the establishment of a "state licensing program for the agricultural production of industrial cannabis hemp for food, fuel, and fiber, and the establishment of a pilot project to conduct agronomic research on industrial cannabis hemp." For more information, please contact Rep. David Tarnas @ (808) 586-8510. For more information on industrial hemp or a copy of H.C.R. 28, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. REMINDER: THE USA TODAY SUNDAY SUPPLEMENT, ONE OF THE NATION'S MOST WIDELY DISTRIBUTED MEDIA FEATURES, WILL RUN A COVER STORY ON MARIJUANA THIS WEEKEND. NOTICE! NORML DEPUTY DIRECTOR ALLEN ST. PIERRE DEBATES FORMER DRUG CZAR LEE BROWN LIVE ON AMERICA ON-LINE THIS MONDAY EVENING AT 9 P.M., NOT 10 P.M. AS WAS PREVIOUSLY LISTED. THE DEBATE, SPONSORED BY USA TODAY WEEKEND, CAN BE ACCESSED ON AMERICA ON-LINE BY ENTERING EITHER OF THE FOLLOWING KEY WORDS: "CENTER STAGE" OR "USA TODAY." -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-15IA087-000632-B002-210http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-02-08.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083330 text/html 11230HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:33:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:26 GMTContent-length: 11014 NORML News - February 8, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 8,1996 Actor Woody Harrelson Endorses Industrial Hemp; Hearings For Colorado Cultivation Bill Begin Today February 8, 1996, Denver, CO: Hearings begin today before the Colorado State Senate Agriculture Committee to determine the fate of a bill that would allow Colorado to become the first state to grow industrial hemp in almost 40 years. The bill, sponsored by Senator Lloyd Casey (D-Northglenn), permits the planting of no more than 40 acres of industrial hemp in Colorado in 1996 for agricultural, commercial, and scientific research. The legislation allows for full scale commercial production of hemp to begin in 1998. Appearing before the Committee today are a wide assortment of hemp activists, businessmen, farmers, and lobbyists. However, Casey speculates that the bill's most influential endorsement may come from Hollywood actor and businessman, Woody Harrelson. In a fax to the Agriculture Committee, Harrelson stated that he "will personally guarantee that all hemp produced in Colorado will be purchased at fair market prices." Harrelson is a hemp proponent who has commercial interests in both the clothing and paper industry. "That [endorsement] might do the best for us," notes Casey. In the past, a major concern for the committee was whether there is a legitimate market for industrial hemp. Harrelson's announcement demonstrates that there are buyers willing and waiting, the senator states. If Casey's legislation is approved by the 7-member Senate Agriculture Committee, the bill will then move on to the Senate floor for a vote. For more information on this bill, please contact either Colorado State Senator Lloyd Casey @ (303) 866-4865 or the Colorado Hemp Initiative Project at (303) 784-5632. For more information on industrial hemp, please contact Allen St. Pierre @ NORML. Circuit Court Ruling Allows For Religious Defense In Marijuana Cases February 2, 1995, San Francisco, CA: Rastafarians can defend themselves against charges of marijuana possession on religious grounds, the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals has ruled. Citing the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act, the three judge appeals panel overturned the lower court convictions of three individuals charged with possessing marijuana. The Circuit Court ruled that a Montana District Court Judge had violated the act by failing to allow the Rastafarian defendants to present evidence demonstrating marijuana's sacred role in their religion. However, the Court upheld additional drug convictions against the defendants. "The court's decision to negate the marijuana possession charges against these defendants is a significant ruling," stated NORML Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre. "To the best of NORML's knowledge, this decision is the first time that a marijuana conviction has been overturned on the basis of freedom of religion." The Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 strengthened protections for religious groups and was intended to curb criminal prosecutions that interfere with religious beliefs. The act requires the government to show a compelling interest for any prosecution that significantly hinders the exercise of religious freedom. "Under RFRA, ... the government had the obligation, first, to show that the application of the marijuana laws to the defendants was in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest and, second, to show that the application of these laws to these defendants was the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest," Judge John Noonan wrote for the court. In addition, the court maintained that the government could challenge the defendant's claims that they were, in fact, Rastafarians. The government should be free to cross-examine [the defendants] on whether they ... are Rastafarians and to introduce evidence negating their assented claims," added Judge Noonan. "It is not enough in order to enjoy the protections of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act to claim the name of religion as a protective cloak." For more information, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. A copy of the decision is currentlyavailable on the Internet at the following address: http://www.law.vill.edu/Fed-Ct/Circuit/9th/opinions/9430073.htm Iowa Supreme Court "Just Says No" To Controversial License Suspension Law February 1996, Des Moines, IA: Iowa's federally mandated "smoke a joint, lose your license law" has been ruled unconstitutional by the State Supreme Court. As a result, hundreds of convicted drug offenders, many found guilty of simple marijuana possession, will have their driving privileges restored. In addition, the state stands to lose more than $16 million annually in federal highway aid. With its recent decision, the court nullified a 1993 state law that imposes an automatic six-month driver's license suspension upon conviction of any drug offense, regardless of whether the offense is driving related. According to the court, the license suspension constituted "double jeopardy" because it was a second punishment for a single criminal action. "There [is] no direct connection between possession of controlled substances, driving, and public safety," wrote the court. "The amended statute authorizing this license revocation was aimed essentially at enhancing punishment for controlled substance possession." The Iowa Department of Transportation estimates that nearly 8,500 people had been subject to license suspension since the law took effect two years ago. "It's the first step in the right direction of common sense," said Attorney Jeff Crispin of Des Moines. "There's no logical connection between these drug offenses and driving privileges. It doesn't make sense to have these penalties." Despite the recent decision, transportation officials have decided against expunging drug-related suspensions from the driving records of those who have already completed them. For more information, please contact Attorney Jeff Crispin @ (515) 288-7400. Medical Marijuana Patients To Rally On State Capitol Steps February 7, 1996, San Francisco, CA: Persons who are living with AIDS and cancer from the Sacramento County area and beyond will be rallying on the West Steps of the California State Capitol Building Saturday, February 17 at 2:00 to show their support for medical marijuana. Sacramento County Director of Californians for Compassionate Use, Ryan Landers, will present state lawmakers with signatures gathered in Sacramento during the first half of the statewide effort to qualify the "Compassionate Use Act of 1996" for inclusion in the 1996 election ballot and demonstrators will be conducting an all day sign-up drive. Medical marijuana proponents need to gather 600,000 signatures from registered voters by April 20 in order to put the Initiative on the ballot for the 1996 election. To date, the all volunteer drive has amassed approximately 125,000 signatures. California's Medical Marijuana Initiative came about in response to Governor Pete Wilson's decision to veto legislation that would allow for the medical use of marijuana. If the initiative is passed by California voters this fall, the bill will become law immediately and cannot be vetoed. "The [Medical Marijuana] Initiative will simply set the record and allow patients and their doctors to use marijuana medicinally in California free of the stigmas and terror they have come to accept," explained Dennis Peron, statewide Director of the Compassionate Use Campaign. For more information, please contact either Dennis Peron @ (415) 621-3986 or Ryan Landers @ (916) 736-3598. REMINDER: "HIGHER TIMES," THE CNN SPECIAL ON MARIJUANA WILL AIR THIS SUNDAY AT 9:00 P.M. EST. AND NORML DEPUTY DIRECTOR ALLEN ST.PIERRE DEBATES FORMER DRUG CZAR LEE BROWN LIVE ON AMERICA ON-LINE ON FEBRUARY 19!!! -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-16IA087-000632-B002-232http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-02-01.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083340 text/html 11058HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:33:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:30 GMTContent-length: 10842 NORML News - February 1, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 1, 1996 NORML Targets Republican Task Force: Urges Panel To Lift Ban On Medical Cannabis, Reconsider Decriminalization Of Marijuana February 1, 1996, Washington, DC: NORML has sent a formal letter and 50-page informative booklet to each member of the new Republican task force on drugs. The letter urges the committee to lift the federal government's ban on medical cannabis and re-examine the decriminalization of marijuana as a public policy. NORML also asks the task force to include testimony from medical experts on these subjects when the committee holds public hearings on drug use later this year. Enclosures to the letter include endorsements of the potential of medical marijuana from such well respected organizations as the National Academy of Sciences, American Public Health Association and others. Also included in the booklet is a summary of the 1981 Monitoring the Future briefing paper that stated, "decriminalization [of marijuana] has had virtually no effect either on the marijuana use or related attitudes and belief about marijuana use among American young people." "This compendium makes a strong argument for a federal re-evaluation of our current marijuana policies," says NORML Deputy National Director Allen St. Pierre. "It is intended to persuade as well as inform the newly established Republican drug task force." The letter and booklet are two of NORML's latest efforts to garner political attention and support for U.S. Representative Barney Frank's federal medical marijuana bill (H.R. 2618). Frank's legislation would amend the federal law to permit doctor's to prescribe marijuana as a therapeutic agent to seriously ill patients. The bill has been referred to the Commerce Subcommittee on Health and the Environment and the Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime where it is presently awaiting a vote. For more information, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Washington State Senators Introduce Legislation To Allow Research Of Medical Marijuana January 30, 1996, Olympia, Washington: Washington State Senator Jeanne Kohl, D-36th District, along with Sens. Bob McCaslin, R-4th District; Darlene Fairley, D-32nd District; and Pat Thibaudeau, D-43rd District, has introduced a bill (S.B. 6744) that would allow further research to be conducted regarding the medical uses of marijuana. The legislation, known as the Controlled Substances Therapeutic Research Act, finds that there is a need for research regarding the cultivation, processing, and distribution of medicinal marijuana under strictly controlled circumstances. Therefore, S.B. 6744 amends current state statutes, creates new sections, and allows for appropriations to achieve those ends. The bill has been referred to the 25-member Committee on Ways and Means and must be brought to an initial vote by February 6. For more information, please contact Joanna McKee of Green Cross @ (206) 780-0630. For more information on the medical uses of marijuana, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Senator Jeanne Kohl may he contacted @ (360) 786-7670. Pot Charges Against Legal Marijuana User Dismissed January 31, 1996, Ft. Lauderdale, FL: Attorney Norman Elliot Kent announced today that all charges against Elvy Musikka, a 56-year old glaucoma patient from Hollywood, Florida, and one of only eight people in the country allowed by the federal government to use marijuana for medical treatment, have been dropped by the Alachua County State's Attorney's Office. Musikka was arrested by Gainesville police on December 9, 1995 while performing on stage at the sixth annual Florida Hempfest. Despite having a prescription for marijuana issued to her by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), Mussika was arrested after she took out one of her marijuana cigarettes and began smoking. She was dragged off the stage arm-and-arm by two police officers and was later charged with possession of marijuana and disorderly conduct. "The police just attacked the stage, reached up and grabbed me, and knocked me down," Musikka said. "I was in total shock." "The State Attorney honorably entered a nolle prosequi [decision not to prosecute] all charges after we presented them with the medical and legal documentation that supported our position," stated Fort Lauderdale attorney Norm Kent. Musikka says that she will continue to work as a medical marijuana activist. For more information, please contact either Elvy Musikka @ (954) 966-4238 or Attorney Norman Kent @ (954) 763-1900. Trial Date Set In Johann Moore Case January 25, 1996, New York City, NY: A trial date has been set for April 3, 1996, in the case of Johann Moore, the longtime marijuana activist who was arrested last August when law enforcement officials busted New York City's underground cannabis buyers club. Moore is the coordinator of the club. At a preliminary hearing, Judge Stolz of Manhattan's Criminal Court chose not to dismiss felony sales charges against Moore. Stolz refused the defense's motion to dismiss on the grounds that the sale took place in a public space and because Moore has no formal training in medicine. Moore has stated that he has no intention of ceasing operation of the club. For more information on this case, please contact Cures Not Wars @ (212) 677-7180. E-mail: cnw@cures-not-wars.org Internet address: http://www.cures-not-wars.org/ Washington Human Rights Group Criticizes Incoming Drug Czar January 24, 1996, Washington, DC: The Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) released the following statements concerning President Clinton's nomination of Army General Barry R. McCaffrey as the nation's new "Drug Czar." "General McCaffrey has an impressive record of service to this country," says George R. Vickers, Executive Director of WOLA. "But what is needed is a fundamental shift in U.S. anti-narcotic policies, away from failed military strategies that have had little impact on the supply of illicit drugs coming to the United States. "Regardless of his personal qualities, McCaffrey's nomination symbolizes the misguided militarization of U.S. drug policy," adds WOLA Senior Associate Colleta Younger, "and suggests a continued erosion of civilian control over law enforcement efforts in this field." As Commander in Chief of the United States Southern Command, General McCaffrey has overseen the U.S. military's anti-narcotics operations in Latin America. The WOLA has monitored human rights and United States policy in Latin America since 1974 and has produced numerous reports on U.S. anti-narcotics policy in the Andes. For more information, please contact either Colletta Younger or Bill Spencer of the Washington Office on Latin America @ (202) 544-8054. CNN Marijuana Special Slated To Air On February 11 January 25, 1996, Atlanta, GA: The much talked about CNN special on marijuana is scheduled to air at 9:00 p.m. EST. Entitled "Higher Times," the feature will explore a comparative analysis of federal marijuana policies in America and Holland. The segment will feature interviews with law enforcement officials, prosecutors, and political figures from both countries. In addition, the special will contain footage of interviews conducted with NORML Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre and Senior Policy Analyst Richard Cowan. The CNN feature was initially slated to run in late 1995, but was delayed due to scheduling conflicts. DON'T FORGET: NORML DEPUTY DIRECTOR ALLEN ST. PIERRE DEBATES FORMER DRUG CZAR LEE BROWN LIVE ON AMERICA ON-LINE ON FEBRUARY 19. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-17IA087-000632-B003-23http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-01-25.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083404 text/html 12474HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:33:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:34 GMTContent-length: 12258 NORML News - January 25, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. January 25, 1996 Circuit Judge's Dissent In Urinalysis Case Could Spur Supreme Court Review January 24, 1996, Atlanta, GA: The 11th Circuit Court has ruled that a Georgia law requiring all political candidates running for state office to undergo drug screening urinalysis is constitutional, but it is the dissent that has attorney Walker Chandler talking. "It's a great decision," Walker said. "Have you read the dissent. It hits the nail right on the head." In a scathing 11 page dissent, Circuit Judge Rosemary Barkett writes, "I do not believe that the suspicionless search in these circumstances serves any special governmental need beyond the normal need for law enforcement, and, if it did, I believe that the candidates' privacy interests outweigh the governmental interests. ..." ...We are not merely dealing with the denial of a job opportunity, but with the denial of opportunity to participate in our democratic form of government." Barkett's dissent also calls into question apparent First Amendment violations posed by the controversial Georgia law. "The majority maintains that the government's purpose [in passing this legislation] is not suppression of free expression. Yet, it supports its holding by citing the importance of ensuring that elected officials are 'persons appreciative of the perils of drug use' and 'sympathetic to drug interdiction efforts.' Establishing a certain ideology as a 'qualification' for holding public office appears to be a content-based restriction on free expression." Chandler, who filed the action against the Georgia statute and served as his own legal counsel maintains that he will forgo an "en banc" review of his case and will attempt to take his appeal directly to the Supreme Court. He intends to argue that the law violates the First, Fourth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution. Referring to the Court's decision last year to uphold the constitutionality of a Washington state law mandating random and warrantless searches of high school athletes partly on the notion that school children live under fewer constitutional protections than adults, Chandler fires, "The only way the Supreme Court could [then] approve of Georgia's law is by affirming that all Georgians are [children.]" NORML's recently reformed Amicus Curiae Committee is currently reviewing the 11th Circuit Court decision and will consider filing an amicus brief if the Supreme Court decides to hear the case. For more information, please contact Walter Chandler, Esq., @ (800) 560-3882. Activists Intending To Sell Marijuana At The Super Bowl Gain National Exposure January 14, 1995, Tempe, AZ: The rumor that marijuana will be sold openly during this year's Super Bowl has garnered the attention of the national media in recent weeks and has even made it to the pages of Time Magazine. Representatives from the Richard M. Davis Cannabis Hemp Co. plan to be on hand selling marijuana, states the magazine. "I plan to have a press conference in the parking lot," says longtime marijuana activist and R.M. Davis spokesman Ron Kiczenski, "[I will] tell people where they can buy [marijuana] in the vicinity of the Super Bowl. Not within the secured zone you have to get a special venue license for, but outside of that zone. They'll be able to buy legal marijuana." Both Kiczenski and Davis have openly sold marijuana in Arizona before. Ironically, on one occasion, the activists boldly set up shop in front of the Arizona State Capitol. The activists latest plan stems from a ruling by Northwest Phoenix Justice Court Judge John Barclay that dismissed charges against Arizona NORML Chairman Peter Wilson because of evidence that he is licensed by the state to sell marijuana. Basing his decision on constitutional prohibitions against double jeopardy, Judge Barclay concluded that Wilson could not be prosecuted for possession of marijuana because of taxes he has paid to the Arizona Department of Revenue to sell cannabis. Under Title 42 of a 1983 law, Arizona residents can purchase both a license and tax stamps to possess and sell marijuana. For more information, please contact either Ron Kiczenski @ (602) 894-8994 or AZ4NORML @ (602) 921-2724. Defense Fund Established To Aid Man Charged With Marijuana Trafficking January 24, 1996, Oregon, OH: NORML chapters in Cleveland and Fremont Ohio have united to establish a defense fund for medical marijuana user Daniel Asbury. Asbury is a quadriplegic who has been charged with trafficking in marijuana for growing his own medical cannabis. Asbury suffered a broken neck 15 years ago and began to use marijuana as a therapeutic after prescription drugs proved to be ineffective at controlling his pain and muscle spasms. Marijuana made me "fe[el] like a human being again," he said. Asbury was arrested in September of 1995 for growing his own marijuana to treat his medical condition. Asbury's lawyer, Terry Lodge of Toledo, Ohio, will invoke "medical necessity" as the basis for his defense. The trial is scheduled to begin February 26 at the Lucas County Court House. The medical necessity defense is expensive and requires expert testimony to establish the foundation for the defense. Asbury's legal fees, including the cost of flying in expert witnesses such as NORML board member Dr. John Morgan, will total in the thousands of dollars. NORML will forward all moneys received for the Daniel Asbury Defense Fund to Mid-American Bank in Toledo, Ohio where an account has been set up to assist Asbury. Concerned parties can mail checks or money orders made payable to Daniel Asbury to: NORML Defense Fund, PO Box 771154, Cleveland, Ohio, 44107 or call (216) 521-9333 for more information. NORML Deputy Director To Publicly Debate Lee Brown, Finally! January 25, 1996, Washington, DC: After years of prodding, former Drug Czar Lee Brown has finally agreed to engage in a public debate with NORML Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre over the issue of marijuana decriminalization. The debate will take place over the Internet in a large America Online discussion room. USA Today is hosting the debate and will also serve as moderator. Questions from the On-line audience will be answered by both guests. The anticipated debate is slated to take place on February 19 at 10 p.m. eastern time. More specific information concerning this debate will be available from NORML in the upcoming weeks. National Review Advocates Legalizing Drugs January 21, 1996: The latest issue of National Review, a weekly conservative journal headed by syndicated columnist William F. Buckley, asserts that the "war on drugs is lost" and recommends that the time has come to make narcotics legal. In a 15 page section of the political weekly, Buckley and a half-dozen other legalization proponents including Mayor Kurt Schmoke of Baltimore argue that America's "present prohibitive policy has failed, flatly and without serious question." In a telephone interview with the San Francisco Chronicle, Buckley said that he hopes that the attention garnered from National Review will encourage the thinking community to begin seriously facing the issue of legalization. Buckley, who just recently debated DEA head Thomas Constantine on the January 23 edition of "The Today Show," intends to follow up on the subject with three televised debates on his PBS program, "Firing Line." NORML Chapter Debuts Hemp Store: Grand Opening To Take Place This Week January 11, 1996, Lakewood, OH: The Northcoast Chapter of NORML has announced the opening of its new hemp store in Lakewood, Ohio. The store will be called Cannabis Connections and its theme will be products for the cannabis community. Items sold at the store will include hemp clothing, marijuana related books and t-shirts, posters, tie-dyes, and various assorted NORML merchandise. President of Northcoast NORML John Hartman is the driving force behind the retail store and hopes that the profits can be used to help further fund NORML's efforts to reform marijuana laws. Cannabis Connections will also serve as the new office for Northcoast NORML and store patrons will be provided with free information on marijuana-related issues. Cannabis Connections will have its grand opening on January 27, 1996. For more information, please contact Cannabis Connections @ (216) 521-9333 or stop by the store at 16019 Madison Ave., Lakewood, Ohio, 44107. USA Today Sunday Supplement To Feature Story On Marijuana January 25, 1996: The USA Today Sunday supplement, one of the nation's most widely distributed media features, will run a cover story on marijuana. The upcoming article will explore the issue of adolescent marijuana use and whether marijuana should be decriminalized. The cover story is scheduled to run on February 18, 1996. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-18IA087-000632-B003-46http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-01-18.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083416 text/html 10586HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:34:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:40 GMTContent-length: 10370 NORML News - January 18, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. January 18, 1996 U.S. Supreme Court To Review Double Jeopardy Case January 12, 1996, Washington, DC: The United States Supreme Court has agreed to review the case that has virtually halted civil forfeitures across the country and resulted in thousands of convicted individuals asking courts to vacate their convictions. In United States v. $405,089.23 in U.S. Currency, the Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit ruled that civil forfeitures constitute punishment for the purpose of double jeopardy. Soon thereafter, courts across the country were flooded with petitions from inmates claiming that they had been punished by civil forfeiture and demanding that their convictions must be vacated. Consequently, prosecutors throughout the nation have been besieged with litigation which requires that they defend cases they thought they had already won. Criminal forfeiture statutes allow the government to simply combine the forfeiture and the criminal prosecution in the same case. However, civil forfeitures are preferred by the government because the property owner is presumed guilty and because prosecutors have the added benefit of impoverishing the property owner as he or she faces a criminal prosecution. Should the Supreme Court affirm the 9th Circuit's decision, even in part, many convictions and civil forfeitures will have to be undone. Both the government and the property owners urged the Supreme Court to take this case to resolve a host of issues which have arisen in the 6 years since the Court ruled in 1989 that civil forfeiture could be considered punishment for double jeopardy purposes. For more information on civil forfeiture, please contact counsel for the property owners: Jeffrey Steinborn (206) 622-5117, or Jeffrey Finer (509)455-3700. Exiting Drug Czar Takes "Pot" Shot At New Hemp Shoe January 13, 1996, Washington, DC: The name of Adidas' new hemp-based sneaker has fallen under staunch criticism from exiting drug czar, Lee Brown. In a January 5 letter addressed to Adidas America President Steven Wynne, Brown asserts that the product's brand name -- "The Hemp" -- was specifically chosen to glorify and capitalize on the drug culture. "On behalf of the children of America...," Brown writes, "I call upon you not to market [this] shoe." In response to the drug czar's sharp reproach, Wynne answers that the shoe's brand name was chosen simply as a way to call attention to the industrial material used to construct the shoe. "Adidas ... is working to produce products that are environmentally responsible," responds Wynne. "One such material is hemp. ...Consistent with this direction, we have produced a shoe using hemp. ..." ... [Furthermore,] products made from fiber hemp, including our shoes have no drug qualities. I don't believe you will encounter anyone smoking our shoes anytime soon." This past Friday, Brown shot off a second letter to Wynne, chastising the "sarcastic" tone of his previous response and again repeating his demand that Adidas find another name for its shoe. "What the shoe is made of is not the problem," Brown counters. "The problem is what you call it. ...I do not think it is in the goal of curbing drug abuse to imply that drugs are cool." Adidas spokesman John Fread says the company has not yet decided whether it will respond to Brown's latest letter. The controversial Adidas shoe hit stores in December, but has not yet been publicly advertised. For more information on the uses of industrial hemp fiber, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Florida Schools To Consider Drug Testing Students January 12, 1996, Fort Myers, FL: The Lee County school board is considering whether to impose random drug tests on its entire upper level student body as a way to deter teen drug use. The proposed tests would be given regardless of reasonable suspicion and would extend to all students in middle and high school. School board members intend to decide on the issue before the next school year. "I think there is a [drug] problem," board member Pat Riley told the Fort Myers News Press. "When I mention it to students, they jokingly say: 'There goes the whole basketball team, or the whole football team.' I don't think that's funny. Lee County school officials note that the schools already undergo random searches by drug dogs of students' lockers, although few drugs have been found. Nevertheless, Superintendent Bobbie D'Alessandro states that results of a survey of 5,000 Lee County high school students demonstrate that there is a drug problem. For more information on student drug testing, please contact either Allen St. Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Clinton Administration Close To Naming New Drug Czar January 17, 1996, Washington, DC: Army Lt. Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey is a leading contender to be the nation's next drug czar, reports a recent story in The Washington Post. The Post article quotes an unnamed senior administration official who said McCaffrey is "looking good" for the position. McCaffrey is one of the country's most decorated generals and in the past has taken a hard-line stance against drugs. He recently criticized the United States' current drug interdiction efforts during a public forum at the Heritage Foundation, a Washington DC Republican think-tank. Many political analysts speculate that appointing a tough, no-nonsense military figure to head the federal "war on drugs" would be a wise strategic move for the Clinton administration, which has often been criticized for appearing "soft" on the illegal drug issue. If McCaffrey is selected for the position, he would be the nation's fourth drug czar, after William Bennett, former Florida governor Bob Martinez, and Lee Brown. San Francisco D.A. Refuses To Charge Drug Offenses Under The Three Strikes Law January 17, 1995, San Francisco, CA: The city's new top prosecutor will not charge nonviolent crimes, such as drug offenses, under the state's tough three strikes law. A drug violation is "not something someone should be going to prison for 25 years for," says District Attorney Terence Hallinan. The Associated Press reports that drugs are involved in 63 percent of the three strikes cases in San Francisco. Hallinan's office is currently working out the details of his more lenient policy. For more information on mandatory minimum sentencing, please contact Julie Stewart at Families Against Mandatory Minimums @ (202) 457-5790. NORML Chapter To Run Month Long Hemp Exhibit January 15, 1996, Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma NORML will be running a month long hemp exhibit in the display case of the Norman (OK) Municipal Public Library starting on February 1. Initially, the NORML chapter's request to gain access to the display case was denied by library management. UO NORML challenged this decision and contacted the ACLU alleging that the library was engaging in discrimination. Library officials eventually consented last summer following the ACLU's involvement and UO NORML President Eric Copenhaver reports that the scheduled exhibit will be taking place next month as planned. For more information on the Norman Municipal Library hemp exhibit, please contact Eric Copenhaver of University of Oklahoma NORML @ (405) 366-7610. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-19IA087-000632-B003-70http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-01-11.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083429 text/html 11199HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:34:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:44 GMTContent-length: 10983 NORML News - January 11, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. January 11, 1996 Canadian Hemp Activist, Businessman Busted By Vancouver Police January 4, Vancouver, Canada: Police have raided the Hemp BC store in Vancouver, British Columbia, and are charging the store's owner, vocal hemp activist Marc Emery, and three employees with selling marijuana seeds. Emery had been selling marijuana seeds, along with hemp products and literature, from his retail store for the last 19 months in open defiance of the law. Emery was recently featured in a front page article of the Wall Street Journal where he boasted to have sold "130,000 seeds" this year alone. The raid took place at approximately 1 p.m. and law enforcement officials seized seeds and drug paraphernalia such as pipes, bongs, and mushroom grow kits. A large Budget Rent-a-truck was parked outside to help the police move Hemp BC's wide assortment of products. Emery and three employees were taken away in handcuffs and all four activists are being charged with trafficking marijuana seeds and selling instruments and paraphernalia for illicit drug use. If found guilty of both charges, all four could face each life imprisonment and fines of $100,000. Police Constable Anne Drennan states that the Hemp BC bust is the first time in Vancouver history that trafficking charges have been filed against individuals for selling marijuana seeds. Drennan further added that she expects Emery -- a self-proclaimed libertarian who has previously served time in jail for opening his bookstore on Sunday in disobedience of Ontario's blue laws -- to conduct a very public court challenge. Both Emery and the three Hemp BC employees were released Friday on their own recognizance. A preliminary hearing has been set for February 8, 1996. Dana Larsen, editor of the magazine Cannabis Canada, reports that the Hemp BC retail storefront continues to remain open for business in spite of last Thursday's raid. "We will be selling pipes, bongs, and seeds as per usual, although we might be understocked for a day or two," he says. For more information on Hemp BC or Marc Emery's arrest, please contact Hemp BC @ (800) 330-HEMP. American Farm Bureau Supports Industrial Hemp Research January 11, 1995, Reno, Nevada: The American Farm Bureau Federation, the largest farming organization in the United States, passed a resolution at its annual convention calling for research that could lead to the re-introduction of hemp into the American farm economy. The resolution, adopted by a unanimous vote of the 51 state presidents and all 300 voting delegates, reads: "We recommend that [the] American Farm Bureau Federation encourage research into the viability and economic potential of industrial hemp production in the United States. We further recommend that such research includes planting test plots in the United States using modern agricultural techniques." Often described as "marijuana's misunderstood cousin," industrial hemp is from the same plant species that produces marijuana. Unlike marijuana, however, industrial hemp has only minute amounts of delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive ingredient that gives marijuana its euphoric properties. Industrial hemp is currently grown legally throughout much of Europe and Asia and is being cultivated in test plots in Australia and Canada. Andrew Graves, incoming president of the Fayette County chapter of the Kentucky Farm Bureau and vice-president of the Kentucky Hemp Growers Cooperative Association, introduced the resolution at the convention. "What we are asking for is research to determine whether industrial hemp can once again become a profitable agricultural commodity for American farmers just as it is for farmers around the world," Graves said in his presentation. "Where would agriculture be without research?" In a separate resolution, the AFB also voted to affirm its policy in support of government efforts to eradicate illegal drugs, including marijuana. For more information on the Kentucky Hemp Growers Cooperative Association, please contact Andrew Graves @ (606) 293-0579 or write to P.O. Box 8395, Lexington, KY 40533. The American Farm Bureau Federation may be contacted @ (202) 484-3600. U.S. Representative Criticizes Hempilation Protest Rally January 3, 1996, Washington, DC: In response to a December 1 rally held outside the offices of Boston radio station WBCN to the protest the airplay of the NORML benefit CD Hempilation, U.S. Representative Barney Frank (D-Mass.) has issued a letter to Attorney General Janet Reno both condemning the actions of rally organizers, the Governor's Alliance Against Drugs, and requesting an inquiry into whether federal law enforcement officials were involved. Like many others who have voiced their disapproval over the actions of the G.A.A.D. (i.e., National Writers Union, Boston Coalition for Freedom of Expression, Mass/Cann, etc.), Frank is highly critical of the actions of a Drug Enforcement Administration official who allegedly took an active role in the protest. "It does not seem to me at all appropriate for a federal law enforcement agent to accompany an individual [G.A.A.D. Executive Director Georgette Watson] who is making a demand that a media outlet cease broadcasting a particular album, no matter how ... ill-advised you, I and the DEA might find it to be," Frank writes. "This [sort of conduct] puts the federal government in the position of lending official support to an interference with freedom of expression. ..." ... [Therefore,] if in fact a DEA agent accompanied Ms. Watson and lent support by his ... presence to her demand that the radio station stop playing [the Hempilation] CD, [then] that is a wholly inappropriate action for a federal law enforcement official ... and I ask that you look into it and make clear that this is not the sort of thing that should happen." For more information, please contact either Bill Downing of Mass/Cann NORML @ (617) 944-2266 or Jeremy Much of Capricorn Records @ (615) 320-8470. For further information on the Hempilation CD, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. College Freshman Survey Shows Renewed Support For Marijuana Legalization January 8, 1996: Results from an annual survey of college freshmen indicates that support for marijuana legalization currently stands at a 15-year high. Nearly 34 percent of the respondents favored the legalization of cannabis, The Associated Press reported. This figure was double the 17 percent who held that view in 1989. Bipartisan Committee Set To Analyze Violent Crime In America; Issues First Report January 5, 1996, Washington, DC: The bipartisan committee, Council on Crime in America, held a press conference to issue its debut report on the state of violent crime in America. The task force is co-chaired by former Drug Czar William Bennett and former U.S. Attorney General Griffin Bell. The committee's first report is "descriptive" rather than "prescriptive" and reveals that violent crime today still remains at a historic high. "This study paints a realistic and sobering picture of violent crime in America," says Bennett. Future reports and conferences will be aimed at addressing potential solutions to America's violent crime problem, the bipartisan task force announced. One of the problems that the bipartisan commission intends to address is the notion that America's current criminal justice system is simply a "revolving door" for career offenders. "We are hear to underscore the American people's perception on violent crime," Bennett concluded. For more information or for a copy of the report, "The State of Violent Crime In America," please contact Lara Stead by fax @ (202) 822-8328. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-20IA087-000632-B003-87http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY96/96-01-04.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083440 text/html 11019HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:34:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:31:48 GMTContent-length: 10803 NORML News - January 4, 1996 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on news items related to Marijuana Prohibition. January 4, 1996 Marijuana Activists Sue Prosecutors: Hemp Proponents Claim Unlawful, Selective Prosecution In Hemp Seed Case December 28, Hilo, Hawaii: Longtime hemp activists Roger Christie and Aaron Anderson have filed a civil lawsuit against Hawaii County prosecutor Jay Kimura and Deputy Prosecutor Kay Iopa alleging that they were unlawfully and selectively prosecuted for expressing their opinions regarding marijuana. Christie and Anderson's suit maintains that the two were selectively prosecuted by Iopa in 1992 for possessing apparently sterile hemp seeds. The seeds had been imported from China as birdseed in compliance with both state and federal laws. Charges of "commercial promotion of marijuana" against Christie were dismissed earlier this year, but the case against Anderson is still pending. The duo's lawsuit asserts that they were singled out primarily for their outspoken beliefs regarding the positive uses for hemp. Christie and Anderson note that while similar hemp seeds are available and commonly sold in stores in Hawaii, they were the only individuals targeted by prosecutors. Specifically, the suit alleges that prosecutors violated Christie's and Anderson's constitutional rights to "freely speak, petition their government, and be free from unjust government oppression." The suit also alleges that Iopa misrepresented the facts against Christie and Anderson. In 1992, police sent 800 seeds to the state Department of Agriculture for germination tests. According to Christie and Anderson, the report said that there was zero germination. However, the activists maintain that Iopa told the county grand jury, the Circuit Court, and the Hawaii Supreme Court that 6 to 9 percent of the seeds germinated. "Our lawsuit underscores the new energy in the hemp movement," states Christie. "We seek to make this the last marijuana trial in Hawaii." Christie and Anderson are seeking $3 million in damages. For more information on Christie and Anderson's lawsuit, please contact Roger Christie @ (808) 961-0488 or Attorney Steven Straus, Esq. @ (808) 969-6684. Canada Set To Lessen Pot Penalties January 1, Toronto, Canada: A bill that will revamp the way Canada deals with marijuana has passed Parliament and is now in its final stages of becoming law. Among the reforms included in the bill are a relaxing of the penalties associated with the possession of small amounts of marijuana. "People charged with possession of less than 30 grams of marijuana or one gram of hash or hash oil will no longer be fingerprinted and they will have no criminal record," says Steve Jeffrey, a spokesman for Canada's Health Ministry. "[However,] possession of the drug [will still] remain a crime," he warns. That aspect of bill C-7 troubles NORML Canada President Umberto Iorfida. "[The law] almost doesn't mean anything to me if you still have to appear in court," he says. Other less critical proponents of the bill view C-7 as striking a necessary balance between a liberalizing public attitude toward the drug and the fears of anti-drug groups and law enforcement. Among the new marijuana sanctions proposed by the pending legislation are community service or payment of a fine. Revenue raised through marijuana possession fines will be used to support marijuana related medical treatment programs and/or rehabilitation programs, notes Iorfida. The new law is expected to take effect this spring. For more information concerning bill C-7 and Canada's marijuana laws, please contact Umberto Iorfida of Canada NORML @ (905) 833-3167. NORML Establishes Amicus Curiae Committee In an effort to establish NORML as a more serious participant in the national debate over drug policy, NORML has re-established an amicus curiae ("friend of the court") committee to offer legal assistance in important marijuana related legal issues. The committee will be co-chaired by NORML Legal Committee members Michael D. Cutler, Esq. of Boston, Massachusetts and C. Rabon Martin, Esq. of Tulsa, Oklahoma. "An active NORML Amicus Committee will provide an avenue for NORML to once again add its organizational voice to some of the important legal issues of the day," says NORML Executive Director Keith Stroup, Esq. "The committee will review requests that come into the national office for amicus assistance and will file an amicus brief with the court in the appropriate cases." Many policy groups file amicus briefs in important and controversial legal cases as way to assist the court. The first case before the new committee is a marijuana cultivation case involving the question of whether dead marijuana plants count as plants (with an assigned weight) or as actual marijuana (measured by actual weight). The case (U.S. v Shields) is currently on appeal before the 11th Circuit. The committee further intends on filing a second brief in the case of Seeley v Washington. Defendant Ralph Seeley earlier won a declaratory judgment ruling that the state's ban on medical marijuana was unconstitutional. The case is now going before the Washington State Supreme Court. For more information on NORML's Amicus Curiae Committee, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. Indiana Supreme Court Rules On Constitutionality Of Illegal Drug Excise Tax December 27, Indianapolis, Indiana: The Indiana Supreme Court has ruled that the state cannot tax illegal drugs and prosecute their owners too. In the written opinion of the court, Chief Justice Randall T. Shepard maintained that to apply both civil and criminal penalties to drug cases would be a violation of the constitutional protections against double jeopardy. However, the high court also added that the assessment of the tax is a valid punishment when it is the "first jeopardy" -- that is, if it precedes criminal proceedings. Responses to the ruling are widespread and some legal scholars are critical that the ruling will allow certain defendants to "buy" their way out of criminal sanctions. Citing the court's suggestion that Revenue Department officials could consult with prosecutors to determine which action to take, Attorney Andrew Maternowski of Indianapolis worries that the state's particular punishment could depend on the defendant's financial standing. "If you don't have money, you go to prison," he said. Others feel that the ruling will encourage the state legislature to abolish the excise tax. A similar "double jeopardy" ruling was recently issued in an Arizona trial court. In that decision, a Northwest Phoenix Justice Court Judge dismissed marijuana charges against Arizona NORML Chairman Peter Wilson because he had previously paid the state tax on cannabis. Despite "Colorful" Side Effects, FDA Panel Gives Thumbs Up To New Anti-Glaucoma Drug A Food and Drug Administration panel has approved a new type of anti-glaucoma drug even though it has the startling side effect of turning blue eyes brown. "This could turn out to be a major public health hazard for glaucoma patients," noted Dr. Alexander Buckner of the University of Pennsylvania. The panel voted 4-2 to approve the new drug. National statistics indicate that glaucoma effects some 980,000 Americans a year. Standard therapy in the treatment of glaucoma is the drug Timolol; however, physicians state that the drug has numerous side effects ranging from breathing problems to irregular heartbeats. Medical marijuana proponents argue that the use of cannabis is an effective treatment in lowering inter-ocular pressure in individuals who suffer from open-angle glaucoma. Advocates state that cannabis is both more effective and safer than other conventional treatments. For more information on medical marijuana, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202) 483-5500. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS!WT01-B20-21IA087-000632-B003-143http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-12-28.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083510 text/html 6216HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:34:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:30:26 GMTContent-length: 6001 NORML News - December 28, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. December 28, 1995 USDA Issues "White" Paper OnIndustrial Hemp: Report Concedes That American Hemp CultivationIsn't Likely Any Time Soon A recently released USDA "white" paperindicates that the federal agency is currently exploring thepossibility of domestic hemp cultivation. The report notesthat a number of U.S. states reliant on the revenue raisedthrough tobacco farming have shown an interest in the possibilityof cultivating hemp as a way to compensate for slumping tobaccosales. However, the report's conclusions demonstrate thatin spite of worldwide trends and renewed domestic interest inhemp production, large-scale hemp cultivation will not begin inthe United States any time soon. According to the report, the USDA insists that, "Productionand processing trials [are] needed to establish the economicviability of industrial hemp production [within the UnitedStates.]" Nevertheless, the report further notes thatneither can be permitted because "legal issues currently preclude[this] research" from taking place. In sum the USDAmaintains that they cannot endorse the domestic production ofindustrial hemp until field tests are conducted whilesimultaneously noting that the DEA refuses to allow any actualtests to take place. Moreover, the report states that the DEA remains "opposed toany consideration of hemp as a legitimate fiber or pulpproduct." The DEA justifies this position, not on thebasis of any agricultural or economic evidence, but on "theperception that industrial hemp advocates have a hidden agenda offavoring the legalization of marijuana." The reportfurther notes that current policy dictates "that the WhiteHouse Drug Enforcement Office should be contact[ed] before USDAstaff attend meetings on industrial hemp or get involved withresearch programs. "In essence, the federal government is allowing our nation'spolicy toward an agricultural endeavor be determined -- not by anagricultural agency -- but rather, by an anti-narcotics agency thatbases its reasoning upon the preconceived notion that anyadvocacy of industrial hemp is also an endorsement of thelegalization of marijuana," states NORML DeputyDirector Allen St. Pierre. "For the American farmersand businessmen who could potentially benefit from this growingworldwide industry, the U.S. government's bias is unsupported andtruly shameful." An in depth look at the USDA report will be featured in theforthcoming issue of NORML's OngoingBriefing. Copies of the 7 page report entitled"Industrial Hemp and other Alternative Crops for small-scaleTobacco Producers," are presently available from NORML. (Meanwhile) Colorado Senator Set ToIntroduce Legislation Allowing For Hemp Cultivation In Colorado A Colorado bill that would allow for theregulated cultivation of industrial hemp by Colorado farmers isexpected to be submitted to the state legislature in 1996. The bill, sponsored by Senator Lloyd Casey (D-Northglenn),permits the planting of no more than forty acres of industrialhemp in Colorado for agricultural, commercial, and scientificresearch. A similar bill was introduced by Sen. Casey in 1995 but wasdefeated. (A complete story of the hearings surroundingCasey's previous hemp bill appeared in the Spring 1995 issue of NORML'sActive Resistance.) For more information on Colorado's efforts to legalize hempcultivation, please contact the Colorado HempInitiative Project @ (303) 784-5632 or e-mail: cohip@darkstar.cygnus.com. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-22IA087-000632-B003-175http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-12-22.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083550 text/html 12902HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:35:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:09 GMTContent-length: 12686 NORML News - December 22, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. December 22, 1995 Police, Protesters Clash At Florida HempRally Legal Marijuana Smoker Arrested For Pot December 9, 1995, Gainesville, FL: The sixth annual Florida Hempfest was marred by a greater policepresence than ever before and a record number of arrests --including that of marijuana activist and legal medical marijuanauser, Elvy Musikka. Musikka, who is supplied by the federalgovernment with a monthly prescription of marijuana cigarettes totreat her glaucoma, was dragged off the stage arm-and-arm by twopolice officers after lighting one of her prescription "joints"on stage. Musikka was initially charged with possession of cannabis anddisorderly conduct. Her lawyer, Gary Wainwright, laterannounced that the rally's organizers would take legal actionagainst the city for false arrest. Hempfest organizer, Kevin Aplin, noted that the police presenceat the event was both threatening and excessive. "I'msure the police intimidation discouraged some people from coming out,"he told The Gainesville Sun. Longtime hemp activist,Jack Herer, also stated that he felt the behavior of theGainesville police officers was the worst that he had ever seenat an event. Nine total misdemeanor arrests were reported overall. For more information, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @(202) 483-5500. Anti-Drug Group's Attack On Hempilation,WBCN, Draws Fire From National Writers Union, Boston CoalitionFor Freedom Of Expression December 13, 1995, Boston, MA: Inresponse to a December 1 rally held outside the offices of Bostonradio station WBCN to protest the airplay of the NORML benefit CD Hempilation, theNational Writers Union and the Boston Coalition for Freedom ofExpression have issued statements condemning the actions of rallyorganizers, the Governor's Alliance Against Drugs. Both groups are highly critical of the overall nature of theprotest and specifically of the alleged use of state power andfinances to help institute the rally. Reports from theDecember 1 gathering note that protesters arrived in statevehicles, attendees were encouraged to "bring their squad cars,"and an individual identified as a Boston liaison to the DEAaccompanied Georgette Wilson, Executive Director of the G.A.A.D.,as she entered the station. "These sort of actions,when performed [and sponsored] by government agents, arespecifically [prohibited] by law," charges Bill Downing, president of NORML'sMassachusetts chapter. In a letter to Governor William Weld from the National WritersUnion, Political Issues Chairman Robert B. Chatelle urges thegovernor to demand Ms. Watson issue a formal apology for heractions. The letter further urges Watson to "pledge inthe future to abide by the laws [and] the U.S.Constitution." If the executive director is unwilling to dothis, the National Writers Union suggests that Gov. Weld requesther resignation. "We are concerned ... that you have not yet spoken outagainst this abuse of power committed in your name,"Chatelle writes. "The voters of the Commonwealth havethe right to hear from you about this disturbing event. I'msure you have no wish to advance your political career by tramplingon the inalienable rights of the people." A press release issued by the Boston Coalition for Freedom ofExpression also casts stern consternation on the event and callsthe protest an "astonishing example of the power of thestate riding roughshod over the Bill of Rights." "The news blackout on this matter, which should at the veryleast result in the resignation of Ms. Watson and thedisciplining of the DEA agent who accompanied her into WBCN, isalmost as scandalous as the incident itself," concludesJames D'Entremont, Director of the Boston coalition. For more information, please contact either Bill Downing ofMass/Cann NORML @ (617) 944-2266 or Jeremy Much of CapricornRecords @ (615) 320-8470. For further information on the HempilationCD, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @(202) 483-5500. Missouri Senator Pre-files Medical MarijuanaNecessity Defense Bill December 14, 1995, Jefferson City, MO: State Senator John Moseley has pre-filed a bill (Senate Bill 573)for the 1996 session of the Missouri General Assembly that wouldprovide certain marijuana users with a medical necessitydefense. Sen Moseley is the former President of theMissouri Association of Prosecuting Attorneys. The bill states that "no criminal or civil penalty shallapply to any person for the act of possessing marijuana providedthat ... a [physician] certifies in writing that the person isunder professional care ... [and] ... needs marijuana as part ofa therapeutic regimen." Attorney Dan Viets, President of Missiouri NORML, views Moseley'sbill as a step in right direction and does not forsee significantpolitical opposition. "Given the fact our legislature overwhelmingsupported a resolution to end the federal prohibition ofmarijuana as a medicine in 1994, we feel that Moseley's bill hasan excellent chance of passing in the Missouri General Assembly,"he said. "It is appalling that in some states, juries are forbiddento hear testimony regarding the medical uses of marijuana,"says NORML Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre. "It is even more appalling that individuals who consumemarijuana for its therapeutic effects are prosecuted under ournation's policy of 'zero tolerance.' Senator Moseley'slegislation would allow for some needed compassion in America'swar on marijuana consumers." For more information, please contact Attorney Dan Viets ofMissouri NORML @ (314) 443-6866. Charges Dropped Against Shop Owner Who SoldShirts That Parodied DARE Logo December 8, 1995, Pomona, California: The Los Angeles County District Attorneys office droppedcharges against store-owner Mark Hornaday for selling T-shirtsparodying the DARE logo. Hornaday had been cited on acomplaint by DARE America for selling shirts bearing the DARElogo with the statement: "I turned in my parents and all Igot was this lousy T-shirt." He was charged under ararely used criminal law forbidding the counterfeiting ofcopyrighted logos. Hornaday's T-shirts were alsoconfiscated. Hornaday was defended by NORML Legal Committee memberWilliam Panzer, who argued that the law was unconstitutionallybroad in failing to distinguish between legitimate free speechand intentionally deceptive marketing practices intending tomislead customers. "No one was going to think thosewere really DARE T-shirts," argued Panzer. Pomona assistant district attorney Richard Jenkins said that hechose to dismiss the case because "the people from DAREwould prefer that the [trade]mark be protected by a civilaction." "Since when does DARE call the shots at the DA'soffice?" Panzer replied sarcastically. Hornaday faced a maximum sentence of a year in jail and a $5,000fine on four separate counts if convicted. It is unclearwhether DARE America intends to press further, civil litigationagainst Hornaday. For more information, please contact Dale Gieringer of California NORML@ (415) 563-5858 or Attorney William Panzer @ (510) 834-1892. Republican Task Force Organized To Analyze,"Get Tough" On Drug Use December 13, 1995, Washington, DC: Pronouncing the current administration's anti-drug policy to be"in utter disarray" and citing recent findings thatindicate 48 percent of the high school class of 1995 has tried anillegal drug, House and Senate Republicans have organized aneighteen man task force to examine the drug issue. "It's time to get tough with this stuff," said taskforce co-chair, Orrin Hatch (R-UT). Hatch criticized thenation's current anti-drug strategies as not focusing enough oninterdiction and law enforcement. The task force announcedthat it will issue a report in March. Recent studies demonstrate that drug use among high schoolseniors is steadily climbing upward. The annual Universityof Michigan study discovered that teen drug use rose for thethird year in a row, but cautioned that America's currentadolescent use rates still remain far below the peak period ofthe late 1970s and early 1980s. For more information or for a listing of the eighteenindividuals comprising the Republican task force, please contact NORML @(202) 483- 5500. -End- HAPPY HOLIDAYS FROMNORML! MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-23IA087-000632-B003-197http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-12-14.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083600 text/html 16707HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:35:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:15 GMTContent-length: 16491 NORML News - December 14, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. December 14, 1995 Missouri Senator Pre-files Medical MarijuanaNecessity Defense Bill December 14, 1995, Jefferson City, MO: State Senator John Moseley has pre-filed a bill (Senate Bill 573)for the 1996 session of the Missouri General Assembly that wouldprovide certain marijuana users with a medical necessitydefense. Sen. Moseley is the former President of theMissouri Association of Prosecuting Attorneys. The bill states that "no criminal or civil penalty shallapply to any person for the act of possessing marijuana providedthat ... a [physician] certifies in writing that the person isunder professional care ... [and] ... needs marijuana as part ofa therapeutic regimen." Attorney Dan Viets, President of Missiouri NORML, views Moseley'sbill as a step in right direction and does not forsee significantpolitical opposition. "Given the fact our legislature overwhelminglysupported a resolution to end the federal prohibition ofmarijuana as a medicine in 1994, we feel that Moseley's bill hasan excellent chance of passing in the Missouri General Assembly,"he said. "It is appalling that in some states, juries are forbiddento hear testimony regarding the medical uses of marijuana,"says NORML Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre. "It is even more appalling that individuals who consumemarijuana for its therapeutic effects are prosecuted under ournation's policy of 'zero tolerance.' Senator Moseley'slegislation would allow for some needed compassion in America'swar on marijuana consumers." For more information, please contact Attorney Dan Viets ofMissouri NORML @ (314) 443-6866. Anti-Drug Group's Attack On Hempilation,WBCN, Draws Fire From National Writers Union, Boston CoalitionFor Freedom Of Expression December 13, 1995, Boston, MA: Inresponse to a December 1 rally held outside the offices of Bostonradio station WBCN to protest the airplay of the NORMLbenefit CD Hempilation,the National Writers Union and the Boston Coalition for Freedomof Expression have issued statements condemning the actions ofrally organizers, the Governor's Alliance Against Drugs. Both groups are highly critical of the overall nature of theprotest and specifically of the alleged use of state power andfinances to help institute the rally. Reports from theDecember 1 gathering note that protesters arrived in statevehicles, attendees were encouraged to "bring their squad cars,"and an individual identified as a Boston liaison to the DEAaccompanied Georgette Wilson, Executive Director of the G.A.A.D.,as she entered the station. "These sort of actions,when performed [and sponsored] by government agents, arespecifically [prohibited] by law," charges Bill Downing,president of NORML's Massachusetts chapter. In a letter to Governor William Weld from the National WritersUnion, Political Issues Chairman Robert B. Chatelle urges thegovernor to demand Ms. Watson issue a formal apology for heractions. The letter further urges Watson to "pledge inthe future to abide by the laws [and] the U.S.Constitution." If the executive director is unwillingto do this, the National Writers Union suggests that Gov. Weldrequest her resignation. "We are concerned ... that you have not yet spoken outagainst this abuse of power committed in your name,"Chatelle writes. "The voters of the Commonwealth havethe right to hear from you about this disturbing event. I'msure you have no wish to advance your political career by tramplingon the inalienable rights of the people." A press release issued by the Boston Coalition for Freedom ofExpression also criticizes the event and calls the protest an"astonishing example of the power of the state ridingroughshod over the Bill of Rights." "The news blackout on this matter, which should at the veryleast result in the resignation of Ms. Watson and thedisciplining of the DEA agent who accompanied her into WBCN, isalmost as scandalous as the incident itself," concludesJames D'Entremont, Director of the Boston coalition. For more information, please contact either Bill Downing ofMass/Cann NORML @ (617) 944-2266 or Jeremy Much of CapricornRecords @ (615) 320-8470. The East Coast office of theNational Writers Union can be contacted @ (212) 254-0279 and theBoston Coalition for Freedom of Expression can be contacted @(617) 497-7193. For further information on the HempilationCD, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @(202) 483-5500. State Supreme Court Rules WarrentlessSearches Of Bus Passengers To Be Illegal December 7, 1995, Chicago, IL: Civilliberties proponents are claiming victory following an IllinoisSupreme Court decision to uphold a Champaign County Judge'sruling that the police acted illegally by searching the bag of aGreyhound Bus passenger. Judge Harold Jensen granted a motion to suppress in the case ofGreyhound passenger Tim Besser. Besser was faced with drugcharges after a police search of bus passengers and their luggagerevealed Besser's suitcase to contain marijuana. At the hearing, officers testified that they boarded the bus asit pulled into the Urbana Station at 2:50 a.m. One officerand his dog searched the luggage compartment and two otherofficers questioned the bus passengers, ordering each to identifytheir luggage. During the course of the trial, policeconceded that there was nothing suspicious about the bus or anyof its passengers. One officer further testified that heknew the bus schedule by heart and added that such suspicionlesssearches of busses were routine police procedure. Consequently, by boarding the bus and detaining the passengerswithout probable cause, the court ruled that Besser had beenunlawfully seized and searched. "That kind of randompolice work is a little offensive to me," Judge Jensenremarked. Besser was represented by NORML Legal Committee member,Peter J. Vilkelis. For more information, please contact Attorney Peter J.Vilkelis @ (312) 408-0258. NORML Chapter Is Approved At ColumbiaUniversity: Marijuana Reform Organization Achieves Ivy LeagueFoothold December 5, 1995, New York, NY: TheStudent Governing Board (SGB) of Columbia University's Earl HallCenter approved the constitution of CUNORML, the ColumbiaUniversity Chapter of the National Organization for the Reform ofMarijuana Laws. Earl Hall's approval of the group makesColumbia the first Ivy League campus to recognize a NORMLchapter. CUNORML was founded as an unofficial student organization in theSpring semester of 1995 by Wayne Jebian and Aaron Wilson, agraduate student at Columbia University Teacher's College. Prior to enrolling at Columbia, Wilson helped to found the Cannabis ReformCoalition (CRC) at the University of Massachusetts atAmherst, the largest student marijuana-reform group in the UnitedStates. For more information on CUNORML, please contact Ari Blank @(212) 853-1466 or Aaron Wilson @ (212) 781-5383. NORML Chapter Seeking To Reduce Local PotPenalties Faces Opposition, Resolution From City Officials December 1995, Traverse City, MI: A NORMLchapter hoping to reduce marijuana penalties in Traverse City wasrecently met with heavy opposition by local officials. Following the announcement that the group plans to collect the330 signatures necessary to put a new pot ordinance on theballot, city commission officials unanimously passed a resolutionasking residents not to sign the petition. The TraverseCity NORML petition sends the wrong message to teenagers,Commissioner Shelly Kester said. Regardless of the resolution, area NORML President Bill Bustancesays he will have no problem gathering the necessary number ofsignatures to bring the new marijuana ordinance to a publicvote. Last year, Bustance reportedly amassed more thantwice the needed amount of signatures on a similarpetition. However, the prior petition was rejected by thecommission because it allegedly conflicted with state law. Bustance says that his current petition avoids last years legalproblems. His revised ordinance would make marijuanapossession in Traverse City punishable by a fine of $100 and 10hours of community service for the first offense. For more information, please contact Bill Bustance of TraverseCity NORML @ (616) 667-2507. Supreme Court Reverses Drug ConvictionsInvolving Firearms: Justices Rule Possessing A Weapon Not EnoughTo Warrant Longer Sentences December 7, 1995, Washington, D.C.: In a unanimous decision that may open the door for the appeals ofhundreds of firearm convictions, the Supreme Court unanimouslyruled that a federal law mandating drug traffickers to receive anadditional five years in prison for using a firearm can only beinvoked when the defendant actively employs the weapon. The decision struck down the convictions in two District cases inwhich firearms were present but locked away during drugdealing. In one incident, police discovered a pistol insidea bag in a car trunk following a traffic stop that revealed 27bags of cocaine. In the second case, an unloaded derringerwas discovered locked in a trunk of the defendant's bedroomcloset. The defendant had earlier sold crack cocaine to anundercover officer in her apartment. Prior to the Court's ruling, many circuits courts had beendivided on how much "use" of a firearm is necessary toinvoke the additional mandatory minimum. A prior D.C.Circuit of Appeals ruling stated that as long as the weapon is inclose proximity to the drugs or drug proceeds and is accessible,the stiffer punishment could apply. However, after reviewing the law's language, the Supreme courtconcluded that prosecutors must show active employment of thefirearm. The definition of "use" said Supreme Court JusticeSandra Day O'Connor "is of such breadth that no role remainsfor 'carry," which is also included in the statute. "Use" does not include the mere placement of a gunnearby for protection, she concluded. Drug Czar Leaves Post December 12, 1995, Washington D.C.: President Clinton accepted "with regret" the resignationof Dr. Lee Brown as head of the White House Office of NationalDrug Control Policy. A spokesman for the administrationsays that a search for a successor is underway and maintained thatthe President is as committed as ever to the battle against drugabuse. "[The war on drugs] will never be over untilevery child in America knows that drug use is dangerous, illegaland wrong," the President said. Brown is leaving his post as Drug Czar to take a teaching job atRice University in Houston. (Meanwhile) Gallup Poll Indicates ThatAmericans Are Very Concerned About Illegal Drug Use December 12, 1995, Miami, FL: Americans rate the use of illegal drugs as one of the nation'sgreatest crises, second only to violent crime, indicates a Galluppoll released this past Tuesday. According to results from the 1995 poll, 88 percent of thenation's adults view illegal drugs as a serious problem --ranking it ahead of such issues as the federal budget deficit andhealth care costs. The survey also indicated that 93percent of respondents favored more anti-drug education in publicschools and 85 percent opposed the idea of legalizing drugs. White House Drug Czar Lee Brown, speaking at a conference inMiami, commented that the results of the poll furtherre-emphasize the need for a high-profile, well-funded nationaldrug control strategy. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-24IA087-000632-B003-218http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-12-07.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083613 text/html 14757HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:36:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:21 GMTContent-length: 14541 NORML News - December 7, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. December 7, 1995 American Public Health Association PassesResolution Endorsing Making Cannabis Available By Prescription November, 1995, Washington DC: TheAmerican Public Health Association (APHA), the oldest and largestorganization of public health professionals in the world, passeda resolutionthis past November urging lawmakers to make marijuana legallyavailable as a therapeutic agent. The APHA represents morethan 50,000 members and has been effectively influencing policiesand setting priorities in public health since 1872. TheAPHA is one of the first major American health associations toformally recommend using cannabis as a medicine. "This is a significant development toward achieving NORML'sgoal of amending the federal law to allow physicians to be ableto legally prescribe marijuana to their patients," states NORML'sDeputy Director Allen St. Pierre. "These are respectedhealth care professionals whose opinions and positions carrygreat weight with our publicly elected officials." The APHA resolutionconcludes that "greater harm is caused by the legalconsequences of [marijuana's] prohibition than possible risks ofmedicinal use" and "urges the Administration and Congressto move expeditiously to make cannabis available as a legalmedicine." The resolutionwill be published in the forthcoming issue of The AmericanJournal of Public Health. For more information on the APHA medical marijuana resolution,please contact Jeff Jacobs of the American Public HealthAssociation @ (202) 789-5600. For more information on themedical uses of cannabis or the federal bill pending in Congress(H.R. 2618) that would allow doctors to legally prescribecannabis to their patients, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @(202) 483-5500. Marijuana Arrests For 1994 Near Half MillionMark: FBI Data Confirms Clinton's Marijuana War To Be TougherThan Bush's An estimated 481,098 total marijuana arrests weremade by state and local law enforcement during the year 1994,according to the latest edition of the FBI's Uniform CrimeReport. This figure is a 26 percent increase over lastyear's total and pushes the total number of marijuana arrestsunder the Clinton administration to a staggering 861,788. Of the 481,098 arrests made for marijuana in 1994, approximately83.7 percent (402,717) were for simple"possession." The remaining 16.3 percent (78,381arrests) were for "sale/manufacture," a category thatincludes all cultivation offenses -- even those where the marijuanawas being grown for personal use. "This data confirms that the federal government's war onmarijuana consumers has gotten significantly tougher underClinton's regime," states NORML's Deputy NationalDirector Allen St. Pierre. "These new FBI statisticsindicate that one marijuana user is arrested eveiy 65 seconds in America. Not surprisingly, those individuals who possess marijuana arebeing hardest hit." According to annual data collected by the FBI, Clinton's two yearaverage of total marijuana arrests (430,894 arrests per year) is27 percent higher than the average number of yearly arrests underthe Bush administration (338,998). "The fact thatstudies indicate adolescent use rates for marijuana are rising atthe same time that law enforcement is arresting record numbers ofusers affirms NORML's long-held belief that marijuanaprohibition is not an effective deterrent to marijuanaconsumption," remarks St. Pierre. For more information on marijuana arrests, please contactAllen St. Pierre of NORML @(202) 483-5500. To receive a copy of the FBI's 1995 UniformCrime Repors, please call (202) 324-5015. Informationregarding drug arrests appears on pages 216-217 (Meanwhile) Prison Population ExperiencesLargest Annual Increase In History: United States NowIncarcerates A Larger Percentage Of Its Population Than Any OtherNation December 4, 1995, Washington, DC: The nation's prison population experienced its largest 1 yearincrease ever bringing America's inmate population to a recordtotal of more than 1.1 million. With this total, the UnitedStates now surpasses Russia to claim the unenviable crown of havingincarcerated a greater share of its residents than any othernation. Since 1980, America's prison population has risen by over 300percent. This dramatic increase is due mainly to the impactof the "war on drugs" and stiff mandatorysentences. According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics,drug offenders now constitute nearly two-thirds of all federalprisoners and approximately one-quarter of all state prisoners. Update: Marijuana Activists Swarm To ArizonaTo Purchase Legal Tax Stamps December 5, 1995, Phoenix, AZ: Following a recent Arizona court decision that rules a citizenmay legally possess and sell cannabis in Arizona if they possessthe proper state license and tax stamps to do so, marijuanaactivists have been swarming to the state. According to reports from representatives of AZ4NORML, someactivists have even taken to openly selling marijuana in front ofthe Arizona State Capital. Rich Davis, longtime hempactivist and curator of the mobile USA Hemp Museum, recently soldone gram bags of marijuana out in front of the Department ofRevenue in plain view of both capital and state policeofficers. No arrests were made. A second well known activist, Ron Kiczenski, reports that heintends to open America's first ever marijuana store. "This will be the first legal marijuana cigarettecompany," he told The Associated Press. "It's legal to buy marijuana from anyone in the state. You just have to pay the state tax within 24 hours of thesale." The recent goings-on in Arizona stem from a ruling by NorthwestPhoenix Justice Court Judge John Barclay that dismissed chargesagainst Arizona NORML Chairman Peter Wilson because of evidencethat he is licensed by the state to sell marijuana. Basinghis decision on constitutional prohibitions against doublejeopardy, Judge Barclay concluded that Wilson could not be prosecutedfor possession of marijuana because of taxes he has paid to theArizona Depantnient of Revenue to sell cannabis. UnderTitle 42 of a 1983 law, Arizona residents can purchase both a licenseand tax stamps to possess and sell marijuana. State lawmakers contend that the legislation was intended solelyas a way to punish drug traffickers, not to legalize cannabis inthe state of Arizona. "We're confident that [JudgeBarclay's] decision will be overturned," states BarnettLotstein, a special assistant with the Maricopa County Attorney'sOffice. "In the event it isn't, I'm sure theLegislature would remedy that post haste." "We know that the Legislature is going to vote on this issue[when it convenes in January,]" responds Bill Green of AZ4NORML. "Our goal is to be well organized so that we [can] actively changethe law the best we can at that time." For more information, please contact AZ4NORML @(602) 921- 2724. To view the applications, click here: Page 1 Page 2. Click here toview the AZtax stamp regulations. Controversy Over HempilationCD Escalates: Massachusetts Anti-Drug Group Organizes RallyAgainst Radio Station WBCN Boston Boston, Massachusetts, December 1, 1995: The Massachusetts based anti-drug group, Governor's AllianceAgainst Drugs, in cooperation with representatives from the DEAand local law-enforcement, organized a protest outside theoffices of WBCN Boston to voice their disapproval of the station"giving airtime" to the NORML benefit CD, HEMPILATION. Alleging that NORML is poised to make "millions"from the sale of the CD and further stating that "WBCN is anactive participant of the pro-marijuana legalization effort inMassachusetts," the G.A.A.D. issued a fax releaseencouraging local law enforcement to attend the rally and"bring [their] squad car[s.]" According to representatives from Mass/Cann NORML, about 15protesters showed up at the gathering and a report of the eventwas broadcast on WCVB-TV Channel 3 News. Attendees wereshown carrying signs with slogans such as "WBCN is bringingthe country to its knees" and "WBCN: BroadcastingCapitalists for NORML." G.A.A.D. Executive DirectorGeorgette Wilson and Boston liaison for the Drug EnforcemantAdministration, Steve Morreale, were filmed entering WBCN'soffices as "they went in to make their case to stationofficials." WBCN reported to WCVB-TV that the station will continue to playmusic off the HEMPILATIONCD. Later, in an MTV NEWS interview which aired December 6and 7, WBCN's program director commented that: "Musicshouldn't be blamed for social phenomena. Musicians havethe same right to free expression as other Americans." The radio station offered Wilson an opportunity to air herconcerns over HEMPILATIONon WBCN's public forum show, but Wilson refused their invitation. In response to the action taken by the Governor's AllianceAgainst Drugs against WBCN, Mass/Cann NORML is considering takinglegal action against the federal prohibitionist groups involvedin the protest. "These government sponsored andorganized activities are designed to coerce, threaten,intimidate, and damage WBCN-FM so that they [will] abandon theirassociation with Mass/Cann NORML," alleges President Bill Downing. "These sorts of actions, when performed by governmentagents, are specifically proscribed by law." For more information, please conract either Bill Downingof Mass/Cann NORML @ (617) 944-2266 or Jeremy Much of CapricornRecords @ (615) 320-8470. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-25IA087-000632-B004-7http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-11-30.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083631 text/html 8414HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:36:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:25 GMTContent-length: 8199 NORML News - November 30, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANALAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. November 30, 1995 Marijuana Arrests For 1994 Near Half MillionMark November 19, 1995, Washington, DC: An estimated 481,098 total arrests were made by state and locallaw enforcement during the year 1994, according to the the latestedition of the FBI's Uniform Crime Report. This figurepushes the total number of marijuana arrests under the Clinton administrationto a staggering 861,788. Of the 481,098 arrests made for marijuana in 1994, approximately83.7 percent (402,717) were for simple"possession." The remaining 16.3 percent (78,381arrests) were for "sale/manufacture," a category thatincludes all cultivation offenses -- even those intended for personaluse. "This data affirms that the federal govemment's war onmarijuana consumers has gotten significantly tougher underClinton's regime," says NORML'S Deputy Director Allen St.Pierre. "Not surprisingly, those individuals who possessmarijuana for personal use are being the hardest hit." USA Today noted that total drug possession arrests reached arecord 1 million in 1994. This figure is nearly a 43percent increase from just three years earlier when the number ofAmericans arrested for possession of controlled substances stoodat less than 700,000. The FBI report further reveals thatthe number of individuals arrested for marijuana possession in1994 virtually equaled the combined total number of individualsarrested for possessing heroin, cocaine, and/or theirderivatives. For more information, please contact Allen St. Pierre or Paul Armentanoof NORML @ (202) 483-5500. To receivea copy of the FBI's 1995 Uniform Crime Report, please call (202)324-5015. Information regarding drug arrests appears onpages 216 and 217. New York State Senator And NORML BoardMember Joseph L. Galiber Dies State Senator Joseph L. Galiber, a Bronx New YorkDemocrat who took unpopular stands on crime and drug policy andremained a power in New York City and state politics for three decades,died recently of a heart attack. He was 71. Sen. Galiber was first elected to the state senate in 1968. He was an early supporter of methadone-maintenance programs andan early and vocal opponent of mandatory sentencing laws. He favored the legalization of marijuana and joined the NORMLboard of directors in September of 1994. His essay,"Marijuana Prohibition: A Mistaken View Of Reality,"recently appeared in the June issue of NORML's monthlypublication, Ongoing Briefing. Harvard professor and fellow NORML board member Lester Grinspoon, M.D.,said: "Sen. Galiber will be sorely missed by all who work indrug reform. He was a wise and compassionate man and one ofthe few elected public officials courageous enough to speak outagainst the 'war on drugs.' His valuable counsel will besorely missed at NORML." Exaggerated Claim Of Pot's Potency ReachesMost Absurd Level Yet Illinois Lieutenant Governor Purports Today's Marijuana To Be One Thousand Percent More Potent November 19, 1995, Illinois: In apress release condemning the release of HEMPILATION: Freedom IsNORML -- a benefit CD for the National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws -- Illinois Lieutenant Governor BobKustra claims that, "According to research conducted by theU.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the marijuana soldon the streets today is 1,000 percent more potent ... than whatmany parents experimented with in the l960s and 1970s." Contrary to Kustra's allegations, annual marijuana potencyfigures supplied by the National Institute on Drug Abuse indicatethat marijuana today is essentially no stronger than in thepast. NIDA data taken from a 1994 report monitoring yearlycannabis potency demonstrates that ordinary marijuana has containedapproximately 3 to 4 percent THC for at least the last 13years. NIDA only began measuring marijuana potency in themid-l970s. For more information regarding either marijuana potency or HEMPILATlON,please contact NORML @ (202) 483-5500. International Medical Journal PublishesEditorial Calling For The Decriminalization Of Cannabis November 11, 1995, Great Britian: The prestigious British medical journal, The Lancet, printedan editorialin its November 11 issue calling for the decriminalization andregulation of cannabis similar to the Dutch model. TheNovember editorial-- entitled "Deglamorising cannabis" -- asks the question:"Where is the harm in decriminalizing cannabis?" After weighing the evidence, the editorialconcludes that: "The smoking of cannabis, even long term, isnot harmfal to health. ...[Yet] cannabis has becomepolitical football, and one that governments continuallyduck. Like footballs, however, it bounces back. Sooner or later politicians will have to stop running scared andaddress the evidence: cannabis per se is not a hazard to societybut driving it further underground may well be." For more information on marijuana decriminalization, pleasecontact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202)483-5500. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-26IA087-000632-B004-27http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-11-13.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083640 text/html 6005HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:36:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:28 GMTContent-length: 5790 NORML News - November 13, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. November 13, 1995 Congressman Barney Frank Introduces FederalLegislation To Make Marijuana Available By Prescription Washington, DC: U.S. RepresentativeBarney Frank (D-MA) introduced a federal medical marijuana billin Congress on November 10 that would permit physicians toprescribe marijuana to patients for a number of seriousillnesses. The Frank medical use bill is modeled closely after a 1981federal medical marijuana proposal co-sponsored at that time byRep. Newt Gingrich, now Speaker of the House, and three other Republicans. The bill would reschedule marijuana from Schedule I to ScheduleII and would authorize the Secretary of Health and Human Servicesto provide for controlled domestic cultivation to provide a legalsupply of medical marijuana. Although much more research is needed, it is clear from bothlimited scientific data and rapidly accumulating anecdotalevidence that marijuana is a valuable aid in reducing pain andsuffering for patients with a number of serious ailments, andthat it is less toxic and costly than the conventional medicinesfor which it may be substituted. Marijuana is an effective means of overcoming the nausea andvomiting induced by cancer chemotherapy as well as the nausea andloss of appetite associated with the wasting syndrome of AIDS. It is useful for various spastic conditions including multiplesclerosis, paraplegia, and quadriplegia. It lowersinterocular pressure in people who suffer from open-angleglaucoma. For some people with epilepsy, it is the onlyanticonvulsant that works. It has been used for centuries asan analgesic and its medical potential has been endorsed by boththe National Academy of Sciences and the Australian CommonwealthDepartment of Human Services and Health. In 1988, DEA ChiefAdministrative Law Judge Francis J. Young declared that marijuanafulfilled the legal requirements for currently accepted medicaluse in the United States, finding marijuana to be "one ofthe safest therapeutically active substances known toman." His order was overruled, not by any medicalauthority, but by the DEA itself. Results from a recent poll conducted by the American CivilLiberties Union demonstrate that 85 percent of the voting publicfavor the medical use of marijuana. Thirty-six states haveadopted legislation facilitating the medical use of marijuana,but none of these state measures can be implemented untilCongress amends the law. The introduction of Rep. Frank'slegislation provides Congress with that opportunity. Many seriously ill patients in this country are already usingmarijuana to reduce their pain and suffering, even though theymust risk arrest to obtain and use it. As a result,informal "buyer's clubs" have formed in many cities tosupply marijuana to the seriously ill. Some of these clubsare small and almost clandestine; a few, such as the one in SanFrancisco, operate openly and serve several thousand clients on aregular basis. The fact that thousands of seriously illAmericans would risk arrest to obtain marijuana as a medicineattests to the need for medical marijuana legislation. Harvard Professor Lester Grinspoon M.D., co-author of Marihuana,the Forbidden Medicine (Yale University Press, 1993) says theFrank medical marijuana bill "is a compassionate and humaneproposal which would provide relief from pain and suffering tothousands of seriously ill Americans. These are people withlife-threatening illnesses who cannot obtain relief withavailable medication. It is both unscientific andunconscionable for the federal government to continue to deny aneffective medication to these patients. Rep. Frank'sproposal would allow this decision to be made by the patient andthe treating physician." -END- OVER 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-27IA087-000632-B004-52http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-11-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083655 text/html 10857HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:36:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:33 GMTContent-length: 10641 NORML News - November 2, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. November 2, 1995 U.S. Sentencing Commission's RecommendationsRegarding Marijuana Weight Disparity Enacted Into Law: NewLegislation Could Affect Approximately 950 Imprisoned MarijuanaGrowers November 1, 1995, Washington, DC: Recommendations made by the U.S. Sentencing Commission this pastspring mandating a universal plant-weight ratio for marijuana wasenacted into law on November 1. The recommendation will beretroactive and will affect an estimated 950 cases across thenation dating back to 1989. Many of these prisoners will beeligible for early release due to the amended guidelines;however, Families Against Mandatory Minimum's (FAMM) spokesmanJeff Stewart cautions that the decision to release an inmateearly still remains up to the discretion of each individualjudge. While it's true that nearly 1000 inmates will be affectedby the change, it does not necessarily follow that all of thoseinmates will be immediately released, FAMM warns. Under the newly amended guidelines, each marijuana plantcultivated will now be given a weight equivalent to 100 gramsregardless of the number of plants involved. In the past,the 100 grams per plant measure was only mandated when adefendant was convicted of possessing 49 plants or fewer. Forthose convicted of harboring 50 plants or more, the weightequivalent for each plant jumped to 1000 grams. Consequently, defendants convicted for possessing 50 plants ormore faced sentences almost 3 times as long as those convictedfor 49 plants. "To enhance fairness and consistency, this amendment adoptsthe equivalency of 100 grams per marijuana plant for allguidelines determinations," the commission stated. Thecommission voted 7-0 in favor of the change. A bill blocking the commission's recommendations was introducedby U.S. Representative Jim Bunn (R-OR) in October, but Congressfailed to act on it. For more information on the newly amended sentencingguidelines, please contact Julie Stewart of FAMM @ (202)457-5790. Buchanan Flip-Flop-Flips On MedicalMarijuana Issue October 4, 1995, Storm Lake, IA: When it comes to the issue of medical marijuana, presidentialhopeful Pat Buchanan just can't seem to make up his mind. While fund-raising in Charlotte, NC this past summer, Buchananresponded to a question posed by MAPS (MultidisciplinaryAssociation for Psychedelic Studies) President Rick Doblin aboutwhether he would "support the use of medicalmarijuana." At that time, Buchanan stated that:"If a doctor indicated to his patient that this was the onlyway to alleviate certain painful symptoms ... I would defer tothe doctor's judgment." However, when confronted with a similar question at a recentgathering in Storm Lake, Iowa, Buchanan began singing a differenttune. When approached by a citizen and publicly asked about hisviews on the medicinal use of marijuana, Buchanan said that hefelt that doctors should not be permitted to prescribe smokingmarijuana because of its destructive effect. Buchanan thenasked the man if he was with NORML. When the citizenresponded that he wasn't, but rather that he was "terminallyill patient ... [with] no hope and no treatment," Buchanan suddenly flipped yet again on the issue. "If everything you say is true, and I choose to believeyou," Buchanan said, "[then] I would support [yourdecision to use marijuana as a medicine] in a second." For more information on the medical use of marijuana, pleasecontact Allen St. Pierre of NORML @ (202)483-5500. Idaho Supreme Court Rules That Employee LetGo For Failing Drug Test Should Be Awarded Unemployment Benefits September 27, 1995, Idaho: In asurprising 3-2 decision, the Idaho Supreme Court has ruled thatan employee who was fired after having tested positive for THCshould be eligible for unemployment benefits. In it'swritten opinion, the Court concluded that: "The recordpresents substantial and competent evidence to support theCommission's conclusion that Shearer [Lumber Products] failed tocommunicate its expectations to [its employee, Steven]Merriott. Shearer therefore could not require Merriott tocomply with uncommunicated expectations." The "uncommunicated expectations" in this case had todo with whether or not it was clear that Merriott's conduct whileoff-duty could be construed as appropriate grounds fordismissal. After testing positive for THC on a February 9,1993, drug test, Merriott admitted that he had smoked marijuanaduring his day off two days earlier. Merriott maintainedthat he had not been intoxicated while on the job. He waslater fired on February 16, 1993, for violating Shearer LumberProducts' substance abuse policy. Upon analysis, the Court decided that although the company'ssubstance abuse policy prohibited employees "from beingunder the influence of any chemical substance or alcohol during workinghours," it did not make reference to what employees may ormay not do during non-working hours. "The Commissionnoted that Shearer presented no evidence that Merriott was impairedwhile at work, nor was Merriott informed that use of controlledsubstances during non-working hours would violate Shearer'spolicy. Because there was no evidence that Merriott did notcomply with Shearer's communicated substance abuse policy, theCommission concluded that Merriott was not discharged foremployment-related misconduct. ... [Therefore,] the Commission'sconclusion that Merriott is eligible for unemployment benefits isaffirmed." Activists wishing to acquire a copy of the decision shouldrefer to: Steven R. Merriott v Shearer Lumber Products and Stateof Idaho, Department of Employment, Docket No. 21002, Filed:September 27, 1995. Northcoast NORML Launches Campaign To Kill Proposed Ohio Bill That Allows Police To Sell Drugs October 30, 1995, Cleveland, OH: Northcoast NORML has launched an educational campaign to informcitizens about a proposed House Bill that would change Ohio'slong standing policy prohibiting law enforcement personnel fromselling less than the bulk amount of an illegal drug in reversesting operations. The bill (H.B. 125) is titled"Violations of the Drug Laws" and is being sponsored byState representative Jeff Jacobson (R-Dayton) by the request ofMontgomery County law enforcement officials. Northcoast NORML is concerned about this proposed legislation forvarious reasons. Most of all, NORML is worried that thisbill, if enacted into law, would shift the focus of Ohio's drugwar away from traffickers and onto small time users. "If the Senate passes House Bill 125, it will be open seasonin Ohio for drug users," stated Northcoast NORML PresidentJohn Hartman. "With the State prison system [alreadyoperating] at over 170 percent capacity and many county jails burstingat the seams, ... [it's clear that] we just don't need more drugusers in prison." Northcoast NORML also notes that a change in the law could causelaw enforcement personnel to unintentionally add to the drugproblem in Ohio. Hartman notes that an October 25, 1994, OrangeCounty Register article (Defense Wants Crack Cases Killed, PeterM. Gollner) reported that 42 percent of the people who boughtdrugs from undercover officers got away with the policemanufactured drugs. For more information on House Bill 125, please contact JohnHartman of Northcoast NORML @ (216) 521-WEED. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-28IA087-000632-B004-71http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-10-25.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083703 text/html 9892HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:36:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:37 GMTContent-length: 9677 NORML News - October 25, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. October 26,1995 Marijuana Smoke Study DemonstratesWaterpipes To Be Ineffective October 24, 1995, San Francisco, CA: Preliminary findings from a recent study on marijuana smokeindicate that waterpipes offer smokers little protection againstthe harmful tars found in cannabis. The study was sponsored byCalifornia NORML and MAPS (Multidisciplinary Association forPsychedelic Studies) and its findings were released in aCalifornia NORML press release. According to the release, "The reason [for this startlingresult] appears to be that waterpipes filter out more ofmarijuana's main psychoactive ingredient,delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), than they do other,non-psychoactive, harmful tars. [Hence] users [ofwaterpipes are required] to consume more noxious smoke in orderto reach their desired high." The study, which was supported by the Drug Policy Foundation andprivate donors, carefully analyzed the solid tar and THC contentof marijuana smoke from six separate devices. These devicesincluded a regular joint, a cigarette filter, three differentwaterpipes, and two vaporizers (devices designed to evaporate theTHC from the marijuana with minimal smoke.) The performanceof each device was rated according to how effectively it reducedthe concentration of tar relative to THC. (THC, unlike thetars in marijuana, is not carcinogenic.) Surprisingly, the unfiltered joint yielded less tar per THC thandid either the cigarette filter or any of the waterpipes thatwere tested. Results regarding the performance of thevaporizers were mixed. "While the study results suggest waterpipes may becounterproductive, sponsors caution that it is still premature toconclude that they are actually harmful to health,"California NORML summarizes. "This is because thestudy did not analyze the non-solid vapor phase of marijuana smoke,which contains a number of gasses known to be harmful tohealth. If waterpipes help screen out these gasses, theymight be beneficial to health." For more information, please contact Date Gieringer ofCalifornia NORML @ (415) 563-5858 or Rick Doblin of MAPS @ (704)358-9830. Drug Czar Urges High School Coaches To DrugTest Student Athletes October 20, 1995, Washington, DC: Speaking before both national and DC area middle and high schoolcoaches, Drug Czar Lee Brown once again called for the drugtesting of high school athletes. Proclaiming that schoolathletes are both "role models" and "trendsetters" for the student body, Brown encouraged schools andcoaches across the country to institute programs that wouldsubject athletes to random drug testing. "If we canmake real headway in turning student athletes away from drugs, Ibelieve we can succeed with the entire population of young people,"Brown explained. Ironically, Brown admitted during Friday's speech that,"There is no reason to think that drug use is any moreprevalent among student athletes than among young peoplegenerally." Nevertheless, Brown wholeheartedly spokeout in favor of policies that encourage student athletes to betested. "My message for coaches and all schooladministrators and teachers is this," Brown concluded,"You have important tools available to you, but first you'vegot to get off the sidelines and into the game." In a decision advocated and publicly embraced by the ClintonAdministration, the Supreme Court this past June upheld aWashington state middle school policy that authorized the random testingof student athletes, without cause or suspicion of druguse. At that time, Brown called the Court's ruling a"victory for kids." For more information about the student drug testing, pleasecontact Allen St. Pierre or Paul Armentano of NORML@ (202) 483-5500. Magazine Just Says "No" To NORML,Yes To Mark Fuhrman October 19, 1995: A national callingcard magazine has refused to allow NORML to advertise itscalling card, but has agreed to publish a press release for acard honoring former LAPD police officer Mark Fuhrman. The press release, featured in the October edition of TeleCardWorld, states that: "The Mark Fuhrman 'Justice' Fund isusing prepaid calling cards to raise money to cover thedetective's legal expenses for the O.J. Simpson murdertrial." The limited edition cards are being producedby HT Technologies Inc. of San Francisco. During theSimpson trial, transcripts surfaced of Fuhrman proudly admittingthat he often planted evidence, used excessive force, andrepeatedly uttered racial epithets while serving on the LAPDpolice force. TeleCard World is believed to have rejected NORML'sadvertisement because the calling card displays a picture of amarijuana plant. For more information on NORML's prepaidcalling cards, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORMLat (202) 483-5500 or Mike Philbeck of Pre-Tel @ (818) 563-9334. Newspaper Runs Special Feature Analyzing TheDrug War October 1995: Great EventsMonthly, a bi-monthly newspaper edited by Jack Anderson, hasdevoted its September/October edition to analyzing the pros andcons of the "War On Drugs." Posing the question of whether to "legalize" drugs or"escalate" enforcement, the special issue explores bothsides of the drug issue and features articles by a variety ofauthors including syndicated columnist Doug Bandow and DEAAdministrator Thomas Constantine. The issue also includestwo feature articles on the subject of medical marijuana. The first, written by the Oklahoma City chapter of NORMLdescribes the plight of Jimmy Montgomery, the paraplegic medicalmarijuana user who was sentenced to serve 10 years in prison forless than two ounces of cannabis. (Thanks in large part tohundreds of phone calls and letters from the media and NORMLactivists, Oklahoma Governor Frank Keating signed forMontgomery's medical release in late July.) The secondarticle focuses on both medical marijuana user Todd McCormick andthe ongoing legal battle for federal rescheduling reforms. NORML's contribution to the publication includes a fullpage chart outlining the responses of two widely respecteddoctors when asked to rank drugs on the basis of five problemareas. (These areas are withdrawal, reinforcement,tolerance, dependence, and intoxication.) Both Dr. Jack E.Henningfield of the National Institute on Drug Abuse and Dr. NealL. Benowitz of The University of California at San Franciscoranked marijuana as the least serious drug. Both doctors determinedmarijuana to be less serious than caffeine. Great Events Weekly can be contacted @ (703) 764-0496. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-29IA087-000632-B004-90http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-10-19.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083715 text/html 12117HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:37:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:41 GMTContent-length: 11901 NORML News - October 19, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. October 19, 1995 Pierce County Superior Court Judge Rules That Cancer Patient Should Be Allowed To Use Marijuana October 13, 1995, Tacoma, WA: In adecision that may be a first for the nation, Superior Court JudgeRosanne Buckner has ruled that a cancer patient's need to usemarijuana as medicine overrides the state's interest in outlawingits prescription. Defendant Ralph Seeley--a former journalist, lawyer, and cancerpatient--accomplished what no one else has done in a quartercentury of attempts. Seeley filed a declaratory judgmentaction in Pierce County Superior Court, asking for a ruling thatthe State's Constitution's reliance on "fundamentalprinciples" requires that marijuana be available as aprescription substance. This past Friday, the HonorableJudge Buckner agreed. A final order is being prepared. "I think, practically speaking, the effect [of this ruling]is to put prosecutions for medical marijuana use on hold,"Seeley said. During the court proceedings, Seeley's movingargument contained numerous references to his own experiences asa cancer patient, forced to choose between breaking the law orenduring unbearable suffering. Seeley has undergone eightsurgeries on his spine, two lung surgeries--including the removalof one lung--radiation, and several bouts of chemotherapy. He faces another surgery next month. Jeffrey Steinborn, a Seattle lawyer who has represented a numberof clients in medical marijuana cases, called the rulingsignificant. "I think it's going to open the door to anew wave of attempts to make this a legitimate medicine,"commented Steinborn, who is a friend of Seeley's. "There'sa crack in the door now, a crack in the shell and I think it'sgoing to spread." "It is monstrous to say [that] this substance cannot be usedas a medicine by people who are dying," Steinbornconcluded. "I challenge any federal official to comeand debate the wisdom of this." For more information on Honorable Judge Buckner's ruling,please contact Ralph Seeley @ (206) 383-3434 or Jeff Steinborn @(202) 622-5117. For more information on the medical uses ofmarijuana, please contact Allen St. Pierre of NORML@ (202) 483-5500. (As Expected) Governor Wilson Vetoes MedicalMarijuana Bill Californians For Compassionate Use Band Together To File MedicalMarijuana Initiative October 16, 1995, Sacramento CA: California Governor Pete Wilson vetoed a bill (A.B. 1529) byAssemblyman John Vasconcellos to allow for the prescribed medicaluse of marijuana by the sick and terminally ill. Thelegislation would have provided for the controlled compassionate useof marijuana for those individuals diagnosed by a physician to besuffering from the diseases of AIDS, cancer, glaucoma, andmultiple sclerosis. This is the third consecutive time thatWilson has vetoed a medical marijuana proposal. In reaction to Wilson's veto, a coalition of AIDS activists,cancer survivors, seniors, nurses, and medical experts have fileda medical marijuana initiative with the California AttorneyGeneral's Office. Marijuana activist and head ofCalifornians for Compassionate Use, Dennis Peron, will be directingthe initiative drive. The initiative maintains that any patients who possess a validdoctor's recommendation should be allowed to use marijuana as atherapeutic agent without fear or risk of prosecution. The initiativealso allows citizens to cultivate their own marijuana forpersonal use and encourages state and federal governments toestablish a program that will provide for a safe and affordablemethod of distribution. This coalition has 150 days tocollect 600,000 signatures. "Using patients as pawns is not right," declared AnnaBoyce, RN, in response to the governor's action. Boyce ispresident of the petition drive as well as an elected member ofthe California Senior Legislature. "Marijuana helpspeople who are suffering; it is being denied to them for purely politicalreasons and that must change." For more information on the California medical marijuanainitiative, please contact Dennis Peron of Californians forCompassionate Use @ (415) 621-3986. HEMPILATION CD Draws National Attention OnCNN September 13, 1993, New York City, NY: Showbiz Today, a regular half hour program on CNN, featured asegment on the growing controversy surrounding the release of HEMPILATION:Freedom Is NORML. HEMPILATION is the first ever majorrelease devoted solely to the "wonders of weed." The approximately two minute news segment featured positivecomments from NORML's Deputy Director Allen St. Pierre aswell as musicians Ian Moore and B-Real of Cypress Hill. Both Moore and Cypress Hill are featured on the CD. The CNN piece also featured criticism from David Chamberlain ofthe Washington DC-based Family Research Council. Statingthat be hoped that Capricorn Records would abandon the project,Chamberlain commented that he felt the CD would encourageteenagers to try marijuana. A portion of the profits of the CD go directly to benefit theNational Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws. HEMPILATION: Freedom Is NORML hit record stores across the nationon September 26. Meanwhile, Drug Czar Lee Brown Is Not Amused October 19,1995, Washington, DC: TheWashington Post recently reported that Drug Czar Lee Brown issteaming over the release of HEMPILATION: Freedom Is NORML. The Post quoted Brown as stating that song titles appearing onthe CD such as "I Wanna Get High" and "Who's Gotthe Herb" were "enough to make one sick." Brown is set to voice his frustration over the CD as well as whathe considers to be Hollywood's overall glorification of marijuanain a speech to the Entertainment Industries Council in LosAngeles. Other prohibitionist groups who have recently voiced their ardentdisapproval over the release of the HEMPILATION CD include theAtlanta-based Parents Resource and Information on Drug Education(PRIDE), the Center on Addiction and Substances Abuse (CASA), andthe Family Research Council. Alaska Court Rules Roadside Marijuana SearchTo Be Illegal September 27, 1995, Anchorage, AK: In a ruling that could cast doubt upon the legality of manyroadside searches, Alaska District Court Judge William Fuld hasdismissed charges against a man who was arrested after a statetrooper reportedly smelled marijuana and then demanded that thedefendant "hand it over." In the court's view,the officer's phrase: "hand it over" was not a choice,but a demand to search the defendant's vehicle. Therefore,the court ruled that the roadside search was improper because novalid consent was ever given by the defendant. "The trooper was in uniform and the defendant testified thathe felt he had to respond to the officer's command,"summarized Fuld in his court opinion. "The demand to'hand it over' admitted to by the trooper was an illegal searchof the defendant. While the trooper smelled marijuana, he hadno right to search the passenger. ... ... The state argues that there was a valid consent to asearch. I don't think so. No choice was offered [tothe defendant.]" For more information on this decision, please contact Don Hartof the National Lawyers Guild @ (907) 376-2232 or Len Karpinskiof Anchorage NORML @ (907) 248-HEMP. Sentencing Project Report Reveals ThatNearly One In Three Black Males Are Under Criminal Justice Supervision October 4, 1995, Washington, DC: Nearly one in three African American males in their twenties iseither in prison, jail, on probation, or on parole, according toreport issued this month by the Washington DC-based SentencingProject. This figure is a significant increase over the approximately25 percent of five years ago. The report, entitled YoungBlack Americans and the Criminal Justice System: Five YearsLater, cites the federal "war on drugs" as the largest contributingfactor to the disproportionate number of young black malescurrently under criminal justice supervision. For more information or to receive a copy of the SentencingProject's latest report, please contact Mark Mauer of theSentencing Project @ (202) 628-0871. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-30IA087-000632-B004-112http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-10-12.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083726 text/html 11428HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:37:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:46 GMTContent-length: 11212 NORML News - October 12, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. October 12, 1995 Alaska Court Rules Roadside Marijuana SearchTo Be Illegal September 27, 1995, Anchorage, AK: In a ruling that could cast doubt upon the legality of manyroadside searches, Alaska District Court Judge William Fuld hasdismissed charges against a man who was arrested after a statetrooper reportedly smelled marijuana and then demanded that thedefendant "hand it over." In the court's view,the officer's phrase: "hand it over" was not a choice,but a demand to search the defendant's vehicle. Therefore,the court ruled that the roadside search was improper because novalid consent was ever given by the defendant. "The trooper was in uniform and the defendant testified thathe felt he had to respond to the officer's command,"summarized Fuld in his court opinion. "The demand to'hand it over' admitted to by the trooper was an illegal searchof the defendant. While the trooper smelled marijuana, he hadno right to search the passenger. ... ... The state argues that there was a valid consent to asearch. I don't think so. No choice was offered [tothe defendant.]" For more information on this decision, please contact Don Hartof the National Lawyers Guild @ (907) 376-2232 or Len Karpinskiof Anchorage NORML @ (907) 248-HEMP. California Activists File Medical MarijuanaInitiative For 1996 State Ballot September 29, 1995, Sacramento, CA: A coalition of AIDS activists, cancer survivors, seniors, nurses,and medical experts have filed a medical marijuana initiativewith the California Attorney General's Office. Theinitiative was filed in response to Governor Pete Wilson'sexpected veto of bill AB 1529. (This legislation wouldprovide for the controlled compassionate use of marijuana forthose individuals diagnosed by a physician to be suffering fromthe diseases of AIDS, cancer, glaucoma, and multiplesclerosis.) Wilson previously vetoed similar bills in both1993 and 1994. The initiative maintains that those patients who possess a validdoctor's recommendation should be allowed to use marijuana as atherapeutic without fear or risk of criminal prosecution. The initiative also allows citizens to cultivate their ownmarijuana for personal use and encourages state and federalgovernment to establish a program that will provide for a safeand affordable method of distribution. This coalition has150 days to collect 600,000 signatures. Marijuana activist and head of Californians for CompassionateUse, Dennis Peron, will be directing the initiative drive. "If Governor Wilson had not vetoed, two years in a row, twoseparate medical marijuana bills--one that would have alloweddoctors to prescribe, and one to allow patients not be prosecutedfor personal use of marijuana--this would not be necessary,"he stated. For more information on the California medical marijuanainitiative, please contact Dennis Peron of Californians forCompassionate Use @ (415) 621-3986. 10th Circuit Appeals Court Rules WarrantlessUse Of Heat Sensing Equipment To Be Unconstitutional October 4, 1995, Denver, CO: The followingis an excerpt from a Reuters news brief: It is unconstitutional for police and drug enforcement agents to scan homes with heat-sensing equipment to detect criminal activity without a warrant, the federal appeals court in Denver ruled Wednesday. The decision came in a case which law enforcement officers in Wyoming obtained a search warrant, and later a conviction, after using a thermal imager to gather evidence that marijuana was being grown in a home. The 10th Circuit Court of Appeals, which hears cases from a six state region [Utah, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico, Kansas, and Oklahoma], ruled 3-0 that police must obtain a search warrant before using such equipment. "We reject the government's contention that its technical wizardry should free it from the restraints mandated by the Fourth Amendment," the court said. It noted that the government denies thermal imagers intrude upon privacy. The court said four federal appeals courts in other circuits have ruled the opposite way, that warrants are not needed before police use thermal imagers. For more information about the use of thermal imaging, pleasecontact Allen St. Pierre @ NORML.NewYork Times Editorial Lashes Out At The Drug War October 7, 1995, New York, NY: Citingstatistics from a recently released Sentencing Project report,The New York Times denounced the "War on Drugs" in aSaturday editorial. Noting that current data indicates that one in three black menbetween the ages of 20 and 29 are involved somewhere in thecriminal justice system (either prison, pre-trial detention, on probationor on parole), the Op-ed argues that the "War on Drugs"is rounding up a "disproportionate" number of blackAmericans. In support of this notion, the editorial notedthat "during the early 1990's, at a time whenAfrican-Americans accounted for only 13 percent of monthly drugusers, African-Americans were involved in 35 percent of thearrests for drug possession, 55 percent of the convictions and 74percent of the prison sentences. Although the editorial never spoke out in favor of legalization,it did assert that America "need[s] to rethink both drug andpunishment policies." These latest figures, the Timesconcluded, "should set off alarm bells from the White Houseto city halls--and help reverse the notion that we canincarcerate our way out of fundamental social problems. For more information or to receive a copy of the SentencingProject's latest report, please contact Mark Mauer of theSentencing Project @ (202) 628-0871. County Sheriff, Undercover Agents ThreatenSandusky County NORML With Indictments September 30, 1995, Fremont, OH: ASeptember 22 weekend rally put on by the Sandusky County Chapterof NORML has stirred up more than just controversy following anannouncement by Sheriff David Gangwer that he had undercoveragents infiltrate the event. "I am disappointed with the actions of this sheriff,"said Sandusky County NORML Chapter President, TomasSalazar. "This is a direct attack on NORML and we arebeing targeted for our beliefs. This is a violation of ourConstitutional right to assemble." Gangwer claims that the information and evidence gathered by hisagents will eventually be turned over to the Sandusky CountyProsecutor and state officials. The evidence could warrant theneed for a special grand jury to seek criminal indictmentsagainst NORML, he added. Gangwer would not discuss whatcharges were being considered. "At the very least we hope the information we gathered willprevent this from ever happening in this county or in this stateagain," he said. Don't bet on it, claims Salazar, who is already preparing toorganize another Harvest Festival next year. "I can'tsee anything that they can charge NORML with," hecontends. "NORML has always acted responsibly in allof their events ... and I expect there will be noindictments. This is harassment." Salazar addedthat organizers required all attendees to sign a releaseaffirming that they would not engage in any illegal activitiesduring the course of the festival. The release also requiredattendees to indicate that they were not an undercover lawenforcement official. "We have a right to socialize and that's what we did,"Salazar concluded. "We never expected the big brouhaha thatwas made out of it." For more information, please contact Tomas Salazar of SanduskyCounty NORML @ (419) 334-9310. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-31IA087-000632-B004-134http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-10-04.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083757 text/html 21952HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:37:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:52 GMTContent-length: 21736 NORML News - October 4, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. October 4, 1995 Prohibition Establishment Attacks NORML& Capricorn Records For The Debut Of The Long-Awaited HEMPILATION Release September 26, Nashville, TN & Washington,D.C.: Last week marked the first time ever that a majorrecording label has released a benefit compilation of popularmusicians that will benefit the National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws (NORML). Available in music stores aroundthe nation, Capricorn Records' HEMPILATION contains major musicrecording stars: Blues Traveler, The Black Crowes, Cypress Hill,Ziggy Marley and the Melody Makers, Gov.'t Mule and twelve othermusical acts. "We want people to think about freedom," explains AllenSt. Pierre of NORML. "This is why the CD's subtitle is'Freedom is NORML'. Participating artists view HEMPILATIONas a permanent, musical means of expressing their joint concernsabout the unfair restriction on Americans' civil liberties posedby long standing government anti-marijuana efforts and a public statementof their support for NORML. On September 29, the Associated Press (AP) reported thatextremist anti-marijuana groups have already vowed to protestHEMPILATION'S release. Devout prohibitionist JosephCalifano, head of the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse(CASA) at Columbia University, told AP, "Why anyone wouldwant to take something that's dangerous and damaging andencourage children to use it is beyond me." NORML'sAllen St. Pierre responds: "I wish that Mr. Califano wouldstop misrepresenting NORML's mission statement. For 25years NORML has never advocated that anyone, especially children,should use marijuana. NORML advocates that adults shouldnot face criminal or civil penalties for the use and possessionof marijuana in their homes. If Mr. Califano is trulyconcerned about the welfare of today's children and 'pro-drug'messages in our society, I strongly suggest that Mr. Califanoshould begin by loudly advocating the prohibition of thesemi-pornographic beer commercials that litter professional andcollegiate sporting events aired on television. It's clearthat alcohol and tobacco are, by any measure, the two drugs thatMr. Califano and his group should be focusing on." Other prohibition groups such as the Atlanta-based ParentsResources and Information on Drug Education (PRIDE) and theWashington, D.C.-based Family Research Council have indicatedthat they would like to force this music off the market in a waysimilar to their attempts to ban explicit rap music. For more information about the HEMPILATION release, pleasecontact NORML's Allen St. Pierre @ (202) 483-5500. Freedom Of Speech Is Affirmed In Canada NORML Canada Wins Significant Court Case September 28, King City, Ontario: Athree-year legal struggle to allow citizens of Canada to have thefreedom to purchase and read literature that describes or depicts"illicit drug use" has been won by Umberto Iorfida ofCanada NORML. In a letter to Iorfida's attorney, TheAttorney General (Ministry of Justice) indicates that theCanadian government has decided not to appeal the decision handeddown on October 4, 1994 by the then Ontario Supreme Court [nowcalled the Ontario Court of Justice, General Division]. That decision removed from the Criminal Code offensive languagethat made "literature" such as: NORML publications,High Times magazine, HEMP BC catalogs, Jack Herer's "TheEmperor Wears No Clothes" and a myriad of other popularpublished works illegal in Canada. Madame Justice Ellen McDonald determined the inclusion of"literature" in the Criminal Code to be inconsistentwith the Charter of Rights and Freedoms [The equivalent to theUnited States' Bill of Rights--ed.] and unjustifiable in a freeand democratic society. With this case finally put to rest, Iorfida and NORML Canada arenow going to focus all of their attention on defeating BillC-7. This legislation seeks to enhance the criminalpenalties in marijuana-related cases. For more information on NORML Canada's victory or informationabout how individuals (Canadians and Americans!) can contact andhelp NORML Canada's efforts to change the laws governingcannabis, please contact Umberto Iorfida @ (905) 833-3167 (p) /(905) 833-3682 (f). News Bulletin: CNN "SpecialReports" Examines The State Of Cannabis Prohibition In The United States And InEurope CNN Producer Ted Rubenstein and his AssociateProducer, Scott Brownstein, have traversed the country and oceans examiningthe pros and cons of cannabis policies in the United States and Europe(especially The Netherlands where cannabis is defacto legal andtaxed.). "The one hour special is expected to be one of the most comprehensivereports on marijuana in TV broadcast history. Thedocumentary should add greatly to the current public discourse on endingcannabis prohibition," said Allen St. Pierre of NORML. Items which will be covered in the news documentary include: -->Medical marijuana -->Hemp -->The Netherlands -->The U.S. criminal justice system and cannabis prohibition -->Cannabis black market and trafficking, with special attention on the increase in domestic cannabis cultivation -->Possible physical or mental side effects from cannabis use -->Law reform efforts CNN Special Reports airs Sunday, October 8. 9:00 PM(Eastern). **Immediately after the document airs there will be an on-linedebate/discussion on CompuServe in the Coliseum. Featuredguests are Allen St. Pierre, Deputy National Director, NORML andat this time, an unknown supporter of cannabis prohibition(likely to be a representative from the DEA, NIDA, HHS,Partnership for Ding Free America, etc...). The debate airs from 10:00 PM - 11:00 PM (Eastern) inCompuServe's Coliseum.Missouri NORML Sells State Of Missouri800 Pounds Of Marijuana September 20, Columbia, MO: TheState of Missouri recently purchased 800 pounds of hemp,otherwise known as marijuana through the Missouri affiliate ofNORML. The hemp is in the form of four 200 pound baleswhich are being used as part of an exhibit at the Visitors'Center of the Battle of Lexington State Historic Site. Thebales were made to the specifications of the Historic Site. The Battle of Lexington (also known as the Battle of the HempBales) took place in September of 1861. Approximately 3000federal soldiers from Chicago looted the bank and created a makeshiftearthwork fort. Twenty thousand Missouri volunteers engagedthe federal troops. A three day siege of the fort led to astand-off until the Missourians had the idea of using therecently harvested hemp bales as a moving defense. With water soaked hemp bales (to prevent the fire red hotgrapeshot from burning the hemp bales), the Missourians, firingover the hemp bales, rolled them forward toward the fort andcarried the day, defeating the federal troops. Missouri NORML Coordinator Dan Viets, said, "NORML is proudto be of service to The State of Missouri in this regard andpleased to be able to contribute to a greater understanding of thehistory of the hemp plant and its incredible potential as anagricultural resource for the State of Missouri today." For more information about "The Battle of the HempBales," please contact Dan Viets, Esq., MO NORML @ (314)874-2244. For information on Hemp, please contact The Ohio Hempery@ (800) BUY-HEMP. School Board In Pennsylvania Votes ToInclude "Publications" As Drug Paraphernalia September 19, Octorara, PA: By a 6-2vote, the Octorara Area School Board adopted a policy thatenables school officials to suspend students for 10 days andnotify local police if student is caught on school grounds with "publicationsabout drugs" wrote a report in The Intelligencer Journal(IJ). According to school administrators, the policy is needed because"publications ... brought to school have dealt with how togrow marijuana and manufacture hallucinogenic drugs,"reported The New Era newspaper. While the vote to adopt the policy prevailed, strong oppositionwas voiced by School Board Member John Addyman who was quoted inthe IJ as saying, "I have a real problem saying a publicationshould be banned." Addyman said when he took a seat onthe school board he swore to uphold the U.S. Constitution. "That Constitution guarantees the right of freespeech," Addyman said. William Iacone, director ofspecial services, said administrators hope to target publications whichpromote drugs by telling how to cultivate, buy, sell, use ormanufacture illegal drugs --and in some case, where to getthem. "This is not freedom of speech," Iaconesaid to the IJ. Also opposing the new policy was school board attorney, AlanJarvis. He told the IJ that publications are "a tenderarea" of the law and cautioned the board on calling publicationsdrug paraphernalia. He said the policy might bechallenged. Despite Mr. Jarvis' reservations of the legalityof the board's actions, other board members chimed in: - "Leave it in [the policy change] and be challenged," said board member Sam Gasnow. "That's what's right." Gasnow also asserted that students "have no First Amendment rights in the classroom." - Board member Lawrence Gibbs [who supports the change in policy]: "Why don't we stop by the library after the meeting. There may be a few books I want to get out of here." - Also, Superintendent Tom Sholvin commented, "Today the right thing and the legal thing aren't always the same things. Our intent is not to take away anybody's rights." MASS CANN:NORML Draws More Than 30,000 ToAnnual Rally September 23, Boston, MA: MASS CANNNORML drew over 30,000 peaceful pot protesters to its SixthAnnual Rally To End Cannabis Prohibition. With great fall weather and a terrific line up of speakers andmusical acts the Boston Common turned into a sea of protestagainst America's prohibition of the cannabis plant. "The purpose of the rally was to press home to the peopleand their representatives on Beacon Hill that our grievance isthe absolute prohibition of marijuana; even to the chronically orterminally ill," said MASSCANN: NORML chairperson AttorneySteve Epstein. The event was well received by the New England media (and TheEconomist magazine) and the Boston police. Only sevenarrests on cannabis-related charges were reported. A NORML activistin attendance solicited some police officers for their thoughtson the whole event. The officers commented that they werereally glad that the 30,000 protesters were predominantly consumingcannabis--and not alcoholic beverages! For more information on the MASSCANN: NORML Sixth Annual RallyTo End Cannabis Prohibition please contact MASSCANN: NORML @(617) 944-2266. Another U.S. Judge Advocates LegalizingDrugs: 'We're Losing The War On Drugs' September 26, Nashville, TN: Joiningmore than 60 other Federal judges, U.S. District Judge ThomasWiseman spoke up in opposition to this country's "war ondrugs" in an interview with The Tennessean. JudgeWiseman said that "We've spent $100 billion on the war ondrugs and we're losing it." Wiseman recommends thatthe U.S. should legalize drugs. That, he says, is the onlyreal way to win the war. "If you take the profit outof it, nobody will be pushing it. Wiseman, a 17 year veteran of the federal bench, said that whenPresident Bush escalated the war on drugs in 1989 [Omnibus CrimeBill, Asset Forfeiture, DARE educational programs, Partnershipfor a Drug Free (sic) America, Mandatory minimum prisonsentences, etc. ... -ed.], the country not only lost the battle,but also, "We've just about lost a generation of youngpeople," he told The Tennessean. Good News: Seattle Area's Green CrossPatient Co-op Court Case Is Dropped September 26, Bainbridge Island, WA: The Seattle Times reports: There is good news and bad news for Joanna McKee and her GreenCross Patient Coop, busted earlier this year for supplying whatMcKee says is 'medicinal marijuana' to people she describes aspatients. The good news is that Kitsap County Superior Court Judge LeonardKruse threw out the search warrant used in a May raid when policeseized 162 marijuana plants from McKee's home. "If thewarrant's no good, then all the evidence is out. If theevidence is out, then we have no case to prosecute," saidDeputy Prosecutor Kevin Kelly. The bad news for McKee is that it doesn't look like the countyplans to return her marijuana, estimated by drug enforcementofficials to be worth $300,000. McKee -- the firstmedicinal marijuana supplier [Cannabis Buyer's Club--ed.] in thecountry to be busted, according to NORML -- said she's going totake Kitsap County to court. About 70 patients with AIDS, multiplesclerosis, cancer and other illnesses ... depended on Green Crossfor marijuana ... "We were not convicted of a crime, and they have no right totake our medicine away. They said they took $300,000 worthof medicine away from us. I think they owe us$300,000," said McKee. The Dutch Government Modifies Its DrugPolicy Pressure Felt From Neighboring Countries September 25, Washington, D.C.: TheDutch government announced some revisions of their progressivedrug policy at a news conference held at the National PressClub. State-Secretary for the Interior, Jacob Kohnstamm, presentedto the U.S. press (what little there was assembled! -ed.] a listof changes that the Dutch government are seeking to implement inthe coming years. While some of these changes may be viewedby some as an abdication by the Dutch of the progressive drugpolicies established in the 1970's, Secretary Kohnstamm was quick topoint out that The Netherlands is not abandoning its defactolegalization of small amounts of cannabis. Due to strong pressure from its neighboring countries (especiallyFrance), The Netherlands seek to compromise with its neighborswhile still championing the social, public health, and criminal justicebenefits that it believes its drug policy presents. Secretary Kohnstamm indicated that policy changes concerningcannabis are: -The sale of cannabis products in "coffee shops" will be reduced from 30 grams per purchase to 5 grams, -There will be a 50% reduction of the number of "coffee shops", -The state will begin to combat the large-scale production of cannabis in the Netherlands, -The Netherlands will also seek to establish a more active policy on the deportation of "drug tourists" and addicts residing illegally in the Netherlands. Mr. Kohnstamm reiterated that the citizens and the government ofthe Netherlands strongly support their drug policy. Whenasked by an American reporter, "Why don't the Dutch adopt a drugpolicy similar to America's war on drugs approach?" Mr.Kohnstamm said that such a policy is considered a completefailure in the minds of the Dutch. He cited the lateststatistics from both the U.S. and the Netherlands concerning theprevalence of cannabis use amongst teens to make his case. In the Netherlands (where cannabis sales are tolerated) the rateof teens admitting to using cannabis is: Ever using cannabis = 13% Last 30 days = 6% As compared to the United States (where there is a total prohibition on cannabis): Ever using cannabis = 28% Last 30 days = 14% For more information on the Netherland's decision to modifyits drug policy and a copy (in English) of its FACTSHEET pleasecontact the Public Information Division of the Ministry ofHealth, Welfare and Sport, P.O. Box 5406, 2280 HK Rijswijk, (31)70-340-6O-15 (p) / (31) 70-340-62-51 (f).-End-MORETHAN 10 MILLION MARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90SECONDS! WT01-B20-32IA087-000632-B004-157http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-09-21.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083818 text/html 12704HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:38:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:59 GMTContent-length: 12488 NORML News - September 21, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. September 21, 1995 California Legislature "Just SaysNo" To Unpopular Marijuana Law September 15, 1995, Sacramento, CA: California Governor and possible Presidential nominee Pete Wilsonsuffered a major defeat when the Republican controlled CaliforniaAssembly rejected his last ditch effort to renew the state's"Smoke a Joint, Lose Your License" law. The controversiallegislation requires that the state impose a six-month driverslicense suspension upon conviction of any drug offense,regardless of whether the offense is driving related. Thelaw will expire on the 2nd of December. Looming heavy over the head of the California Assembly's decisionto dissolve the "Smoke a Joint" legislation is theissue of federal mandates. Because Wilson initially pushedfor the license suspension law by co-sponsoring a 1990 federalmandate requiring the state to either enact the legislation orpass an "opt-out" resolution explicitly rejecting thepolicy, California now stands at risk of losing nearly $100million in federal highway aid. Ironically, in recentyears, Wilson has been an outspoken proponent against thelegitimacy of federal mandates. For more information, please contact Dale Gieringer ofCalifornia NORML @ (415) 563-5858. Meanwhile, Governor Pete Wilson Expects ToVeto Medical Marijuana Bill For Third Consecutive Year September 12, 1995, Sacramento, CA: For the third time in as many years, the California StateAssembly has voted in favor of a bill that would allow for themedical use of marijuana by the sick and terminally ill. However, sources close to the governor claim that Wilson willonce again veto the proposed legislation. The bill, AB 1529, would provide for the controlled compassionateuse of marijuana for those individuals diagnosed by a physicianto be suffering from the diseases of AIDS, cancer, glaucoma, andmultiple sclerosis. In addition, this revised version ofthe bill is worded in such a way so that it expressly avoidsconflicting with current federal policies prohibiting use of thedrug. (Wilson cited these policies as the basis for lastyear's veto.) Despite the revision, however, a spokesmanfor Wilson told the San Diego Union Tribune that thegovernor "hates" the bill. AB 1529 is supported byboth the California Nurses Association and the California SeniorLegislature. In response to claims that Wilson will veto the measure, thebill's author, Assemblyman John Vasconcellos (D-San Jose), hasblasted the governor as being more concerned with politics than withhuman suffering. "In a free society, people who areill shouldn't be made criminals to alleviate their pain,"said Vasconcellos. "Wilson is engaging in politics ofpain. That's pathetic." For more information on bill AB 1529, please contact DaleGieringer of California NORML @ (415) 563-5858 or contact DennisPeron of Californians for Compassionate Use @ (415)864-1961. In the coming months, the CCU intends to collectthe 600,000 signatures necessary to place this measure on the1996 statewide ballot. This initiative is set to be filedwith the Attorney General's Office for title and summary onFriday, September 29. New York Times Runs FeatureOn Todd McCormick Bust September 17, 1995, Bryan, 0H: The NewYork Times featured a major story on the case of medicalmarijuana user Todd McCormick in the national edition of thisweek's Sunday paper. The Times is the second nationallysyndicated paper to publicize McCormick's legal battle since his arreston July 18. USA Today referred to McCormick in an August 21editorial supporting the use of medicinal marijuana. McCormick was arrested this past July when Ohio State Patrolmendiscovered in excess of thirty pounds of marijuana in hisvan. He is currently free on bail and staying with DonWirtshafter at the Ohio Hempery since having his bail dropped ata September 7 bail reduction bearing. McCormick maintainsthat the cannabis found in his vehicle, all of which was visiblymarked "for medicinal use only," was intended to beused to establish a Compassionate Use Club in Rhode Island andwas not meant for sale. He is charged with four felony drugcounts. When asked to comment on the McCormick case, John A. Mutter,president of the 3000 member American Judge's Association, toldthe New York Times that: "It strikes me as being incongruousthat a doctor can prescribe for the well being of his patientsnarcotic drugs like morphine that are habit forming, but theycan't prescribe marijuana." For more information on Todd McCormick, please contact either NORMLor the Todd McCormick Alliance @ (619) 582-7303 or (619) 582-7330(fax). Meanwhile, Landmark State Decision CouldSpell Victory For McCormick's Upcoming Trial September 10, 1995, Columbus, OH: Civil liberty and personal privacy proponents achieved a majorvictory last week when the Ohio Supreme Court ruled to severelylimit the rights of police to question citizens or search theirproperty after misdemeanor roadside traffic stops. NorthcoastNORML President John Hartman applauded the court's ruling. "People in the cannabis community will be driving a littleeasier [now] in the state of Ohio," he said. In a 4-3 decision, the court struck down the drug arrest of a manwhose car was searched following a routine traffic stop. The court maintained that the evidence seized during the search wasinvalid because the search itself was in violation of the FourthAmendment to the U.S. Constitution. According to the AP,"The court said that although the driver gave his consent,the search was improper because the deputy never told the driver[that] he was free to go after the traffic stop and before thedrug search began." The law states that police cannotautomatically search a car based upon a traffic misdemeanor. Defense attorney Harry R. Reinhart praised the ruling. Heexplained that hundreds of innocent Ohio motorists are stoppedeach year by police and intimidated into having their automobiles searchedbecause law enforcement officials purposely neglect to informcitizens of their legal right to say no. One can only wait and see what potential ramifications thisdecision may have on Todd McCormick's upcoming trial. McCormick had his van searched after Ohio State Patrolmen pulled himover "because the curtains in [his] van wereclosed." McCormick maintains that he did not givepolice permission to search his vehicle. For more information on the Ohio State Supreme Court ruling,please contact John Hartman of Northcoast NORML @ (216) 521-WEEDor William Saks of the Cleveland ACLU @ (216) 781-6277. Formore information on your legal rights as a motorist please contact NORMLto acquire a copy of NORML's Citizens' GuideTo Marijuana Laws. The report is available for $2.00. Update: Richard Martinez Set Free! September 18, 1995, Tucson, AZ: Theplight of medical marijuana user Richard Martinez looks to havefinally come to an end. Martinez was released from jail at12 pm on September 18 and the charges against him have beendismissed under rule 11 for incompetence. Martinez sufferedfor over four months in Arizona jails while the state conductedtests to determine whether he was mentally competent to standtrial. He was shot through the right eye in 1991 and nowhas brain damage. Martinez was charged with drug possessionwhen local authorities discovered that he was using marijuana inplace of his prescribed medication, Marinol. Martinez is once again being tended to by hisneuro-rehabilitation nurse and legal guardian, Connie Theis. For more information about Richard Martinez and/or theformation of Tucson NORML, please contact Connie Theis @ (602)790-1595. NIDA To Hold International Drug AbuseConference In Texas September 14, 1995, Houston, TX: Inaccordance with its recent anti-marijuana campaign, NIDA will beholding a special session on marijuana's supposed effects on thebrain as part of an international drug abuse conference takingplace in Houston, TX on September 22 and 23. The workshopswill touch on such subjects as marijuana's possible cognitive andbehavioral effects and will features such speakers as Dr. MerleG. Paule of the National Center for Toxicological Research andDr. Billy R. Martin. Dr. Martin recently surprised manywhen he announced that "average THC [potency] has notchanged" in over a decade while speaking at NIDA's firstever Conference on Marijuana Use. Activists from Houston NORML are planning to attend the event. The two day conference will be held at the Sheraton AstrodomeHotel Heritage Center, in Houston Texas. COMING NEXT TUESDAY!! HEMPILATION: THE NORML BENEFIT COMPILATION CD!!! -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-33IA087-000632-B004-177http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-09-14.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083831 text/html 11625HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:38:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:30:03 GMTContent-length: 11409 NORML News - September 14, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. September 14, 1995 Latest National Household Survey ResultsSound Marijuana Alarm (Again) September 12, Washington, DC: Speaking at a formal press conference, both Health and HumanServices Secretary Donna Shalala and Drug Czar Lee Brown tooktime out to once again urge Americans to denounce the use ofmarijuana. "Marijuana use is illegal, dangerous,unhealthy, and wrong," Shalala reaffirmed. Armed with preliminary estimates from the 1994 National Survey onDrug Abuse, the duo remarked that while overall illicit drug use(defined as once in the past month) among the population as awhole rose only marginally in the past year, the number ofteenagers using marijuana has nearly doubled since 1992. "Anyone who thinks we've licked the drug problem in thiscountry is living in a fantasy land," the Secretary remarkedat the press conference. According to the study's preliminary findings, teens usingmarijuana at least once a month rose from 4% in 1992 to 7.3% in1994. Shalala called the findings "a wake-up call forAmerica." Put in historical context, however, the latest adolescent usestatistics still remain far below the peak reached in 1980. According to annual studies conducted by the National Instituteon Drug Abuse, the number of high school seniors ever havingadmitted to experimenting with marijuana dropped significantlyfrom 50.9 percent in 1980 to 38.2 percent in 1994. Althoughneither Brown nor Shalala mentioned this data during theconference, the Office of National Drug Control Policy didspecify that even with the recent increase in the number ofteenagers admitting to having used marijuana regularly, currentadolescent rates of marijuana use still rank well below what theywere fifteen years ago. Brown speculated that the latest increase in teen marijuanaconsumption might be due to pot's glamorization by theentertainment industry. For more information on the 1994 Household Survey preliminaryestimates, please contact NORML. Copies of the survey are currently available on the Internet at: http://www.health.org/or from SAMSHA, Office of Applied Studies, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room16C-06, Rockville, MD 20857. SAMSHA also has transcripts ofShalala's speech available upon request. Update: Todd McCormick Free On Bail! September 7, 1995, Bryan, OH: At aSeptember 7 bail reduction hearing, medical marijuana user andSan Diego Compassionate Use Club founder Todd McCormick had hisbail dropped from $50,000 to $2,000. He posted bail atapproximately 4:55 p.m. the following day and is currentlystaying with Don Wirtshafter at the Ohio Hempery in Guysville. McCormick was arrested on July 18 when Ohio State Patrolmendiscovered in excess of thirty pounds of marijuana in hisvan. McCormick maintains that the cannabis, all of whichwas visibly marked "for medicinal use only," wasintended to be used to establish a Compassionate Use Club inRhode Island and was not meant for sale. He is charged withfour felony drug counts. For more information on Todd McCormick, please contact theTodd McCormick Alliance @ (619) 582-7303 or (619) 582-7330 (fax). Meanwhile, Landmark State Decision CouldSpell Victory For McCormick's Upcoming Trial September 10, 1995, Columbus, OH: Civil liberty and personal privacy proponents achieved a majorvictory last week when the Ohio Supreme Court ruled to severelylimit the rights of police to question citizens or search theirproperty after misdemeanor roadside traffic stops. NorthcoastNORML President John Hartman applauded the court's ruling. "People in the cannabis community will be driving a littleeasier [now] in the state of Ohio," he said. In a 4-3 decision, the court struck down the drug arrest of a manwhose car was searched following a routine traffic stop. The court maintained that the evidence seized during the search wasinvalid because the search itself was in violation of the FourthAmendment to the U.S. Constitution. According to the AP,"The court said that although the driver gave his consent,the search was improper because the deputy never told the driver[that] he was free to go after the traffic stop and before thedrug search began." The law states that police cannotautomatically search a car based upon a traffic misdemeanor. Defense attorney Harry R. Reinhart praised the ruling. Heexplained that hundreds of innocent Ohio motorists are stoppedeach year by police and intimidated into having their automobiles searchedbecause law enforcement officials purposely neglect to informcitizens of their legal right to say no. One can only wait and see what potential ramifications thisdecision may have on Todd McCormick's upcoming trial. McCormick had his van searched after Ohio State Patrolmen pulled himover "because the curtains in [his] van wereclosed." McCormick maintains that he did not givepolice permission to search his vehicle. For more information on the Ohio State Supreme Court ruling,please contact John Hartman of Northcoast NORML @ (216) 521-WEED,or William Saks of the Cleveland ACLU @ (216) 781-6277. Formore information on your legal rights as a motorist please contact NORMLto acquire a copy of NORML's Citizens'Guides To Marijuana Laws. The report is available for$2.00. Distinguished Chicago Judge AdvocatesMarijuana Legalization September 14, 1995, Chicago, IL: Richard Posner, Chicago's chief federal appeals judge and one ofAmerica's most prominent legal scholars, recommends thatmarijuana use should be legalized as a way of reducing crime andunclogging the courts. Posner, a Reagan administration appointeeonce heralded by American Lawyer magazine as "the mostbrilliant judge in the country," is the highest rankingjudge to ever publicly advocate the repeal of marijuanalaws. His endorsement of marijuana reform was the focus ofa feature article in both USA Today and The TimesLiterary Supplement, a British publication. In the USA Today article, Posner stated that: "It isnonsense that we should be devoting so many law enforcementresources to marijuana. I am skeptical that a society thatis so tolerant of alcohol and cigarettes should come down so hardon marijuana use and send people to prison for life withoutparole." NORML's Senior Policy Advisor, RichardCowan, was also quoted in the story. USA Today also ran an editorial endorsing the use ofmarijuana as a medicine last month. Secret Service Threatens Couple For StampingOne Dollar Bills September 11, 1995, Woodstock, New York: A couple who habitually brand their one dollar bills with amarijuana leaf and the quote: "I grew hemp," wererecently contacted by Woodstock police acting on behalf of theSecret Service. Joy Beckerman and James Horn, owners of theHeaven On Earth Hemp Store, report that the police came to themwith Xerox copies of stamped dollar bills and a written warningfrom the secret service specifying that the practice of defacingUnited States currency was a federal crime. Although Hornadmits that the local officers were laid back about the wholeissue, he claims that the notice stated that the U.S. AttorneyGeneral would be contacted and charges would be pressed if thecouple didn't immediately stop the stamping. While Horn fully admits to stamping many of his dollar bills withthe pro-hemp message, he is alarmed that the federal governmentseems to be targeting him alone. Since Heaven On Earthsells the "I grew hemp" stampers, the couple arguesthat the government has no way of proving that the bills inquestion were defaced by them. Horn says that he will continue to both sell stampers and stampsome of his one dollar bills despite the warning. Thecouple see their action as a way of informing the community ofhemp's industrial uses and its historical background as anintegral American crop. For more information, please contact either Joy Beckerman orJames Horn of Heaven On Earth @ (914) 679-4990. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-34IA087-000632-B004-198http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-09-07.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083849 text/html 12492HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:38:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:06 GMTContent-length: 12276 NORML News - September 7, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. September 7, 1995 Jury Rules That Hemp Seed Demonstration Is AProtest, Not Cultivation August 24, 1995, Madera, CA: A juryhas acquitted three marijuana activists who challengedauthorities to prosecute them for publicly planting 20,000 hempseeds in me Sierra foothills. Hemp proponents RonKiczenski, Doug Weissman, and Craig Steffens were all found notguilty of felony cultivation. The trio, collectively knownas the Three Hawk Stand, were arrested by sheriffs deputiesfollowing a July 4 public protest during which the defendantsplanted hemp seeds in front of both media and localauthorities. Had they been found guilty, the three activistseach faced up to three years in jail and a $10,000 fine. The men were found innocent in spite of the court's efforts todisallow the defense from presenting evidence that hemp can beutilized as an industrial crop and that the defendants' action wasdone strictly as a political protest. Earlier in the trial,Judge John W. DeGroot had ruled that the only relevant issue inthe trial was whether or not the trio planted an illegalcrop. "Being a protest is not a defense to the[cultivation] charge," he said. Ironically, Kiczenski believes that the Court's hardline approachmay have actually helped Three Hawk Stand's defense. "The prosecutor and the judge worked too hard," saidSteffens' attorney, Nancy Lord. "The jury thought thewhole thing was rigged." The defendants were successfulin arguing that the seeds they had planted were legallysterilized hemp seeds which were incapable of producing actualmarijuana. In addition to reaching the three not guilty verdicts, the juryalso presented a prepared statement to the court regarding thereasons behind and the potential impact of their decision. Jury foreman Dean Mitchell read the following: "Some jurorsagree with the cause in which you believe; some jurors aretotally opposed. Our verdict went outside of yourcause. The evidence left reasonable doubt in ourminds. Our admonishment to you three defendants is that weare not sending you on a seed planting mission, but rather wesuggest you pursue your cause through alternative methods." Now that he's been acquitted, Kiczenski maintains that he will dojust that. Kiczenski plans to file a civil lawsuitchallenging the DEA's assumed control and jurisdiction over theproduction of hemp. Kiczenski has received media attention in the past by mailingmarijuana to President Bill Clinton. He is a former HighTimes "Freedom Fighter of the Month." Update: Cannabis Patient Continues To BeDenied Prescription Allegations of Civil Rights Abuses Prompt NORML Lawyers To TakeAction September 2, 1995, Bryan, OH: Recentevents have discouraged hopes that medical cannabis user ToddMcCormick will be legally permitted to use his prescribedmedicine -- marijuana -- while in jail. According toMcCormick, Judge Anthony Gretich is now requiring that anAmerican physician who has physically examined McCormick mustadditionally submit a written statement supporting hisprescription for cannabis. McCormick must also secure alocal Ohio doctor to oversee the administration of hisprescription. McCormick already has letters from three prominent Americandoctors (NORML Board Chairman Lester Grinspoon M.D., NORMLBoard member John Morgan, M.D., and Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D.)supporting his prescription. Inexplicably however, althoughMcCormick received these supportive statements on August 18, hemaintains that his public defender, John Schaffer, failed to fileany motions on his client's behalf until September 1. McCormick had initially believed that the Court needed writtensupport from only one physician. Even more alarming were recent reports of civil andconstitutional rights violations taking place againstMcCormick. Following McCormick's live-from-prison telephoneinterview with a local Ohio radio station, Warden Jim Dennisreportedly forbade McCormick any further press contact. Hewas also denied access to phone calls and visitors. Inresponse to these allegations, Cleveland attorneys Gordon S.Friedman and Terry H. Gilbert of NORML's Legal Committeefaxed a letter on September 1 to Warden Dennis informing him thatthey bad been requested to investigate the abuse charges. As a result of their letter, the Todd McCormick Alliance reportsthat the warden has renewed McCormick's phone privileges and isonce again permitting him to speak to the media. The wardenis also allowing McCormick to use muscle relaxers to helpalleviate the pain and limited lateral head movement he suffersas a result of acute nerve damage in his neck. McCormick is presently awaiting trial on four felony drug chargesfollowing the discovery of 31 pounds of marijuana in his vehicleby Ohio State Highway Patrolmen. McCormick maintains that thecannabis, which was clearly marked "for medicinal useonly," was intended to be used to establish a CompassionateUse Club in Rhode Island and was not meant for sale. McCormick had previously founded a Compassionate Use Club in SanDiego. A hearing to determine whether or not McCormick's $50,000 bailshould be lowered will be held on September 7, 1995. For additional information on Todd McCormick's case, pleasecontact the Todd McCormick Alliance @ (619) 582-7303. Thosewishing to donate funds to McCormick's legal defense can sendtheir financial support to the following address: Don WirtshafterLaw Trust Account, P.O. Box 18, Guysville, Ohio 45735. NORMLmay also be contacted for more information. U.S. Court Of Appeals Reverses CzuprynskiConviction September 1, Bay City, MI: EdCzuprynski, the Bay City attorney who in 1992 was sentenced to 14months in federal prison for possessing 1.6 grams of marijuana,has had his conviction reversed by the 6th Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals. Concluding that Federal Judge Robert Cleland"abused [his] discretion" in his evidentiary rulingsduring Czuprynski's trial, the higher court determined that theprosecution lacked sufficient relevant evidence to show that Czuprynskiknowingly possessed marijuana. Czuprynski had maintainedthroughout both his trial and conviction that the marijuana foundin his office had been planted and that his prosecution was political. In a written statement affirming the higher court's decision toreverse, two of the judges admit that "the [Czuprynski]case...has occupied untold judicial resources." Thedocument also specifies that the amount of marijuana involved inthe case was "minute" and "meager." Federal sentencing guidelines for minor amounts of marijuana donot recommend that a prison sentence should exceed more than 6months. Czuprynski's September 1 victory is actually the second time thathis conviction has been reversed. Czuprynski first won areversal of his possession conviction in November of 1993, but theconviction was later upheld following the government'sappeal. Czuprynski said that he would not be surprised ifthe government chose to appeal this latest decision as well. For more information, please contact Ed Czuprynski @ (517)894-1155. A copy of the 7 page Order by the Court ofAppeals is available upon request. Prisoner To Be Force-Fed Intravenously Despite Availability Of Prescription Alternative September 7, 1995, Fort Worth, TX: Despite the fact that Alan McLemore has a doctor's prescriptionfor Marinol, jail officials continue to deny him access to themedication because it is a schedule II narcotic. McLemoremaintains that he has no appetite without daily use of the drug andhas not eaten a meal in the past 34 days. McLemore hadpreviously been allowed to use Marinol while he was incarceratedat the Jefferson County jail in Beaumont, Texas. He had maintaineda stable body weight of approximately 160 pounds during thattime. In addition, McLemore's wife, Maggie Carter-McLemore, reportsthat her husband is now undergoing an isolated 72-hour"observation period." Following this period,McLemore is to begin intravenous force-feeding. Ms.Carter-McLemore maintains that the law permits force-feeding onlyas a last resort and believes that Fort Worth FederalCorrectional Institution authorities are in violation of the lawby not granting her husband the prior option of usingMarinol. In a recent audio-taped phone conversation withhis wife, McLemore stated: "They may kill me in here. I'm worried about it." In the past, McLemore had used both marijuana and Marinol toprovide relief from chronic migraines, depression, weight loss,and alcoholic tendencies. For more information on Alan McLemore, please contact JudyMcLemore @ (409) 423-2429 or contact Ralph Hodges @ Houston NORML@ (713) 797-6567 or (713) 797-6759 (fax). McLemore can becontacted directly at the following address: Alan D. McLemore#05204-078, Ft. Worth FCI, 3150 Horton Road, Ft. Worth, TX 76119. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 65 SECONDS! WT01-B20-35IA087-000632-B004-218http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-08-24.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083901 text/html 7383HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:38:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:10 GMTContent-length: 7168 NORML News - August 24, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. August 24, 1995 Update: Judge Considers Permitting MedicalMarijuana User To Smoke Cannabis While In Jail August 24, 1995, Bryan, OH: In whatmay end up being a precedent-setting decision, a Williams CountyJudge is considering allowing marijuana activist Todd McCormickto have legal access to medical cannabis while in jail. McCormick is a medical marijuana user and co-founder of the SanDiego Compassionate Use Club--a facility in California thatsupplies free marijuana to seriously ill patients based upon adoctor's recommendation. He is currently awaiting trial inOhio where he faces four felony charges resulting from thediscovery of 31 pounds of cannabis in his vehicle by Ohio StateHighway Patrolmen. The marijuana was marked "formedicinal use only" and McCormick maintains that it wasintended to be used to establish a Compassionate Use Club in hishometown of Providence, Rhode Island. At an arraignment last Thursday, Williams County Court of CommonPleas Judge Anthony L. Gretick suggested that he might order theSheriff to allow McCormick to use cannabis while in jail ifMcCormick could provide the court with written support by anAmerican physician. McCormick possesses a prescription froma physician in the Netherlands that advises for the consumptionof ten grams of cannabis per day. Responding to Gretick's suggestion, three prominent U.S. doctors(NORML Board Chairman Lester Grinspoon M.D., NORMLBoard member John Morgan, M.D., and Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D.) wroteletters supporting McCormick's need for medical marijuana. However, according to a Toledo Blade reporter covering the courtproceedings, the judge is now also requesting that a local doctorbe summoned to endorse and administer the prescription toMcCormick. As this report goes to press, no official actionhas yet to be taken by Gretick. McCormick's case gained national exposure this week when it wasmentioned in an August 21 USA Today editorial endorsingthe use of marijuana as a medicine for seriously sickpatients. NORML had a letter supporting marijuana'smedical utility printed in USA Today the following day. For more information on Todd McCormick's case, please contactthe Todd McCormick Alliance @ (619) 582-7303. For moreinformation on medical marijuana, please contact NORML. California Residents Favor Access To MedicalMarijuana According To Recent Health Poll August 21, 1995, Sacramento, CA: Arecent poll by Mervin Field for the California Center for HealthImprovement indicates that although many Californians stillremain concerned about illicit drug use, the majority of thestate still support the medicinal use of marijuana. Thisconclusion directly contradicts earlier statements made by Dr.Andy Mecca, director of the state Department on Alcohol and DrugPrograms. According to the California Health Poll, 57 percent of therespondents stated that they favored granting doctors the abilityto legally prescribe marijuana to their patients. Bycomparison, only 22 percent favored similar prescriptions forcocaine. Ironically, cocaine is currently classified as a ScheduleII drug which allows for its medical use in certain instanceswhile marijuana remains classified by the federal government ashaving "no medical use." For a copy of the California Center for Health Improvementreport, please contact the center @ (916) 646-2149. New York City Buyers Club Busted Apparent Nationwide Crackdown On Medical Marijuana ClubsContinues August 21, 1995, New York, NY: NewYork City activists have reported that law enforcement officialsrecently busted New York City's underground cannabis buyersclub. The New York club was one of over thirty such clubsthat currently operate and distribute medical marijuana toseriously ill patients. Longtime AIDS and drug reformactivist Johann Moore was arrested at the scene and heldovernight. He is reportedly charged with one count offelony sales. The bust of the New York City Medical Buyers Club--a small buyersclub that had consciously maintained a relatively lowprofile--seems to support the notion that law enforcementagencies across the country are beginning a concerted effort tocrackdown on medical marijuana clubs. In the past fewmonths, both Todd McCormick (San Diego Compassionate Use Club)and Joanna McCkee (Green Cross Patient Co-op of Washington) havebeen arrested and had their marijuana seized by law enforcementofficials. For more information on this incident, please contact the FreeJohann Moore Support Committee of Cures Not Wars @ (212)677-7180. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-36IA087-000632-B004-239http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-08-17.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083911 text/html 11816HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:39:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:14 GMTContent-length: 11600 NORML News - August 17, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. August 17, 1995 Two NORML Chapters Fight For Their Rights...And Win! Two NORML chapters recently emerged victorious intheir fights against local censorship restrictions. In twoseparate incidents, Northcoast NORML (OH) and University ofOklahoma NORML were initially denied access to public forumsbecause of their organization's marijuana-tolerant beliefs. However, after threatening to take legal action in order todefend their First Amendment rights, both chapters subsequentlyprevailed. According to Northcoast NORML president, John Hartman, the localchapter will now be allowed to display public serviceannouncements on the rear and/or side of Cuyahoga citybusses. Regional Transit Authority officials had originallyrefused to post the organization's PSA's. However, uponlearning that an ACLU lawyer had accepted the case, the RTAquickly reversed its opinion. The RTA has informedNorthcoast NORML that the group's displays must meet the samerequirements as do political advertisements and must bear theorganization's name and address. Hartman says that adheringto these standards should not be a problem and hopes to use theads to raise awareness of the fact there have been over tenmillion marijuana arrests since 1965. In a similar scenario, University of Oklahoma NORML will now bepermitted to run a month-long hemp exhibit in the display case ofthe Norman (OK) Municipal Public Library. Originally, thechapter's request to gain access to the display case was deniedby library management. OU NORML challenged this decisionand charged that the library was engaging in discrimination. OU NORML further argued that the library's denial of theirrequest violated the written anti-censorship policy of theNational Library Association. Following this assertion, the librarypromptly rewrote their own policy in order to justify theirprevious decision. OU NORML then had an ACLU lawyer sendthe library a letter requesting them to change their new policyand grant the NORML chapter access to the public displaycase. Library officials finally consented following theACLU's letter. The OU NORML hemp exhibit is slated to be ondisplay this upcoming February. For more information regarding these cases, please contactJohn Hartman at Northcoast NORML @ (216) 521-WEED and/or MichaelPearson at University of Oklahoma NORML @ (405) 840-HEMP. Meanwhile, Mass Cann NORML Denied PermitionTo Hold Hemp Rally By Board Of Selectmen August 17, 1995, Marblehead, MA: Mass Cann: NORML has announced that it must cancel its scheduledweekend Hempfest (Aug. 26-27) because of an abrupt change ofheart by the Royalston Board of Selectmen. Plans arealready underway to hold a protest on the green outside RoyalstonTown Hall. The demonstration is slated to take place atnoon on August 26. Steve Epstein, an attorney and Chairman of Mass Cann: NORML,explained that the Royalston Board of Selectmen suddenly"changed its position and determined that the club did not havethe necessary permits [required] under state law to host theevent." Epstein further states that Mass Cann: NORMLhad "met [previously] with them on August 6 and were toldthat no additional permits were required." Mass Cann:NORML wasn't alerted to the fact that the group would need anadditional permit until August 11. The board refuses to allow theevent without the necessary authorizations. William Downing, President of Mass Cann: NORML maintains that:"The decision of the board was motivated by an illegaldesire to prevent [our organization] from expressing [its]opinions on marijuana prohibition." He additionallystates that: "They could stop Hempfest because of [a permitrequirement, but] they cannot stop 'HEMP-PROTEST' because of theFirst Amendment." Mass Cann: NORML had been hostingevents similar to Hempfest for approximately the past six years. For more information of the scheduled August 26"HEMP-PROTEST," please contact Steve Epstein, Esq. @(617) 699-3161 or Mass Cann: NORML @ (617) 944-CANN. Student Parking "Not For theBashful" Indiana School Board Votes To Institute Drug Free Parking Policy August 16, 1995, Fishers, Indiana: Following directly on the heels of this past June's U.S. SupremeCourt decision upholding an Oregon public school policy mandatingurine tests for all athletes regardless of probable cause, aFishers school board is attempting to force high school studentsto submit to drug tests before they are issued parking permits. Principle Gary Wiersema was asked by the board to adopt the newpolicy before school opens August 23. Wiesema maintainsthat such a proposal should not be instituted so swifty and has advisedthe board to move slowly on the issue. "Kids stillhave rights," he told the Palladium-Item after an initialmeeting with the board. An attorney for the school has stated that he believes such ameasure would stand up in a court of law based upon the U.S.Supreme Court's previous rulings regarding drug testing. "If the rationale to randomly test athletes is because ofsafety," he told the Palladium-Item, "[then] the schoolhas the ability to control who drives." Currently, between 10 and 20 separate schools have enacted randomdrug testing policies for athletes in Indiana. Richard Martinez's Health Worsens Registered Nurse Petitions Arizona Governor To Intervene August 15, 1995, Phoenix, AZ: In thepast week, Richard Martinez's voice has weakened to the pointwhere it is now barely audible. Meanwhile, he continues to sufferfrom life threatening staph infections, high blood pressure,migraines, and possibly anemia. Connie Theis, Martinez's registered nurse and the woman whonotified NORML of his situation, has requested that he betransferred from Durango County Jail and placed in a nearby hospital. Recently, she has written to Arizona Governor Fyfe Symington toalert him of Martinez's increasingly ill health. The Officeof Human Rights in Phoenix is also attempting to get Martinez transferredto a medical facility. Ms. Theis maintains that Martinez'slife is in danger every additional day he is forced to stay inprison. Richard Martinez has yet to be convicted of any crime. Heis currently facing drug charges after being turned in toauthorities for possessing a coffee can of marijuana. Martinez had been using marijuana as a therapeutic agent to helprelieve the pain he suffers daily after having been shot throughthe left eye in 1991. He remains incarcerated in DurangoCounty Jail so that the state can continue to conduct competencytests. Ms. Theis asserts that Martinez's head injury has permanentlydamaged his right frontal lobe and maintains that he is mentallyincompetent to stand trial. Constance Theis can be contacted at the following numbers:(602) 790-1595 (home) or (602) 325-1300 EXT 4435 (work). Activists are encouraged to call and/or fax the following Arizonapolitical officials: U.S. Senator John Kyl @ (202) 224-4521 orfax# (202) 228-1239; U.S. Senator John McCain @ (202) 224-2235 orfax# (202) 228-2862; Governor Fyfe Symington, 1700 W. WashingtonSt., Phoenix, AZ 85007; phone# (602) 524-4331 or fax# (602)542-1381. Federal Prisoner Begins Hunger Strike ToProtest Denial Of Marinol August 15, 1995, El Reno, OK: AlanD. McLemore has forsaken food for the last 18 days and lost morethan twenty pounds since a physician at Montgomery County Jail(Conroe, TX) discontinued his prescription for Marinol. Doctors at the prison have attempted to substitute other medicationsin place of Marinol; however, McLemore's wife reports thatalternative medicines have only aggravated his current physicalcondition. McLemore has a medical history of chronic clinicaldepression and has been prescribed Marinol by a previous jailpsychiatrist. McLemore was sentenced to federal prison this past July onmarijuana charges. In the past, McLemore had used marijuanato provide relief from chronic migraines, depression, lack of appetite,and alcoholic tendencies. For more information on the case of Alan D. McLemore, pleasecall Maggi Carter-McLemore @ (409) 898-4926. Activists mayalso wish to contact Warden Ronald G. Thomas, El Reno FederalCorrection Institute @ (405) 262-4875 or fax# (405) 743-1448. -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-37IA087-000632-B005-14http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-08-10.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083921 text/html 7639HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:39:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:18 GMTContent-length: 7424 NORML News - August 10, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. August 10, 1995 Medical Marijuana Resolution To Be UnveiledAt Upcoming Conference August 9, 1995, San Diego, CA: Aresolution calling for governments everywhere to "immediatelyrescind their policies of arresting ... marijuana consumers whocurrently possess and/or cultivate cannabis for their own medicaluse" will be introduced by Dr. Erik Fromberg at the 37thInternational Congress on Drugs and Alcohol Dependency. Theresolution further demands that governments start separating themedical issue "from the recreational drug issue and begin activelystudying cannabis' use as a therapeutic agent." Dr.Fromberg is a representative from the Netherlands Institute onAlcohol and Drugs (NIAD). The international conference isscheduled to be held August 20-25 in San Diego, California. Also attending the Congress will be the Todd McCormickAlliance. The Alliance has declared an "internationalstate of emergency on medical cannabis" and is embarking onan "information blitz" to raise public awareness. The organization will be holding a round table discussion on themedical use of cannabis on August 22 and is planning to hold apublic rally on August 25. The group is named after SanDiego Compassionate Use Club founder and medical marijuana user,Todd McCormick. McCormick was arrested in Ohio on July 18when State Highway Patrolmen discovered in excess of thirtypounds of marijuana in his van. McCormick maintains thatthe cannabis was intended to be used to establish a CompassionateUse Club in his home state of Rhode Island. For more information about the medical marijuana resolution,please contact Richard Cowan @ (202) 483-5500 or the ToddMcCormick Alliance @ (619) 582-7303. Registered Nurse Contacts NORML In An AppealTo Save The Life Of Her Patient August 4, 1995, Phoenix, AZ: In anattempt to stimulate national attention and awareness to theplight of her patient, Richard G. Martinez, neuro-rehabilitationnurse and Martinez's legal guardian, Constance Theis, hascontacted NORML with a story of unparalleled injustice. After having been shot through the left eye in 1991, RichardMartinez was left with an excruciatingly painful nerve disorderknown as trigeminal neuralgia. In addition, many fragments fromthe bullet could not be removed during surgery and still remainlodged in Martinez's brain. The presence of these fragmentsinduces cognitive deficits and seizure disorders and also givesrise to frequent bouts of intense nausea and severedepression. To help alleviate Martinez's daily pain, he wasgranted a legal prescription for Marinol -- a federally approvedTHC synthetic drug. The Marinol, however, ended up beingfar too expensive ($636.00 per month) for Martinez to afford onhis social security disability-based income. As a result,Martinez turned to the next logical substitute, natural cannabis. Martinez was turned in to authorities for possessing marijuana bya relative in exchange for a small financial reward. He nowsits in Durango County Jail in Phoenix, Arizona, where he isforced to sleep on a dirty floor and is prevented from taking hisproper medication. While in jail, Martinez has sufferednumerous staph infections in the eye socket and ear. Staphinfections put tremendous pressure on the heart and, if leftuntreated, can be fatal. The tremendous swelling from these infectionsis causing green pus to flow from Martinez's right nostril. In addition, Martinez's serious infections are destroyingvaluable tissue and bone in his face. This deteriorationhas gotten so extreme that Martinez now believes that his eye mayactually be "rotting." Martinez is also experiencing critically high blood pressure andis now at risk of suffering a stroke. This occurrence is anatural physical result of untreated pain and infection. The threat of a severe stroke -- in addition to his constantfevers, infections, tissue deterioration, and ear aches -- makesMartinez's incarceration highly life threatening. According to the reports of three separate physicians, Martinez'shead wound seriously damaged his right frontal lobe and hasrendered him mentally incompetent. Therefore, he can not legallystand trial. The state, however, wants Martinez to appearin court regardless. Consequently, psychologists at theDurango County Jail are working round the clock to have Martinezdeclared mentally competent. Ms. Theis maintains that thisprocess can last as long a seven or eight months -- a time framethat she believes Martinez will not survive. The bitterirony is that the state is trying to legally rehabilitate a manwith braln damage solely for the purpose of throwing him back injail. All this because Martinez was trying to alleviatedaily pain, nausea, and seizures with the only effectivetherapeutic agent he could financially afford -- marijuana. Constance Theis maintains that her patient's life is in dangerevery additional day he stays in the Durango County Jail. She can be contacted at the following numbers: (602) 790-1595(home) or (602) 325-1300 EXT 4435 (work). -END- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-38IA087-000632-B005-27http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-08-03.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083929 text/html 6270HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:39:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:21 GMTContent-length: 6055 NORML News - August 3, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. August 3, 1995 Green Cross Co-founder To Serve Two Days InJail For Contempt of Court August 2, 1995, Seattle, WA: JoannaMcKee, activist, medicinal marijuana advocate, and co-founder ofWashington's Green Cross Patient Co-op turned herself in to localauthorities to begin serving a two day sentence for leaving thestate against a judge's orders. Mckee, 52, was arrested on May 3 when regional task force agentsraided her medical marijuana cooperative in BrainbridgeIsland. According to authorities, approximately 130 marijuanaplants were seized during the raid. McKee's Green Cross PatientCo-op is believed to have been the first "Cannabis BuyersClub" in the nation aggressively targeted by the law enforcementcommunity. Over 30 such "Clubs" currently operatethroughout the United States. Following her May arrest, McKee was released on her ownrecognizance pending trial in September. However, a KitsapCounty Superior Court judge ordered her not to leave thestate. McKee recently defied this court order when she flewto Washington DC to attend the National Institute on Drug Abuse'sfirst ever conference on marijuana. McKee's arrest and subsequent legal problems have garnered bothconsiderable local and national media attention. USA Todaymentioned her probable return to jail in its July 20 issue and allthree local network affiliates were on hand to cover McKee'ssurrender to police on August 2. Ironically, McKee's return to jail comes less than three weeksafter San Diego Compassionate Use Club founder, Todd McCormick,was arrested by authorities while on route to Rhode Island. McCormickfaces felony drug charges. Donations to help pay for Joanna McKee's legal defense fundcan be sent to the following address: The Green Cross DefenseFund, 800 5th Ave., #162, Seattle, WA. 98104. Those whowish to help circulate petitions and/or raise public awareness tothe plight of Joanna McKee and other medical marijuana users areencouraged to send a SASE to: Green Cross, PO Box 10416,Brainbridge Island, WA 98110. Senate Appropriations Committee ApprovesElimination of National Drug Czar July 27, 1995, Washington, DC: Aproposal to eliminate the position of White House drug policyadvisor (currentiy held by Lee Brown) has been approved by theSenate House Appropriations Committee. President Clinton hasstated that he will veto any legislation that intends to abolishthe White House Office of National Drug Control Policy. Brown's office has recentiy come under fire from both Republicansand Democrats alike for a "lack of visibility" infighting illegal drug use and trafficking. ONDCP proponentshave countered by arguing that since the creation of a national"drug czar" seven years ago, the Office has significantlyreduced the power of Colombian drug cartels and has helped leadthe campaign against adolescent marijuana use. National studies indicate that marijuana use among American teenshas been on the rise since 1991. Meanwhile, Washington Post Prints ONDCP'sCurrent Six-Figure Salaries July 28, 1995, Washington, DC: Accordingto an article in the Washington Post, fighting illegal drug useon the national level can be quite financially rewarding, if notaltogether effective. The Post reported that in addition to Lee Brown's $148,400 yearlysalary, the Office of National Drug Control Policy also currentiyemploys about a dozen other six-figure staffers. Brownstated that the big money salaries are necessary "in orderto develop and track strategy for a $14 billion program." [And how much was your last paycheck? -ed.] -End- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-39IA087-000632-B005-55http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-07-27.html 206.61.184.43 19970122083944 text/html 6944HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:39:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:25 GMTContent-length: 6729 NORML News - July 27, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. July 27, 1995 Marijuana Compassionate Use Club FounderArrested On Route To Rhode Island July 18, 1995, Bryan, OH: Longtimeactivist and medical marijuana user Todd McCormick was arrestedand charged with two felony drug counts when Ohio State HighwayPatrolmen discovered in excess of thirty pounds of marijuana inhis van. McCormick's passenger, Natalie Byrd, was alsotaken into custody and faces similar felony drug charges. Both activists are currently being held at the Correction Centerof Northwest Ohio where bail has been set, without bond, at$150,000 each. McCormick's preliminary hearing is scheduled totake place today. Byrd's scheduled hearing has beenpostponed to take place at a later date. McCormick, age 25, isthe founder of the San Diego Compassionate Use Club. TheSan Diego Club is one of approximately thirty Cannabis BuyersClubs located across the country. The purpose of the Clubs,many of which have recently received favorable media coverage andhave been grudgingly tolerated by local law enforcement, is tosupply cannabis to seriously ill patients based upon a doctor'srecommendation. Typically, these patients are sufferingfrom the effects of AIDS, cancer, multiple sclerosis (MS),glaucoma, and spinal disorders. McCormick maintains thatthe marijuana found in his van was intended to be used toestablish a Compassionate Use Club in his home state of RhodeIsland. He told police that it was not for sale. Allof the cannabis dispensed at McCormick's San Diego Club wasdonated and was available to patients on a "no charge"basis. The 30+ pounds of cannabis was visibly labeled"for medical use." Based on the evidence seized duringMcCormick's arrest in Ohio on the 18th, DEA agents subsequentlyraided his Rolando, California house three days later. Noneof the four residents staying at the house at the time of the raidwere arrested; however, a small quantity of marijuana wasfound. Also confiscated by federal agents were videotapes,books on the subject of legalizing marijuana, various computerdisks, film, and smoking paraphernalia. In addition,numerous petition signatures calling for a California marijuanalegalization initiative were also seized, but have since beenreturned. All four residents have said that they arecommitted to making marijuana medically available to chronicallyill patients. Although the significant amount of marijuanapresent and the rural venue do not make McCormick's case idealfor a medical necessity defense, he feels that a number of Fourth Amendmentviolations make his case winnable. Most importantly,McCormick contends that law enforcement officials searched hisvehicle without his consent or a warrant. McCormickmaintains that one officer claimed to "smell pot," atwhich time McCormick voluntarily showed the trooper hisprescription for medical cannabis. At this point, his vanwas searched and the bundles of marijuana were found. McCormick acquired his prescription from a doctor in Rotterdam,the Netherlands. Aside from being an activist on the front lines of the medicalmarijuana issue, McCormick is also a medical marijuanauser. McCormick has battled cancer on ten differentoccasions and first started smoking cannabis to alleviate thesignificant side effects of radiation and chemotherapy. He nowuses the therapeutic effects of the drug to combat acute nervedamage in his neck. This damage came about when the firstfive vertebrae in his neck fused together as a result of thecancer and greatly limits McCormick's lateral headmovement. McCormick attributes the regular smoking ofcannabis as the prime reason for the improvement in his conditionand lateral head mobility. He further maintains that theprescription he acquired in the Netherlands makes it legal forhim to transport cannabis in all United Nations. Recently,his prescription had enabled him to enter America through U.S.Customs in Colorado while carrying cannabis. Those wishingto donate funds to Todd McCormick's defense can send theirfinancial support to the following address: Don Wirtshafter LawTrust Account, P. O. Box 18, Guysville, Ohio 45735. Public Outage Inspires Oklahoma Governor ToFree Jimmy Montgomery At the same time one medical marijuana user isarrested, another is set free. Jimmy Montgomery, who wasre-sentenced on April 4 to serve ten years in prison for thepossession of less than two ounces of pot was released todaythanks to the hundreds of phone calls and letters from bothconcerned NORML members and the press. OklahomaGovernor Frank Keating signed his release citing Montgomery'sdeteriorating health while in prison. -End- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-40IA087-000632-B005-78http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-07-18.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084011 text/html 7360HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:39:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:29 GMTContent-length: 7145 NORML News - July 18, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. July 18,1995 Marijuana Arrests Hit Ten MillionMark... Drug Czar Compares Marijuana to Cocaine Based on projections from 1993 Justice Departmentstatistics (FBI Uniform Crime Reports), the National Organizationfor the Reform of Marijuana Laws estimates that the total numberof marijuana arrests since 1965 will pass the ten million mark onJuly 20th, 1995. Mounting at the rate of more than onethousand per day, more than 80% of these arrests aresolely for personal possession. The balance are forcultivation--often for personal use--or for sale, usually ainvolving a very small quantity. To put these numbers in context: Marijuana arrests in 1993(380,690) made up approximately one third of the1.1 million total drug arrests that year. By comparison,there were approximately 600,000 arrests for violentcrimes. This year, the Clinton Administration sought toprovide 100,000 new police. Now, if an arrest, transportingthe arrestee to jail, paper work, etc. ideally takes only 2hours, and there is only one officer involved, then marijuanaarrests currently use the time of approximately one hundredthousand police per year. There are approximately 550,000 stateand local police officers. Thus, approximately 20% of theirtotal time is consumed by marijuana arrests. Obviously, this burden on police resources is not the same in alljurisdictions. In 11 states, marijuana possession has beendecriminalized and the police typically issue citations ratherthan arrest an offender. Additionally, in most major citiesmarijuana possession is a very low priority. However, insome smaller towns, it seems to be a major focus for thepolice. For example, in Beaver Dam, Wisconsin, policesearched Scott Bryant's garbage for marijuana residue for several daysbefore getting a warrant and shooting him dead on April 17. He was unarmed and less than an ounce of marijuana wasfound. In a small town in Oklahoma, paraplegic and medicalmarijuana user Jimmy Montgomery was sentenced to 10 years forpossession of less than two ounces. He is still awaitingrelease on a medical parole. Moreover, the prospect of being able to seize valuable propertyunder civil forfeiture has created an incentive to seek outmarijuana cultivation. This is believed to have been thereason for the 1992 raid on multimillionaire Donald Scott'sestate near Malibu that resulted in his being killed bypolice. No marijuana was found. The effect of theseincreasing arrests on marijuana availability, however, seems tobe negligible. According to Joseph Califano, Chairman ofthe Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, "Americanchildren are telling us they are drenched in drugs." The Clinton Administration is now devoting most of its efforts tothe suppression of marijuana. Drug Czar Lee Brown in apress release on July 17 cited a survey commissioned byCalifano's group. Brown said that: "91% of thepopulation blames illegal drug and alcohol abuse for the rate ofviolent crime that we have in America today. This factalone should tell the media that they need to make the connectionbetween drug use and violent crime in their newsstories." However, in a letter to the editor of theSummer issue of Forbes Media Critic, Califano himselfpoints out that marijuana "has not been associated with highlevels of violence." In fact, most of the violence in our societyis associated with alcohol -- not marijuana. Perhaps even more misleading is the media advisory from Brown'soffice announcing "marijuana sends virtually the samenumbers to emergency rooms as cocaine." This statementis supposedly based on numbers from DAWN, the Drug Abuse WarningNetwork. In truth, the DAWN statistics say nothing of thesort. First, they deal with emergency room mentions,not causes of admission established by a doctor. The DAWNfigures further demonstrate that over 80% of marijuana mentionsare in conjunction with problems associated with alcohol,cocaine, or some other drug. In cases where marijuana isthe only drug mentioned, the problem is almostalways a panic attack by inexperienced users. There is nopractical lethal dose of marijuana and the only adverse acuteeffects of marijuana are transitory and not life or healththreatening. Consequently, the hospital emergency room mentionsof marijuana are neither qualitatively nor quantitativelycomparable to those caused by cocaine. However, thechildren of America might get the impression from Brown'sstatement that the risks associated with cocaine are no greaterthan those associated with marijuana. This conclusion wouldseem to be the antithesis of drug education. NORMLNational Director Richard Cowan commented that the Clinton Administration'sdrug policy concentrating on marijuana seems to be aimed atavoiding "inhale" jokes at all costs. Another tenmillion arrests is too high a price to pay for that. -End- MORE THAN 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-41IA087-000632-B005-107http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-07-13.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084042 text/html 6561HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:40:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:32 GMTContent-length: 6346 NORML News - July 13, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. July 13, 1995 Not All Marijuana Law Victims Are Arrested: Police Officer Who Fatally Shot Suspected Marijuana User ClearedOf Criminal Charges July 6, 1995, Beaver Dam, WI: According to a lengthy article in the Madison Isthmus, DetectiveRobert Neuman -- the police officer who on April 28 fatally shotsuspected marijuana user Scott Bryant in his home -- has beenrecently cleared of criminal charges by a Sheboygan CountyDistrict Attorney. Officer Neuman shot and killed twenty-nine year old Scott Bryanton April 28 when he and three other police officers barged intoBryant's mobile home executing a no knock/no announce warrant. Bryant was unarmed and did not resist arrest; his seven year oldson, Colton, was present during the shooting. A total ofless than one ounce of marijuana was found in the apartment. District Attorney Wells concluded that, "The shooting ofScott Bryant was not in any form justified." However,he also determined that the shooting was"unintentional," and thus, could not file homicidecharges. Wells theorizes that, "[Officer Neuman's]hand may have clenched either as he jerked his weapon toward thenoise and struck the door, or in 'sympathetic physical reaction'to his other hand, which was also grasping." Agun-maker of the Beretta used by Neuman finds such an occurrenceto be unlikely since the Beretta's double action draw length"helps reduce the chance of ... inadvertentdischarges." Neuman claims that he has "norecollection of pulling the trigger." Wells also ruled out charges of criminal recklessness in theNeuman shooting, claiming that the detective "could not havehad a 'conscious, subjective awareness' that his gun handlingcreated a grave risk, since his partner was in the line offire." The Isthmus article further adds thatbecause of the employment of an "outdated legaldefinition," Wells also cleared Neuman of the charge of criminalrecklessness. As a result, Officer Neuman can return toregular active duty. The fatal shooting of Scott Bryant by law enforcement officialsis yet another example of the government's continued war againstmarijuana users. In a similar instance, disabled Vietnam veteranGary Shepard was shot and killed by police in August of 1992 ashe and his family stood on the front porch of his home in ruralKentucky. Shepard had been engaged in a day-long standoffwith law enforcement officials after he refused to let police cutdown the marijuana plants growing on his property. Perhapseven more shocking was the October 2, 1993 fatal shooting of millionairerancher Donald Scott. Scott was killed when law enforcementofficials raided his Malibu property searching for 40 pounds ofmarijuana. No marijuana was ever found. Number Of Jail Inmates Experiences ThirdLargest Increase Since 1983 According to the most recent Census of Jailsand Annual Survey of Jails report, the jail population of theUnited States rose by 30,638 inmates between July 1, 1993, andJune 30,1994. This growth marks the third largest annualincrease recorded since 1983. Even more striking were the report's findings that: "Since1983 the jail inmate population has nearly doubled on a percapita basis. During this period the number of jail inmatesper 100,000 residents rose from 96 to 188." Consequently, the report estimates that about 1 in every 398adult residents (and 1 in every 212 men) are in a local jail. Not surprisingly, the largest source of growth among inmates inlocal jails was drug law violators. Because of increasedlaw enforcement and stiffer penalties under the "War onDrugs," the number of jail inmates charged or convicted ofdrug offenses increased from 20,800 in 1983 to 91,000 in1989. Subsequently, the percentage of inmates serving timein jail for drug offenses has skyrocketed from 10% in 1983 tonearly 25% in 1989. This figure accounts for more than 40%of the total increase in jail population. Counting Down: The Ten Millionth MarijuanaArrest Since 1965 Will Take Place On July 20. ItCould Be You! --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-42IA087-000632-B005-135http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-07-11.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084054 text/html 6838HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:40:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:36 GMTContent-length: 6623 NORML News - July 11, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ NEWS BULLETIN ** NEWS BULLETIN ** NEW BULLETIN** NEWS BULLETIN July 11, 1995 Marijuana Prohibition Subject To New LegalAnd Scientific Challenge: Petition Demands U. S. GovernmentProvide Finding On Marijuana's Abuse Potential As Required By FederalLaw Calling marijuana prohibition a "fraud and afailure," longtime activist and former NORML NationalDirector Jon Gettman filed a rule making petition with the DrugEnforcement Administration on July 10, 1995 demanding that theagency immediately initiate proceedings to re-evaluatemarijuana's Schedule I status under the Controlled SubstancesAct. By law, the DEA is required to forward such petitions to theDepartment of Health and Human Services for a binding medical andscientific evaluation. The petition is based on acomprehensive review of recent scientific evidence demonstratingthat marijuana does not have "sufficient abuse potential towarrant Schedule I or II status under the Controlled SubstancesAct." The CSA mandates that a scientific findingaffirming that a drug has a high potential for abuse is requiredto maintain the complete prohibition of any drug or substanceunder Schedule I. (21 USC 812(b)(1)) No suchfinding has ever existed for marijuana. DEA Administrator Constantine has claimed in an exchange ofletters that abuse potential is irrelevant to the scheduling ofdrugs with no accepted medical use. When Gettman reminded Constantinethat this position was explicitly rejected by the U.S. Court ofAppeals in 1977 (NORML v. DEA, 559 F.2d 736), Constantine boldlychallenged him to pursue action in an April 21, 1995 letter toUnited States Senator John Warner (R-VA). In this letter,Constantine stated that: "[The DEA is] unaware of any newscientific studies of marijuana that would lead us to re-evaluateits classification at this time; therefore no such evaluation isnow in process nor do we feel [that one is] necessary based onthe information available to us. [However,] if Mr. Gettman hasscientific data concerning marijuana which he wishes to bring toour attention, we will be pleased to consider it, should he careto share the documentation with us." In response to Constantine's statements, Gettman has produced a279 page petition referencing nearly 170 scientific journals andgovernment reports. Of prime importance to Gettman's argumentsis the recent discovery of a cannabinoid receptor system in thehuman body. This discovery has radically alteredcontemporary knowledge about marijuana's effects on the body and thebrain. According to Gettman, "These new findingsdirectly contradict many of the DEA's on-record findings of'fact' which have been used to block prior reconsideration ofmarijuana's scheduling status." "Until 1990, no one knew how marijuana affected thebrain. Marijuana prohibition has assumed that science wouldeventually prove marijuana had a high potential for abuse. Science has demolished that assumption, and established marijuanaprohibition as a cruel fraud upon the American public. No scientist has ever established that marijuana has a highpotential for abuse, and now we know that no science can." "Simply put, drugs with a high potential for abuse induceself-administration in animals, and affect the production of theneurotransmitter dopamine. Marijuana does neither. Toretain marijuana in Schedule I creates a double standardforbidden by the 14th Amendment - one set of rules for all otherdrugs, and a different set of rules for marijuana." A 78 page booklet entitled The Scientific and Legal Basis forthe End of Marijuana Prohibition reviewing some of theresearch cited in Gettman's petition will be forthcoming from NORMLat a cost of $10 plus $2.50 shipping and handling. Summaries of the scientific and medical evidence supporting thepetition are available from NORML and will soon beavailable on the Internet. Jon Gettman has also describedthis new research in articles in the March and July 1995 issuesof High Times. [Jon Gettman can be contacted for further information aboutthis rule-making petition c/o NORML. Other activists who wish to file their own similar rule makingpetitions with the DEA should refer to sections 21 CFR Ch. II1308.44 of the Drug Enforcement Administration, Justice manual.] Counting Down: The Ten Millionth MarijuanaArrest Since 1965 Will Take Place On July 20. ItCould Be You! ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-43IA087-000632-B005-153http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-07-06.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084106 text/html 6797HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:41:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:42 GMTContent-length: 6582 NORML News - July 6, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. July 6, 1995 10 Million Arrests and NIDA; Bad ScienceUsed to Justify Bad Policies by Richard Cowan, National Director of NORML On July 20th, NORML will mark the 10 millionthmarijuana arrest since 1965. While there is no way to becertain on what date the actual 10 millionth arrest will takeplace, Justice Department records indicate that it will occuraround this time. Our choice of this particular date wasspurred by the fact that it will be the last day of a two dayconference on marijuana sponsored by NIDA, the National Instituteon Drug Abuse. NIDA is supposed to be a scientific organization dedicated tofinding the truth about "drug abuse" and effective waysto deal with it. Unfortunately, NIDA long ago became apoliticized propaganda mill dedicated to justifying the continuedarrest of marijuana users. This problem is well illustratedby an article by former NIDA head (and former Drug Czar) RobertDuPont being run on newspaper op-ed pages as "The CaseAgainst Legalizing Drugs." In it, DuPont exploits twofrightening sounding factoids about marijuana use in theNetherlands. First, he says that from 1984 to 1992 adolescent marijuana useincreased by 250% in the Netherlands while it decreased by twothirds in the US during that time. Even if one takes the dubiousAmerican numbers at face value (They have been criticized by theGAO and probably greatly understate real usage rates.), thesenumbers hide more than thay reveal. DuPont fails to say that-- even after 20 years of having marijuana readily available --the rate of "regular" use (one or more times in thelast month) by Dutch adolescents in 1992 was still below thelowest use by American adolescents in the last 20 years. He also fails to say that regular use by American high schoolseniors soared 40% in two years to 19% in 1994. All thiswas while American marijuana users were being arrested at therate of 1,000 per day. Moreover, from 1984 to 1992 therewere almost 3 million Americans arrested on marijuanacharges. This is hardly a minor cost or a sign of asuccessful policy. Then he states that there has been a "30% increase inregistered marijuana addicts" in Holland. This is alsovery misleading. The Dutch use the term "addicts"very broadly to include both compulsive gamblers as well aspeople who think that their marijuana use has become aproblem. Such persons are not registered as"addicts" for any purpose other than being enrolled inan out-patient therapy program. This is not the equivalentof a methadone maintenance program. In 1993, there were only 1,700 people enrolled in this programout of a regular Dutch cannabis user population of approximately650,000. This enrollment represents roughly one regular marijuanauser in 400. In the US we arrest the equivalent of oneregular marijuana user in 40 every year. Is that somehow abetter policy? Is being arrested harmless? DuPont next uses these numbers out of context to project what hesays would happen if the US followed the Dutch model. Heclaims that, "The evidence from the Netherlands suggest thatif the United States were to legalize currently illicit drugs,the numbers would probably increase from the present 12 millionto something like the 50 million who use tobacco or even the 103million who use alcohol." DuPont had to dig throughand ignore all of the facts that I have cited in order to supporthis predetermined conclusion. Why would someone dothis? What a bizarre view of the American people thisreflects. However, even the carefully selected numbers that DuPont citesout of context do not support his conclusions. Indeed, why-- after 20 years of having marijuana readily available -- hasn'tDutch marijuana use increased to the level of tobacco or alcoholuse there? In any case, whatever the level of marijuana usein the future, Dutch statistics on marijuana "addicts"do not indicate that it would be a major social or public healthproblem. The Dutch consider their cannabis policies successful becausethey have effectively separated cannabis from hard drugs. Consequently, their hard drug addiction rate remained stableand they escaped the crack cocaine epidemic that began inAmerica during the time of the decline in marijuana use thatDuPont cites as a triumph of American policy over theDutch. 'Twas a famous victory. I hope that Americadoes not have to suffer through any more of them. --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-44IA087-000632-B005-185http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-06-29.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084117 text/html 12158HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:41:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:46 GMTContent-length: 11942 NORML News - June 29, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. June 29, 1995 Major Announcement: CapricornRecords To Issue HEMPILATION CD In Fall Supporting NORML AndProtesting Marijuana Prohibition Capricorn Records and NORML, the NationalOrganization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, are collaboratingto put out a CD album this fall that will be a vocal protestagainst the injustice of marijuana prohibition. HighTimes Magazine, which covers the music scene in addition toreporting on marijuana, helped assemble the talent. Capricorn issued a press release from Nashville announcing the CDand NORML issued the following statement from Washington. Statement by NORML: Since even before the days ofHarry Anslinger's aborted plans to arrest jazz musicians in the1930s, there has been a connection between music, musicians, and marijuana;however, it has been very hard to find connections between themusic business and the marijuana reform movement. Nomore. Capricorn Records has broken down the closet doorby assembling an extraordinary group of today's hottest bands forthe first-ever benefit CD for NORML. It is appropriatelycalled HEMPILATION. The bands include the Black Crowes, BluesTraveler, Cypress Hill, Drivin-N-Cryin, Gov't Mule (featuringWarren Haynes), 311, Widespread Panic, Ziggy & The MelodyMakers, and others. The artists are contributing "HEMP"classics or original pieces. The connection between NORML and Capricorn actually dates back tothe 1970's when Phil Walden, the President of Capricorn, servedon the NORML Board of Directors. When the HEMPILATION wasannounced, Walden said he hoped that "this project will notonly be a great source of entertainment, but will also helpspread the word about the many positive actions of NORML and thebenefits of hemp as more than a drug." Walden madeclear that the HEMPILATION wasn't an endorsement of usingmarijuana but rather the belief that the criminal prosecution ofmarijuana users was unjust and unfair. This, of course, isNORML's position. We are not trying to get people to smokemarijuana, but rather to get the government to stop arresting thosewho do. "HEMPILATION is a testament to these bands'support of NORML's efforts to reform these laws," Waldenexplained. The liner notes for the CD will include more information abouthemp and marijuana prohibition and will contain a membershipapplication for joining NORML. This -- along with theroyalties donated by Capricorn and the artists -- will make anenormous difference in the ability of NORML to work to end thearrests of marijuana users. NORML naturally hopes thateveryone who buys the CD will become better informed and moremotivated to get involved in the defense of freedom, whether theysmoke marijuana or not. The HEMPILATION offers a way forboth music lovers and musicians to stand up for freedom. We also hope that more people in the music business will be movedby the example of Capricorn and the HEMPILATION artists tosupport NORML and the marijuana reform movement. It takescourage for a businessman like Phil Walden to take the lead insupporting NORML, but when others see the public support forCapricorn and the HEMPILATION, they may find that standing up forone's beliefs is a very satisfying experience. In fact, themusic business has the power to change America. It remainsto be seen how many other musicians and music industry executiveswill be inspired by the example of Walden and the artists on the HEMPILATIONand will come forward. Almost ten million Americans have been arrested on marijuanacharges since 1965. If the music business really got behindthe marijuana reform movement, these arrests would stop. Alot of musicians like to sing about pot probably even more liketo smoke it and they may think that this makes them look"cool." However, what is really "cool"is standing up for freedom. Freedom Is NORML. [For more information on the HEMPILATION, contact Jeremy Much atCapricorn Records, (615) 320-8470. For information on musicindustry's support for NORML call Steve Bloom, High Timesmagazine, at (212) 387-0500.] Jimmy Montgomery Remains In Prison As NationCelebrates Freedom June 29, Oklahoma: Paraplegic JimmyMontgomery, passed over for early release for non-violentoffenders (people in wheelchairs are so dangerous), remains inprison in Oklahoma, pending parole board hearings on July12. Montgomery has almost died several times. Hislife and freedom now depend on action by the Oklahoma ParoleBoard. NORML urges that everyone contact the followingParole Board members before July 12: Annita M. Bridges Susan Loving Nadine McPherson Ray H. Page C. Michael Zacharias P.O. Box 60608 P.O. Box 21103 P.O. Box 720356 P.O. Box 289 One Williams Ctr. Oklahoma City, OK Oklahoma City, OK Oklahoma City, OK Spavinaw, OK Tulsa, OK 73146-0608 73156-1103 73172-0356 74366-0289 74172-0148 Supreme Court Ruling On Student Drug TestingExpected To Decrease Pot Use And Increase Alcohol And Hard DrugUse By Students June 26, Washington, D.C.: Commentson the Supreme Court ruling upholding the constitutionality ofrandom drug testing of student athletes generally overlook thefact that such tests do not detect alcohol use and are far lesseffective in detecting the use of cocaine and other hard drugsthan marijuana. Marijuana metabolites (not the drug itself)are detectable in urine far longer than residues of cocaine,etc. This will have the effect of encouraging the use ofhard drugs and alcohol which are far more dangerous thanmarijuana. In his opinion supporting the ruling, Justice Scalia wrote thatthe "Fourth Amendment does not protect all subjectiveexpectations of privacy, but only those which society recognizesas legitimate." After decades of hate propaganda tojustify arresting millions of marijuana users, the Americanpeople have now been conditioned to believe that forcing someoneto urinate on command does not violate their legitimate"rights. What the Fourth Amendment actuallysays: "The right of the people to be secure intheir persons, houses and effects against unreasonable searchesand seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall Issue, butupon probable cause supported by Oath or affirmation, andparticularly describing the place to be searched, and the personsor things to be seized." Thomas Jefferson had intendedto put in the part about "only those which societyrecognizes as legitimate," but he forgot. He wasprobably suffering from short term memory loss because he grewhemp at Monticello. We are not going to be drug-free, justunfree. Anaheim Repeals Ordinance Barring FormerDrug Offenders From Parks June 27, Anaheim, CA: In response toa lawsuit brought by NORML and the Southern California ACLU, thecity of Anaheim has repealed an ordinance that would have keptpersons convicted of marijuana charges out of the city'sparks. A medical marijuana patient convicted of growingcannabis for his own use would have been barred from attending arally in favor of medical access to cannabis had the ordinancenot been enjoined by the courts prior to its repeal. [The case was handled by Mark Silverstein of the Los Angelesoffice of the ACLU. Mr. Silverstein can be reached at (213)977-9500.] Announcing: CompassionateOregonians For Medicinal Cannabis June 15, Portland, OR: Oregoncitizens, frustrated by the Oregon Legislature's failure to addressaccess to medicinal cannabis and the Federal Government's denialof the need, have joined to form this not-for-profitorganization. The organization can be reached at: 2600 N.E. Martin Luther KingBlvd., #126, Portland, OR, 97212 or call (503) 288-8816. Counting Down: The TenMillionth Arrest Since 1965 Will Take Place On July 20 The ten millionth marijuana arrest since 1965will take place on July 20th, the last day of a prohibitionistpropaganda conference on marijuana sponsored by NIDA (theNational Institute on Drug Abuse). Speakers at theconference will include such propagandists as Drug Czar Lee Brownand HHS Secretary Donna Shalala. Their objective will be toavoid "inhale" jokes and justify another ten millionarrests for marijuana during a heroin, binge alcohol drinking,and inhalant epidemic. -END- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-45IA087-000632-B005-209http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-06-22.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084131 text/html 11198HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:41:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:51 GMTContent-length: 10982 NORML News - June 22, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. June 22, 1995 JAMA, The Journal of the American MedicalAssociation Prints Article By NORML Board ChairmanCalling For Medical Access To Marijuana Medical doctors should be legally permitted toprescribe marijuana for their patients according to a commentaryin the June 21 issue of the internationally respected Journalof the American Medical Association. The article iswritten by NORML Board Chairman, Lester Grinspoon, MD of HarvardMedical School and James B. Bakalar, also of Harvard, and doesnot reflect the official position of the AMA. However, itwas printed after months of review by the JAMA editorialboard. The two page commentary gives a brief history of thethousands of years of medical use of cannabis, including thefirst part of this century in America. Grinspoon and Bakalar argue that cannabis is much safer than mostof the drugs regularly prescribed by physicians (a lethaloverdose is virtually impossible) and that it is currently being used,albeit illegally, by many thousands of people who have found thatno legally available pharmaceuticals work as well. (EightAmericans receive free marijuana from the federal governmentunder a program closed to new patients in 1992.) The authors point out that in 1988 the Drug EnforcementAdministration's own chief administrative law judge, the lateFrancis L. Young, called cannabis "one of the safesttherapeutic agents known to man." He added that it metthe legal requirement of currently accepted medical use intreatment in the United States. Young then ordered thatcannabis be transferred from Schedule I to Schedule II, so that,as with morphine and cocaine, it could be prescribed by a doctor. Regrettably, the politically appointed head of the DEA rejectedthis order and continued the DEA's policy of blocking medicalresearch with cannabis while claiming that there is no medical researchto support its use. The commentary goes on to remind physicians that the AMAoriginally opposed the federal Marihuana Tax Act in 1937 (passedafter testimony falsely claiming that cannabis caused violent crimes),because it would interfere with cannabis' medical use. Grinspoon and Bakalar conclude by saying that they are "notasking readers for immediate agreement" that cannabis ismedically useful, but rather, they hope that physicians"will do more to encourage open and legal exploration of itspotential. The ostensible indifference of physicians shouldno longer be used as a justification for keeping this medicine inthe shadows." It remains to be seen if the extensive media coverage of the JAMAcommentary will lead to more attention to the book, Marihuana,the Forbidden Medicine, (Yale University Press) by Grinspoonand Bakalar. This book, published in 1993 and now availablein paperback, has been printed in Germany and France and willsoon be published in Italy. Nonetheless, it has not been reviewedby a single major newspaper or magazine in the UnitedStates. This blackout persists even though it has beenfavorably reviewed by the JAMA, the New England Journalof Medicine, and even by the conservative National Review. In the meantime, the American mass media continue to give over$800,000 per day in free advertising to the so-called Partnershipfor a Drug-Free (sic) America, founded by the former CEO of amajor pharmaceutical company. The Partnership opposesmedical access to cannabis as a part of its campaigning for thearrest of sick, dying and disabled Americans who use cannabis ratherthan the pharmaceuticals, and the alcohol and tobacco sold by itsfunders. How much longer will American physicians becomfortable supporting the arrest of their patients in company withthe pushers of drugs that kill 500,000 Americans annually? [For more information on the medical uses ofmarijuana contact NORML, Allen St. Pierre, (202) 483-5500.] The Story Of Jimmy Montgomery And OtherAmerican Victims Of Cannabis Prohibition Told At London HumanRights Conference June 17, London, U.K.: The violationof the basic human rights of American cannabis users was thesubject of a panel discussion at the London Human RightsConference organized by Liberty, a British rights advocacygroup. For the first time, cannabis users were recognizedalong with more familiar victims of government oppression. Richard Cowan, NORML's National Director spoke on the humanrights violations committed against marijuana users inAmerica. Cowan told the conference about the shooting ofScott Bryant and other suspected marijuana users. Conference attendees were especially shaken bythe plight of Jimmy Montgomery, the paraplegic sentenced to 10years in Oklahoma prison for less than two ounces ofmarijuana. Montgomery remains in prison despite hundreds ofcalls from around the world to the Oklahoma governor's office byreaders of NORML's weekly faxes. It is believed that Montgomery may be releasedsoon -- not because his arrest was unjust or that his sentencewas outrageous or because his life is in danger -- but simplybecause Oklahoma prisons are so overcrowded that they mustrelease someone. While Montgomery's release, for whateverreason, will be welcomed, the fact that the narcocracy can getaway with such an outrageous injustice, unreported by theAmerican media, clearly demonstrates that they can effectivelyget away with anything. Walter Cronkite Calls For BipartisanCommission To Study Alternatives To Drug War June 20: On the Discovery ChannelSpecial, "The Cronkite Report: The Drug Dilemma" WalterCronkite [former CBS news anchorman and regarded internationallyas one of the most trusted figures in America---ed.] called thedrug war a failure. Cronkite called for a bipartisan commissionto study the alternatives to prohibition. He concluded bysaying "We cannot go into tomorrow with the same formulasthat are failing today." ["And that's the way itis."---ed.] Counting Down: The TenMillionth Marijuana Arrest Will Take Place On July 20, The LastDay Of A NIDA Anti-Marijuana Propaganda Fest Based on projections from the U.S. JusticeDepartment arrest statistics, NORML has calculated that the tenmillionth marijuana arrest will take place on July 20. While there is obviously no way of knowing the precise date ofsuch an event, the July date is a far more reasonable estimatethan most made in Washington. This particular date waschosen to emphasize the role that government sponsored hatepropaganda, especially the politicized pseudo-science put out by theNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) plays in maintainingmarijuana prohibition. On July 19 and 20,NIDA is holding a "National Conference on Marijuana Use:Prevention, Treatment, and Research." The reference toresearch is particularly ironic given NIDA's role in blockingresearch on the medical uses of marijuana. According toNIDA, the conference is a part of their "MarijuanaPrevention Initiative." This is aimed at getting themedia to carry more propaganda to support the next ten millionarrests. NORML will be responding to what will undoubtedlybe billed as "the latest research" on marijuana. This will probably include statements on how pot is far morepotent than it was in the past, even though NIDA's own numbersshow no increase in over ten years. In the weeks ahead, NORML will be attempting to get the media toreport the astronomical arrest statistics. These numbers and thepoliticization of science in service to prohibition will be the onlyreal stories. The ten millionth arrest will be a humantragedy. If it is ignored, it will be a national disgrace. [For more information about the ten milliontharrest contact this office -- or your attorney, if you're theone!] --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-46IA087-000632-B006-17http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-06-15.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084154 text/html 11921HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:41:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:56 GMTContent-length: 11705 NORML News - June 15, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. June 15, 1995 NORML National Director To Address MajorLondon Human Rights Convention June 17, London, U.K.: The continuedimprisonment of Oklahoma paraplegic Jimmy Montgomery will beaddressed by Richard Cowan at a three day Human Rights Conventionto be held in London from June 15 to 17. The Convention,billed as "A Festival of Rights," is being sponsored byLiberty, a London based human rights organization. It isexpected that more than 3,000 people from around the world willattend the conference. This will be the First time that the excessesof America's war on marijuana users will be recognized as aviolation of human rights comparable to other forms of politicalpersecution. "I hope that the international media and human rightscommunity will focus on the rising tide of violence and hatredbeing inflicted on American cannabis users, which is beingignored by the American media," said Cowan. He added,"having the persecution of cannabis users recognized at thisconvention is a historic breakthrough in NORML's efforts to getthe world to count the cost of cannabis prohibition." There will be more than 100 speakers at the convention, includingPierre San, the Secretary General of Amnesty International;Kader Asmal, a Minister in the South African government; and LordLester, QC. Oregon Senate Kills MarijuanaRecriminalization Bill June 12, Salem, Oregon: The OregonSenate killed an effort to recriminalize marijuana possessiondue, in part, to the lack of support from key Republican Senatorsand from effective last-minute lobbying by concerned Oregonians(especially cannabis re legalization activists!). Massachusetts House Passes An AffirmativeMedical Marijuana Defense June 13, Boston, MA: TheMassachusetts House passed an affirmative legal defense bill for individualspossessing cannabis who have a legitimate and documented medicalneed. Mass CANN/NORML tirelessly worked to get the billpassed. Lester Grinspoon, M.D., who chairs NORML's Board ofDirectors, testified in support of the bill. The bill(#2170) is short and succinct: "It shall be a prima facie defense to a charge of possessionof marihuana (sic) under this section that (1) the defendant is apatient certified to participate in a therapeutic researchprogram described in..., or (2) the defendant, without medicaluse of marihuana, (i) would be faced with a clear and imminentdanger, (ii) could reasonably expect that his use of marihuanawould be effective in abating the danger, and (iii) there is nolegally available alternative which would be equally effective inabating the danger. The bill now moves on to the State Senate for consideration. [For more information on Mass. HB 2170, please contact MassCANN/NORML's Steve Epstein, Esq., (617) 599-3161 or NORML BoardMember Richard Evans, Esq., (413) 586-1348.] California Senate Committee Approves MedicalMarijuana Bill Senate Ratification Expected! June 13, Sacramento, CA: In a 6 to 1bipartisan vote, the Criminal Procedure Committee of the StateSenate passed AB 1529 which will effectively decriminalize thepossession or cultivation of medical marijuana for individualsbeing treated for cancer, AIDS, glaucoma or multiple sclerosis inthe State of California. The bill has enjoyed editorialsupport from six major daily newspapers as well as patients andthe medical community. [For more information on AB 1529 please contact Californians forCompassionate Use, Dennis Peron, (415) 864-1961 or CaliforniaNORML, Dale Gieringer, (415) 563-5858.] Dutch Police Chiefs Agree: Continue ToSeparate Cannabis From "Hard" Drugs! June 10, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: A major daily newspaper reports that the Dutch chiefs of policeunanimously advise the Dutch government to make every possibleeffort to promote the further decriminalization of"soft" drugs [cannabis products---ed.] internationally. According to De Telegraaf, Dutch policy makers have agreedto postpone plans to overhaul Holland's drug policies untilSeptember. In the mean time, all main political parties(government and opposition) have all agreed to maintain thefollowing policies: 1.) The "classic element" of Dutch drug policy,separating the "hard" and "soft" markets, hasto remain intact because of its evident success. 2.) The "soft" drug market now desperately needsfurther regulation. 3.) Legalization of "hard" drugs is not on theagenda. (Though, experiments with medical supply ofnarcotics to problematic addicts in maintenance programsare.---ed.] More News From The Netherlands: Univ. OfAmsterdam Study Concludes That "Tolerant" Cannabis LawsDo Not Lead To More Use June 10, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Contrary to what many people assume about the citizens ofAmsterdam, where the sale of cannabis in coffeeshops is allowed,the majority of the population does not indulge in cannabis orhashish. The Department of Social Geography of the Univ. of Amsterdam hasmonitored the cannabis use of the Amsterdam population (ages 12years-old and up) since 1987 by means of three large scalehousehold surveys. According to researcher Dr. Peter Cohen,observing the period 1987-1994, the average age for first timecannabis use in The Netherlands is a remarkably high twenty yearsof age [as compared to 14 years-old in the U.S.---ed.]! Theresearch also indicates that despite the high numbers of"coffeeshops" in The Netherlands, only 25% of thepopulation have ever used cannabis. In addition, only 6%admit to using it daily. From these extensive surveys, Dr. Cohen has been able to developa profile of the "average" cannabis consumer: welleducated, single, outgoing, around thirty years-old, and of Dutchdescent. Prosecutors' Choice: Jail Or Taxes For DrugOffenders June 9, Houston, TX: The HoustonChronicle reports: An appellate court ruled...that prosecutors must choose whichthey want more: a drug dealer's [users---ed.] back taxes or theirtime in jail. The 14th Court of Appeals was asked to decide whether MarkStennett was punished sufficiently when, after his indictment formarijuana possession, he was billed $49,070 by the State ComptrollersOffice. Since January 1990, the office has been allowed topursue such taxes known as the Texas Controlled SubstancesTax. It sells tax stamps to be purchased when a person obtainscontraband. Citing a 1994 U.S. Supreme Court ruling regarding Montana's taxstamp, the court decided that since Stennett was paying the tax,pursuing criminal punishment would constitute double jeopardy. Defense attorneys have long made such a claim. "Anybody who has a drug case and also got hit with a drugtax is entitled to have their case dismissed," said one ofStennett's attorneys, Tom Moran, "Any lawyer worth his salt,when they hear about this case, will file (the proper paperwork)to get the case dismissed." It could mean hundreds ofcases could be dismissed. Quayle Accuser's Case Due Another Hearing June 13, USA Today reports: "Brett Kimberlin, who claims prison officials conspired tokeep him from telling how he once sold marijuana to Dan Quaylebefore he became vice-president, may get another day incourt. ... the U.S. Supreme Court ... ordered a lower courtto reconsider Kimberlin's suit. He says prison officials inOklahoma, working on orders from the chief of the Bureau ofPrisons, put him in solitary confinement just before the 1988elections. Prison officials, after consulting with a Justice Departmentspokesman and officials from the Bush-Quayle campaign, placedKimberlin in solitary confinement after learning he planned tohold a news conference to claim he sold marijuana to Quayle in1971." Counting Down: The 10millionth marijuana arrest will take place in July. Don't let itbe YOU! -END- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-47IA087-000632-B006-53http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-06-08.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084213 text/html 10700HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:42:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:00 GMTContent-length: 10484 NORML News - June 8, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. June 8, 1995 Plight Of Oklahoma Paraplegic Pot PrisonerTo Be Topic At Major London Human Rights Convention London: The continued imprisonment of Oklahomaparaplegic Jimmy Montgomery will be addressed at a three dayHuman Rights Convention to be held in London from June 15 to17. The Convention, billed as "A Festival ofRights," is being sponsored by Liberty, the London based humanrights organization. It is expected that more than 5,000people from around the world will attend the convention. This will be the first time that the excesses of America's war onmarijuana users will be recognized as a violation of human rightscomparable to other forms of political persecution. NORML National Director, Richard Cowan, will be speaking at oneof the convention sessions about the inhumane treatment of JimmyMontgomery. Montgomery is a paraplegic who has almost diedseveral times while serving a ten year sentence in Oklahomaprisons for less than two ounces of marijuana. Despitemonths of calling the Oklahoma Governor's office by hundreds ofconcerned Americans, Montgomery is still being held in Oklahoma'sseverely overcrowded prisons. Cowan will also speak about the killings by Wisconsin police oftwo suspected cannabis users. One victim was a 15 year-oldboy allegedly shot by a drunken narc. "I hope that theinternational media and human rights community will focus on therising tide of violence and hatred being inflicted on Americancannabis users, which is being ignored by the Americanmedia," said Cowan. He added, "having thepersecution of cannabis users recognized at this convention is a historicbreakthrough in our efforts to get the world to count the cost ofcannabis prohibition." There will be more than 100 speakers at the convention, includingPierre Sane, the Secretary General of Amnesty International;Kader Asmal, a Minister in the South African government; and LordLester, QC. Back in America, Jimmy Montgomery's parole hearing has beendelayed to July 12, supposedly because the June 21 schedule isfull. NORML urges that concerned citizens continue calling OklahomaGovernor Keating and other state opinion leaders to urge thatMontgomery's case be dealt with immediately. It isunfortunate that Oklahoma is to be subjected to international opprobriumbecause it cannot find a way to free a man who did not belong inprison in the first place. [To reach Governor Frank Keating, call (405)521-2342 or fax (405) 521-3353. To reach the editors of thetwo major newspapers in Oklahoma call 1.) The Daily Oklahoman,(405) 473-3311 or 2.) The Tulsa World (918) 581-8499.] Oregon House Votes To Re-criminalizeMarijuana Possession June 6, Salem, Oregon: In a surprisemove under new rules that allow for only one hour's notice to begiven before legislative hearings, the Oregon House ofRepresentatives voted 47 to 13 to re-criminalize the possessionof less than one ounce of marijuana. The bill would raisethe maximum fine for possession from $1,000 to $5,000 and theminimum fine from $100 to $500 per gram. This would mean aminimum fine of $2,800 per ounce. Although there is nodirect jail penalty, persons unable to pay the higher fines couldbe jailed. The bill also makes it a crime to be "underthe influence" of marijuana without defining just what thatmeans. In 1973, Oregon was the first state to decriminalize marijuana,but it does not have a higher rate of marijuana use than otherstates. The sponsor of the bill cited the usual reasons,the supposed "increase" in potency of marijuana, theclaim that it is the "gateway" to hard drugs (in 1973it was the "stepping stone"), and the claim that 9 and10 year-olds are smoking -- so adults mast be arrested. Critics point out that the bill would cost the state at least onemillion dollars per year by requiring the appointment of publicdefenders for indigent defendants, plus the cost of imprisoning thosewho cannot afford the much higher fines. This bill demonstrates that Oregon is not immuneto the massive hate campaign against cannabis users being wagedby the prohibitionist establishment and the mass media. This week, Gannett News Service carried a three-part seriesclaiming that teenagers who use marijuana just once in a year areten times more likely to be involved in violent crimes thannon-users. Of course, no comparable numbers were given foralcohol use. This is the sort of "reporting" thatleads to the shooting of a 15 year-old by a drunken narc, which-- of course -- was not mentioned in the Gannett articles. So much for their concern for teenage violence. Update: The U.S. SentencingCommission is considering an amendment that impacts cannabis consumers. The following is from the Drug Reform Coordination Network(DRCNet): Earlier this spring, the U.S. SentencingCommission passed some amendments to the federal sentencingguidelines that would reform the penalty structure for certaindrug offenses. One amendment, passed 7-0, would change the plant-weightratio use for marijuana to 1 plant = 100 grams. (Currently1 plant is considered 100 grams for 49 plants or fewer, butbecomes 1 kilo [1000 grams] for 50 plants or more, with theeffect that defendants convicted for 50 plants spend almost 3times as long in prison as those convicted for 49 plants.) A second amendment, would provide a two point reduction inoffense level for certain non-violent, first time offenders whoqualify for the "safety-valve" exemption included inlast year's Crime Bill. This Amendment essentially matchesthe exemption the law now grants from the mandatory minimumstatutes. The amendments will become law if Congress doesn't act byNovember 1 to overturn them. Clarification: What the Sentencing Commission has not decidedyet is whether the amendments will apply retroactively to currentinmates. Please write the commission and ask them to make the followingamendments retroactive: Amendment # 8 Amendment # 7 Use standard weight of 100 grams for each marijuana plant Provide additional two-point reduction for defendants who qualified for the safety-valve The commission only accepts publiccomment by mail. Please send your letters to: Public Comment -- Retroactivity U.S. Sentencing Commission South Lobby, Suite 2-500 One Columbus Circle, NE Washington, D.C. 20002-8002 LETTERS MUST BE POSTMARKED BY JUNE 16 [For more information on the proposed guidelinechanges, please contact Julie Stewart, Families Against MandatoryMinimums (FAMM), (202) 457-5790. For information on DRCNet, contactDavid Borden, Foundation for Drug Policy Awareness, (617)648-2655.] Counting Down: The 10 millionthmarijuana arrest will take place in July. Will it be in Oregon? Will it be you, if you are not shot first by a drunken narc? --END-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-48IA087-000632-B006-94http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-06-01.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084246 text/html 10950HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:42:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:29:04 GMTContent-length: 10734 NORML News - June 1, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. June 1, 1995 Deadline: The U.S. SentencingCommission Requests Public Comment June 16, 1995 will be the last day thatthe U.S. Sentencing Commission will accept public comment on twopossible sentencing guideline changes that are relevant tocannabis consumers charged under federal statutes. *Notethe new numbers that have been assigned to these proposedguideline amendments. Proposed Amendment #8 seeks to retroactively apply any guidelinechanges to individual cases which will lessen an individual'stime of incarceration, or in some cases, freeindividuals sentenced and incarcerated under the previousguidelines. NORML strongly supports the passage of proposedamendment #8 by the U.S. Sentencing Commission. Proposed Amendment #7 seeks to create a "safety valve"which will provide an exception to otherwise applicable statutorymandatory minimum sentences for certain qualified defendants convictedof specific drug offenses. NORML strongly supports thepassage of proposed amendment #7 by the U.S. SentencingCommission. [To give public comment, write to: U.S.Sentencing Commission, One Columbus Circle, NE, Suite 2-500,Washington, D.C. 20002-8002, Attn: Public Comment. Formore information on recent U.S. sentencing guideline amendmentproposals, please contact Julie Stewart, Families AgainstMandatory Minimums (FAMM), (202) 457-5790.] CA Senate Votes To Opt Out Of "Smoke AJoint, Lose Your License" May 30, Sacramento: By a vote of32-3, the State Senate approved a bill that would end California'sunpopular "Smoke A Joint, Lose Your License" law. The bill, SB 1198, would formally opt out of a federal mandaterequiring states to impose an automatic six-month driver's licensesuspension for any drug offense, regardless of whether it isdriving-related. SB 1198 now goes to the Assembly, which recently killed anopposing bill backed by Gov. Wilson to extend the state's"Smoke A Joint, Lose Your License" law. Underfederal law, California must either extend or formally opt out ofthe "Smoke A Joint...," or else lose some $100 millionin highway aid. A recent poll shows that California votersoppose "Smoke A Joint..." by 63% - 32%. [For more information on SB 1198, please contact Dale Gieringer,CA NORML, (415) 563-5858.] Orange County Register OpinesIn Favor Of Medical Marijuana May 25, The Orange County Registerhas once again favorably weighed in on the subject of medicinalmarijuana: "Medicine exists to heal and to relieve pain.... Unfortunately, government unreasonably restricts some substancesthat could help patients. One is marijuana, which greatlyreduces the suffering of those afflicted with such ailments asglaucoma, cancer, and AIDS." "Unfortunately, California law prohibits marijuana use inall cases, including even clear medical use byprescription. Assembly Bill 1529 would relieve the pain andsuffering of many people by allowing marijuana to be used under adoctor's supervision." "...otherwise law-abiding citizens suffering from cancer orsome other ailment, illegally obtain marijuana, and so becometargets for arrest and imprisonment.... Courts and policeshould be going after killers and rapists, not cancerpatients." "Morphine and other drugs, though banned in the market, areallowed as prescription medications to relieve pain. Whyshould marijuana be any different?" Gatewood Galbraith Runs A Strong Fourth InKY Gubernatorial Race May 26, Versailles, KY: "Thestakes are high. Freedom is the issue." Withthese words, Galbraith ended his 1995 bid for Governor. Former NORML board member and perennial gubernatorial candidateGatewood Galbraith, along with running-mate Jerry Hammond,finished fourth in the Democratic primary with a strong 9%showing. The Galbraith-Hammond campaign accomplished thisastonishing vote total with only a $20,000 campaign war chest. [For more information, interested parties may contact JerryHammond at (606) 873-9159/873-0955.] Kentucky Hemp Law Is ... The Law May 19, The Wolf County News (KY)reported: Makes no difference if you're a university researcher or a drugdealer, growing marijuana is illegal. State AttorneyGeneral Chris Gorman's ruling pretty much limits the efforts of astate task force examining uses of a drug-free strain of hemp toreading up on the available literature (sic). State PoliceCommissioner Jerry Lovitt had asked Gorman to grant an exceptionto the marijuana law for the state Department of Agriculture andsome universities to grow the weed for research purposes. Nothing doing: Gorman said, "We find no exception in Chapter218A that would allow the government to growmarijuana." A task force appointed by Gov. BreretonJones had hoped to experiment with growing a drug-free Europeanvariety of hemp as a possible replacement for tobacco as a cashcrop in Kentucky. Marijuana Activist On Trial For Birdseed InTexas A demonstration and press conference will be heldon Monday, June 5, at 1:00 PM outside the Smith CountyCourthouse in Tyler, Texas. Cannabis Action Network (CAN)activist Kevin Aplin will be going on trial for felony possessionof marijuana. The charges stem from a re-legalize cannabis rally held in Tylerback in September where Aplin was arrested for possessing aone-pound bag of legal, government sterilized hemp seed. The seed was part of an educational display on the environmentaland economic benefits of hemp. [For more information on the trial anddemonstration, please contact Kevin Aplin, Louisiana CAN, (504)861-2956 or his attorney, Gary Wainwright, (504) 822-3104.] Update: Jimmy Montgomery ...Cause And Effect June 1, Wheelchair-bound Jimmy Montgomerysuffered a bladder infection this week. This was brought onby the fact that three replacement urine bags, sent by hismother, have not been made available for him to use. WhileJimmy is receiving adequate treatment for the bladder infection,the same can not be said about the chronic infections on hislegs. For Jimmy, those infections remain a constant sourceof unnecessary and excessive pain and discomfort. [To advocate an end to Jimmy's prolonged andunjustified imprisonment, please contact both the offices of Gov.Frank Keating, (405) 521-2342 and the Oklahoma CityDaily Oklahoman, (405) 475-3311, ask for the Editor's desk.] Maine Legislature Rejects Medical MarijuanaBill June 1, USA Today reports that,"Both chambers of the state Legislatures have rejected measuresto relax restrictions on the use of marijuana for medicinalpurposes." Counting Down: The Tenth MillionMarijuana Arrest Will Occur In July. Will You Be The NextVictim Of A Bad Law? Will The Media Ever Report The RealAnd Discernible Numbers Related To Marijuana Prohibition,e.g., the number of arrests, the number of Americans behind bars,and the cost to taxpayers for enforcing the untenable publicpolicy of prohibition. --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-49IA087-000632-B006-121http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-05-24.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084301 text/html 10948HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:42:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:05 GMTContent-length: 10732 NORML News - May 24, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ Weekly Fax * Weekly Fax * Weekly Fax May 24, 1995 Jimmy Montgomery Now Suffering In SolitaryConfinement Medical Neglect Threatens Life May 24, Isolated in a cell with no wayeven to call for help, paraplegic Jimmy Montgomery endures thestench of his untreated infections, suffers the pain of having totear off soiled bandages without any salve or ointments, and runsthe risk of life-threatening kidney and bladder infections becauseguards cannot find the urine bag that his mother sent him. Meanwhile, Governor Keating's office claims to be doingeverything possible. Governor Keating may be reluctant to look closely at the facts ofthe Montgomery case. His office keeps telling callers thatMontgomery must have done something far worse than the trial recordsindicate, because they do not want to believe that good people ina small town, serving as jurors, could have done something soterrible. He may be reluctant to recognize that the hate propagandafostered by the prohibitionist ideology that he espouses couldresult in such a great injustice. Governor Keating shouldspend a few minutes reviewing the record and then go and visit Jimmy'sprison cell and see and smell the stench of his lesions. Then he might find the power and the courage to face theconsequences of hatred. The good people of Oklahoma havebeen the victims of a crime of unspeakable evil, but it isnecessary to say that we are not damned by the evil done to us,but rather by the evil done by us. "The world is a dangerous place to live --not because of the people who are evil but because of the peoplewho don't do anything about it." --Albert Einstein Have you called OK Gov. Keating today? If not, please do at (405)521-2342! San Francisco Chronicle Editorial SupportsMedicinal Marijuana May 23, The San Francisco Chronicleopined, "What a sense of justice and relief many AIDS,cancer, glaucoma and multiple sclerosis patients felt last yearwhen both houses of the state Legislature passed a bill allowingthem to use marijuana to ease their pain and nausea." But their victory was short-lived. Despite its legislativeapproval after substantive hearings, Gov. Wilson vetoed thebill. Let us hope that in this non-election year,compassion and good sense rule and that an identical measure byAssemblyman John Vasconcellos, D-San Jose, passes and, this time,is signed by Wilson." "The measure is narrowly drawn and would ... simply allowsuffering patients -- with a doctor's approval -- to possess orcultivate marijuana for personal use." The editorial concluded, "The patients' hopes were raised,then dashed, last year. A repeat of that cruel outcome isnot acceptable." [emphasis added -ed.] [For more information about the statewide 1996 medical marijuanainitiative underway in California, please contact Californiansfor Compassionate Use, Dennis Peron, (415) 675-9985.] Court Clears Way For NORML Medical MarijuanaLawsuit And Rally In Anaheim May 24, USA Today reports "Ajudge temporarily restrained the city [of Anaheim] from enforcinga law that closes its parks to convicted drug offenders [Yes,even marijuana convictions! -ed.]. It allows the NationalOrganization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws to rally at LaPalma Park Thursday." [For more information on the lawsuit and rally, please contacteither CA NORML, Dale Gieringer, (415) 563-5858 or LA NORML,(310) 652-8654.] SPECIAL APPEAL: Help MedicalMarijuana Patients In Washington State Earlier in the month, NORML reported thatSeattle's Green Cross Cannabis Buyer's Club were arrested. The patients and some of the principles involved in the club arenow facing criminal charges for aiding the sick and dying. Please consider sending a donation for their legal defenseas soon as possible. The cost of their legal defense couldtop $75,000! NORML National Legal Committee member Jeffrey Steinborne'slaw firm is handling the case. Send desperately neededcontributions to Green Cross Defense Fund, 800 5th Ave. #162,Seattle, WA 98408.] A Classic Example Of Permissible Hate SpeechWith A Recent Echo Congressional prohibitionists brought formerFirst Lady Nancy Reagan back to Washington in March to revive the"Just Say No" mantra. They did not ask her torepeat her 1988 statement: "If you are a drug user, you'rean accomplice to murder." (Page 5 of the Final Reportof THE WHITE HOUSE CONFERENCE FOR A DRUG FREE AMERICA.-June 1988) Perhaps this is just as well considering thatpage 6 of the report says "Each time we do not get outragedover senseless death and violence we are guilty." Thismight suggest that they are guilty for their indifference to thesuffering of Jimmy Montgomery and the recent law enforcementkillings of marijuana users in Wisconsin. These do not seemto be matters for concern -- much less -- outrage for anyone inWashington or the national media. Cause and Effect: Imprisoning Non-violentDrug Offenders Doubles Local Jail Populations In Just 10Years! In May, the Associated Press reported, "Thenumber of inmates in local jails across the nation reached arecord 490,442 last year... The rising number of drugoffenders was the biggest reason for the increase ... withmore than 105,800 of the 1993 jail inmates were charged orconvicted of drug crimes." African Americans have anincarceration rate nine times that of other races. Presently,in the U.S. there are an estimated 1.5 million individualsincarcerated. Drug Czar Brown Escalates Potent Pot Follies Claims 40 Fold Increase In THC Levels! May 21, In an interview with the DallasMorning News, Drug Czar Lee Brown was asked, "Why is itmore dangerous for a kid to be experimenting with drugs now thanwhen the baby boomers were in high school or college?" Brown responded, "The major illegal drug they're experimentingwith is marijuana. Marijuana is 40 times more potent todaythan was the case 10, 15, 20 years ago... I don't thinkthat young people know that. It is really not gettingcovered very well." In other recent statements Brown has claimed thatpotency has increased only 6 to 10 fold. He did not offerany explanation for this escalation, nor did he offer anyexplanation for why he is contradicting Alan Leshner, the head ofthe National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) who says that potencyis only 3 times higher than in the past. Brown also did notexplain why the only large scale testing of contraband marijuana,sponsored by NIDA, shows no increase in potency since the early1980's. As for it not being reported, the potent pot mythhas been repeated in almost every major publication inAmerica. It has become the single most accepted lie aboutmarijuana in the mainstream media. Recently, both NEWYORK magazine and syndicated columnist George Will haveclaimed that potency is 15 times higher than in the past. Ironically, the Dallas Morning News cut that one sentencefrom the Will column. NORML finds no valid evidence of any increasein average potency. COUNTING DOWN: THE TENMILLIONTH MARIJUANA ARREST WILL OCCUR IN JULY. WILLIT BE YOU? WILL LEE BROWN BE CLAIMING THAT POT POTENCY HAS INCREASED TEN MILLIONTIMES? WHICH NUMBER WILL THE MEDIA REPORT? --END-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-50IA087-000632-B006-147http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-05-18.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084314 text/html 10638HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:43:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:09 GMTContent-length: 10422 NORML News - May 18, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. May 18, 1995 JIMMY MONTGOMERYSTILL IN PRISON: CONDITION DETERIORATING, AS GOVERNOR'S OFFICE DOES "SPIN CONTROL" May 18, Oklahoma City, OK. Paraplegic Jimmy Montgomery remains in prison, and he is still notreceiving adequate medical care to properly treat his anti-bioticresistant infections. As a result, his life remains indanger. However, he is now receiving showers, a change ofclothes, clean bandages (from his mother), and is now able towash his clothes separately from the other prisoners. The office of Oklahoma Governor Frank Keating is telling callersthat they are doing everything possible to get Montgomeryreleased to house arrest and they are actually urging people tocall and complain to the prosecutor, Richard Dugger, who blockedhis release. Callers have also received various versions ofspin control, depending on whom they talked to. One callerwas told that Montgomery had been selling marijuana tochildren. Another was informed that since he was convictedby a jury, he must have done something much more serious thanwhat "the propaganda [NORML] is saying," but that thestate wanted him out of prison because he was costing them too muchmoney. A third caller was told that the Governor's staffcouldn't understand why this case was getting so much attention,because they had not read anything about the case in the local media. Montgomery will eventually be released, if he doesn'tdie first, and if you keep calling the governor's office. Your calls have clearly made the difference in the way he isbeing treated. The State of Oklahoma may eventually freehim to house arrest, but they will not free the people of Oklahomafrom the chains of a lifetime of hate propaganda. NORMLwould be interested in hearing any novel efforts at spin controlcallers may have encountered from the governor's office. [Please contact Governor Keating's office at(405) 521-2342 and Prosecutor Richard Dugger (at home) (405)225-3678.] ATLANTA MAYORS'PROHIBITIONIST SUMMIT A PROPAGANDA FAILURE! ENTERTAINMENTINDUSTRY LAUNCHES NEW "ANTI-LEGALIZATION" EFFORT May 15, Atlanta, GA. Prohibitionistsat a sparsely attended mayors conference were disappointed tofind organized opposition and minimal media coverage, which theyhad to share with anti-prohibitionists. Bob Keizer, theDutch Minister who heads the Department of Alcohol, Drug andTobacco Policy of the Dutch Ministry of Health joined a group ofprominent American anti-prohibitionists--including the formermayor of Hartford--to object to the misrepresentation of Europeandrug policies at a Press Conference on Monday, May 15th. The day before the summit, reform activists demonstrated againstthe conference from 1 to 4 PM. The conference, billed as "American Cities AgainstDrugs," was held at tax-payers expense and had promised thatattendees would "Hear from key European mayors about thedevastation Legalization is bringing to their cities." Instead, attendees heard the former mayor of Stockholm warnagainst flying KLM out of Amsterdam because the pilots may bestoned on marijuana. The conference was more notable for announcing the formation of anew prohibitionist propaganda effort by Hollywood known as theNational Drug Prevention League. This was founded by theEntertainment Industries Council (EIC), which is sponsored bysuch great moral leaders as Frank Sinatra, Aaron Spelling, andFred Silverman. Now the wonderful folks who brought us Reefer Madness, MaryJane, and other film classics are pushing a new music video,"Will you be there tomorrow?" The video purportsto present "the legalization issue [as seen] through theeyes of children." Perhaps they will also make othervideos giving us their view -- "as seen through the eyes ofchildren" -- of other complex issues such as health carereform, nuclear waste disposal, and flat rate versus progressivetaxation. "Will you be taxed tomorrow?" EIC says that it will be sponsoring an industry briefing sessionon drugs and violence for Orlando-based entertainment executivesin July and is now organizing the industry's "Drugs, Violenceand Youth, Truth or Tragedy Conference" in October. Ishypocrisy too complex a subject for a music video? NORML TO PRESENTLETTER TO DUTCH AMBASSADOR; JOINS INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT FOR DUTCH DRUG POLICY May 19, Washington, D.C. NORML has joinedan international coalition of anti-prohibitionists in voicing itssupport for Dutch drug policies-as they apply to marijuana. In a letter to the Dutch Ambassador, NORML saluted the Dutch fortheir cannabis policies. By making cannabis available inalmost 2,000 coffee shops around Holland, the Dutch have brokenthe connection between hard drugs and cannabis. Instead ofstudying the success of Dutch drug policies, American prohibitionistsare waging a propaganda campaign against our oldest and mostreliable ally, falsely claiming that peaceful Holland has becomea violent country as a result of its drug policies. [For more information on the successes of Dutchdrug policy, please contact Allen St. Pierre, NORML, (202)483-5500.] SLAIN MARIJUANAUSER'S FAMILY FILES WRONGFUL DEATH SUIT May 10, Beaver Dam, WI. According tothe Green Bay Press-Gazette, in response to the April 17shooting of their son, Scott Bryant, 29, by Dodge County sheriffsdetective Robert Neuman, parents Boyd and Shirley Bryant havefiled a wrongful death claim. Law enforcement's yield fromthe Bryant killing; A very small amount of marijuana [Accordingto NORML activists in WI, less than 1 gram of marijuana wasdiscovered!) along with two .22-caliber rifles and five pellet guns. Bryant was unarmed when he was killed. Beaver Dam lawyer Scott Rasmussen will be representing theBryants in their lawsuit on behalf of their dead son, his 8year-old boy (who was home at the time of the shooting), and hisfamily. Rasmussen told the Press Gazette, "Wewill be claiming that the shooting was both negligent and anintentional act. Both of those are questions for a jury todetermine." CALIFORNIA IS'BUZZING' WITH MEDICINAL MARIJUANA NEWS May 17, Sacramento, CA. Despite thelikelihood of passing legislation (AB 1529) that will enable sickand dying medical patients to have legal access to marijuana,Governor Wilson is making noises that he will veto the bill. Anticipating the Governor's appalling position on this issue,California NORML and Californians for Compassionate Use (CCU) aresponsoring a medical marijuana initiative for the 1996ballot. On May 15, CA NORML and CCU received a significantendorsement for their initiative strategy when The San JoseMercury-News editorialized, "A ballot measure may be the onlyhope for a rational marijuana policy." [emphasis added-ed.] [For more information on California's 1996Medical Marijuana Initiative, please contact CCU, (415)675-9985.] Counting Down: The 10Millionth Marijuana Arrest Will Take Place In July. Will you be the one? --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-51IA087-000632-B006-169http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-05-11.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084325 text/html 10410HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:43:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:14 GMTContent-length: 10194 NORML News - May 11, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. May 11, 1995 In Oklahoma Franz Kafka Is Doing Very Well But Jimmy Montgomery Is Still Literally Rotting In Prison May 11, Paraplegic Jimmy Montgomery isstill suffering from a fever caused by the failure to properlytreat his anti-biotic resistant infections. His lesions arestill oozing. He still is unable to shower. He stillhas no sterile bandages. Vindictive prosecutors,incompetent prison officials, insensitive bureaucrats andindifferent politicians keep his life in danger. All thisfor less than two ounces of pot! Only the calls to thegovernor's office by readers of these reports can save him. Pleasedo not give up. Jimmy has not. [Please contact Oklahoma Governor, Frank Keating,(405) 521-2342.] Permissible Murders Part 2: Wisconsin PoliceKill Another Marijuana Suspect 15 Year Old Shot By Narc Who Had Been Drinking May 9, Janesville, WI. Following thefatal shooting of a marijuana suspect in Beaver Dam, Wisconsinlast week, 15 year-old Leon Kelly was shot to death by anundercover officer who had been drinking. Kelly hadmarijuana in his blood, according to police reports. Shooting people is not considered the best way to test formarijuana use, but a drug-free America comes first. There isstill no media coverage of these deaths, although most majorAmerican newspapers have reported on the murder of a NorthAfrican immigrant in Paris. Permissible Murders Happen Because OfPermissible Hate Speech September 6, 1990, The Los AngelesTimes reported on the testimony before a U.S. Senate subcommitteeof then Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl Gates in which Gates saidthat casual drug users "ought to be taken out andshot." Gates made clear that he was talking aboutmarijuana smokers, "who blast (sic, apparently one ofGates's favorite words) some pot on a casual basis." Gateswent on to say that even casual use is "treason." If he had advocated genocide against any group other thanmarijuana users, he would have been immediately removed fromoffice and Los Angeles might have been spared the terrible riotsthat followed the acquittal of the police accused of beatingRodney King. Gates was finally fired for incompetence afterthat tragedy. 1990, Appearing on the television show, LarryKing Live, then drug czar William Bennett said beheading drugdealers would be "morally plausible". (He added,"There's no moral problem there. I used to teachethics---trust me.") April 7, 1995, Boston Heraldconservative columnist Don Feder calls for "the Dresdenoption" to deal with illegal drugs. The reference tothe fire bombing of Dresden should be frightening to the citizensof Los Angeles. As mentioned above, Chief Gates broughtthem their own little Dresden. Hatred kills not just thehated, but the haters and their silent allies. 1991 National Guard Association Conference-- Lt. General John B. Conaway, Chief, National Guard Bureausays, "Our mission as America's National Guard in this war(on drugs) is clear: make America drug-free in as short a time aspossible using any means necessary, no matter what thecost." The people who did not take Gatesseriously also have not taken Conaway seriously. May 28, 1994, Thomas Constantine, the headof the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), told the WashingtonTimes that the "non-violent drug offender ... is a rarespecies." He went on to say that illicit drug users"contribute nothing but evil." Dutch Health Minister Joins Group ObjectingTo Atlanta Mayors' Prohibitionist Conference Atlanta, Bob Keizer, who heads theDepartment of Alcohol, Drug and Tobacco Policy of the DutchMinistry of Health is scheduled to join a group of prominentAmerican anti-prohibitionists, including the former mayor ofHartford, to object to the misrepresentation of European drug policiesat an Atlanta conference of American mayors. There willbe a Press Conference on Monday May 15th at 12:30 PM at the HyattRegency Hotel Atlanta. The Mayors' conference is being sponsored by theNational Institute on Drug Abuse, and other prohibitionistpropaganda agencies, such as the Partnership for a Drug-Free(sic) America. (The Partnership is headed by the former CEOof Johnson and Johnson and takes money from the alcohol, tobaccoand pharmaceutical industries.) On Sunday, May 14,reform activists will demonstrate against the conference from 1-4PM. The conference, billed as "American CitiesAgainst Drugs," is being held at tax-payers' expense. The conference brochure promises that attendees can "Hearfrom key European mayors about the devastation legalization isbringing to their cities." However, there are nocities in Europe in which drugs are legal, so it is difficultto understand how this could be a source of"devastation." Only in the Netherlands will one find marijuanabeing sold with the approval of the government, although eventhat is technically illegal. There are no serious socialproblems being observed as a result of this policy, which issupported by all of the mayors of major Dutch cities. Lastyear the Dutch government complained about anti-Dutch propagandabeing put out by the DEA. NORML is proud to have broughtthese lies to the attention of America's oldest ally. International Demonstrations SupportingDutch Policy Scheduled For May 19 May 19th, a coalition of Europeananti-prohibitionists are scheduling a series of demonstrations inmajor European cities in support of Dutch drug policies. NORML has joined in sponsoring their efforts. Next week,NORML will issue a statement of appreciation for the Dutch cannabispolicies. [To receive more information on the AtlantaMayor's Conference and the counter-balancing press conferencesand rallies by reformers, please contact the following; GeorgiaNORML, Theresa Yarbrough, (706) 235-3475 or James Bell, (404)739-4765, The Lindesmith Center, Dan Weiler, (212) 887-0604.] Legal Defense Fund Being Organized ForWashington State Medical Marijuana Activists As reported earlier this week, medical marijuanaactivists in Washington State have been charged with cultivationof marijuana which they were supplying to seriously ill anddisabled people in their area. They are being defended byNORML Legal Committee member Jeffrey Steinborn. [Persons interested in contributing to their legal defense areurged to contact the Green Cross Defense Fund, 30th Fl. SmithTower, 509 2nd Ave., Seattle, WA, 98104 or call (206)780-0630.] Counting Down:The 10 millionth marijuana arrest will take place in July! Stay tuned for more details!! --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-52IA087-000632-B006-192http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-05-08.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084339 text/html 5423HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:43:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:18 GMTContent-length: 5208 NORML News - May 8, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ Emergency Bulletin * Emergency Bulletin* Emergency Bulletin * Emergency Bulletin May 8, 1995 VINDICTIVE PROSECUTOR BLOCKSJIMMY MONTGOMERY'S RELEASE WITH LAST MINUTE OBJECTION May 8, Oklahoma City, OK. Therelease of paraplegic Jimmy Montgomery from life threateningimprisonment was blocked at the last minute by an objection filedby Richard Dugger, the prosecutor for the five county area whereMontgomery resides. After weeks of efforts by OklahomaNORML and numerous calls to Governor Frank Keating's office byconcerned citizens from around the country, Jimmy was finallyscheduled for release to house arrest this week. It was originallyplanned that Montgomery would be hospitalized for the treatmentof anti-biotic resistant infections in his lower body. Nowhe will remain confined to the prison where he does not even haveaccess to a shower or adequate clean bandages. He can onlybathe in the whirlpool shared by other prisoner patients,exposing them to his infections and in turn, exposing him totheirs. Last week President Clinton said that it is "wrong to killpeople ... who are minding their own business." He didnot say whether it is also wrong to kill people by locking themup and denying them proper medical care, but if action is nottaken quickly, Montgomery will not survive. [Please call Oklahoma Governor Frank Keating at (405)521-2342. Prosecutor Richard Dugger's home number is (405)225-3678.] (Meanwhile) Washington StateArrests Medical Marijuana Patients And Activists Who ProvideMarijuana To Sick, Dying And Disabled Persons May 5, Seattle, WA. A federallyfunded Washington State "narcotics" task force(WestNet) arrested medical marijuana activists Joanna McKee andRonald Miller of Bainbridge Island, WA. McKee, is aco-founder of the Green Cross Patient Co-op which promotes theuse of marijuana for medical purposes. Police valued themarijuana seized at $300,000, but knowledgeable observersconsider this a gross exaggeration. A spokesman for thetask force said that they consider McKee "just anothermarijuana grower." McKee depends on a cane and a wheelchair to getaround and has spoken openly about providing marijuana for peoplewith AIDS, cancer, and various debilitating injuries. Lastweek she told Tacoma News Tribune columnist C. R. Roberts,"There are a lot of people whose lives are depending onthis." Roberts wrote a column called "Marijuanamay be illegal, but barring its medical use is the realcrime." His views reflect those of the majority of theAmerican people, but not those of the Clinton Administrationwhich is blocking research on the medical use of cannabis. PresidentClinton is now celebrating the 50th anniversary of the defeat ofthe last regime to actively persecute the sick and disabled as amatter of policy. The task force is just followingorders. [McKee and Miller are being defended by SeattleNORML Legal Committee member Jeffrey Steinborn. TheGovernor of Washington, Mike Lowry, can reached at (360)753-6780.] --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-53IA087-000632-B006-215http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-05-04.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084350 text/html 11695HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:43:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:22 GMTContent-length: 11479 NORML News - May 4, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. May 4, 1995 PERMISSIBLE MURDERS IN AMERICA: ANOTHERSUSPECTED MARIJUANA USER KILLED IN HIS HOME BY WISCONSIN POLICE April 28, Beaver Dam, Wisconsin, Scott W.Bryant, 29, was shot dead by police as they charged through thedoor of his home with a "no-knock" warrant. Bryant was unarmed and did not resist the police in anyway. His seven year old son, who was sleeping in the nextroom, had to watch his father die while an ambulance took 35minutes to respond. Police later reported finding less than3 grams of marijuana (one tenth of an ounce, enough for 2 or 3"cigarettes.") This fatal shooting of a suspected marijuana user is just thelatest in a series of killings that have occurred over the lastseveral years. These incidents have generally been ignoredbecause the victims are accused of belonging to the one group inAmerica -- suspected marijuana users -- whom it isapparently permissible to murder. These victims range fromthe multimillionaire Donald Scott, shot dead in 1992 at hisestate near Malibu, to the disabled veteran Gary Shepard in thehills of Kentucky in 1994. In all three cases the childrenof the victims were present. Gary Shepard was killed by asmall army as he stood next to his wife, who was grazed by abullet, and his blood splattered on his four year old son. None of these victims were in any way a threat to anyone. DonaldScott did not even have any marijuana. Media attention to these killings has ranged from slow tonon-existent. Even the Donald Scott case, which seemed tohave all the ingredients of a major news story -- money, intrigueand beautiful scenery -- was not covered for more than 90 daysafter the killing and was then quickly forgotten. Thepolice involved were never disciplined. Gary Shepard was apoor man, a disabled Vietnam veteran who was crippled in Nixon'swar in Asia and killed in Clinton's war in America. Hiskillers are still on the job. It is unlikely that anyaction will be taken against whomever shot Bryant. The media are looking for an action story with good pictures, sothey find a bunch of "good ol' boys" playing soldierwho say things ranging from the bizarre to the basic. Somehow it is considered dangerous rhetoric -- and therefore news-- when militia leaders say that they will defendthemselves. However, NORML has been trying to get the mediato look into the role of the National Guard in marijuanaprohibition for over a year and a half. Our report quotesthe head of the National Guard saying that their job is to makeAmerica drug-free "using any means necessary, nomatter what the cost." (emphasis added) Meanwhile, as the militias and their conservative allies focus onthe shooting of the wife and son of the heavily armed whitesupremacist Randy Weaver in Idaho, they ignore the shootings of citizenswho have been accused of having marijuana -- even when they didnot have any pot at all. Of course, indifference to thekilling of marijuana users is precisely what the mass media havein common with the militias and politicians. While themilitias prepare for an invasion by the UN, the media are runningaround the country looking for heavily armed groups that are athreat to the rule of law. Both are missing the realdanger: the involvement of the U. S. military in domestic law enforcementand the extension of unlimited power to the police under theguise of the "War on Drugs." President Clinton has denounced the supposedly inflammatoryrhetoric of his critics, but he ignored the statement last yearby Thomas Constantine, the Director of the Drug Enforcement Administration,that the "non-violent drug user is a myth." Thisis a blood libel that leads directly to the type of shooting thatoccurred in Wisconsin. Former Bush Administration drugpolicy advisor John Walters even mocked the suffering ofimprisoned Oklahoma paraplegic Jimmy Montgomery when his case wasreported by ABC television, saying, "Apparently ABC couldn'tfind a grandmother on death row for carrying a roach clip in herpurse." Apparently, the minor technicality of a trialhas been by-passed, execution first, verdict later. Couldall of this be a clue as to why the people no longer trust theirgovernment and the media? [For further information on the Scott Bryant case, call WisconsinGovernor, Tommy Thompson, at (608) 266-1212.] GOOD NEWS! JIMMY MONTGOMERY TO BE FREED ONTUESDAY! Thanks to the calls by the readers of theseweekly reports, Jimmy Montgomery is expected to be released to"house arrest" next Tuesday. NORML will issue aspecial bulletin as soon as he is free. NORML salutesGovernor Frank Keating, Michael Pearson of Oklahoma NORML, andall who have worked to end this injustice. NORML And ACLU Attack Legitimacy Of AnaheimLaw April 28, Anaheim, In an well publicizedpress conference, NORML and the Southern California AmericanCivil Liberties Union jointly announced that they have filed acivil rights lawsuit in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles toactively challenge Anaheim Ordinance No. 5396. The controversial ordinance adds Sections 13.08.100.010 and13.08.100.020 to the Anaheim Municipal Code and prohibits certainprior drug offenders from the right to use public parks for lawfulpurposes. This discriminatory legislation singles outspecific individuals from the general public based solely upontheir "criminal" history and forbids them fromparticipating in the many recreational, aesthetic, cultural,associational, and other law abiding activities that generallytake place in city parks. Moreover, the restrictive Anaheimordinance remains in effect for three years after thesentence has been served. Consequently, an individualreleased from prison for marijuana cultivation in 1995 would beeffectively denied access from entering and/or participating inany function taking place at a public park until the year1998. Persons convicted of violating the ordinance face amaximum six months in jail and a $1,000 fine. Both NORML and the ACLU charge that the Anaheim ordinance isunconstitutional. Specifically, the lawsuit, NationalOrganization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML) v. City ofAnaheim (95-2813 AAH), asserts that the legislation directlyviolates NORML's right to free speech and assembly by precludingmembers and speakers with prior drug convictions from bothattending and participating in a public rally for medicalmarijuana that is scheduled to take place in La Palma Park. The May 25th rally is being sponsored by NORML. The lawsuit contendsthat, "The absence of these NORML members from the rallywill, [in turn,] deprive the NORML members who can attend oftheir right to associate with and exchange views with the absentmembers." NORML maintains that the Anaheim ordinance will greatly diminishthe force of NORML's message by disallowing several speakers fromvoicing their opinions on the need for medical marijuana. In addition, because the enforcement of Sections 13.08.100.010and 13.08.100.020 of the Anaheim Municipal code threatens toexclude citizens who are non-members as well, NORML charges thatthe ordinance "interferes with NORML's ability to recruitnew members and to reach the full audience it would otherwise beable to reach." The joint lawsuit also alleges that the Anaheim ordinanceviolates the plaintiffs' right to petition the government forredress of grievances and the right to due process. One of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit is activist and medicalmarijuana patient, Craig McClain. Recently convicted forgrowing five cannabis plants at his home, McClain is one ofNORML's scheduled speakers who is forbidden from entering LaPalma Park by the ordinance. In effect, "the Anaheim ordinance makes [McClain's] speech acrime," remarked ACLU Staff Attorney Mark Silverstein. "However well-intentioned, the...ordinance offers a falsehope about combating serious crime. Measures like this letpoliticians off the hook, substituting phony rhetoric formeasures that work." The ACLU and NORML are asking for a preliminary injunction sothat McClain and other plaintiffs can legally attend the rally onMay 25. [For more information regarding the lawsuit, please contact MarkSilverstein at Southern Cal. ACLU (213) 977-9500 x264 or AllenSt. Pierre at NORML (202)483-5500.] COUNTING DOWN: THE TENMILLIONTH MARIJUANA ARREST SINCE 1965 WILL TAKE PLACE IN JULY OFTHIS YEAR! MORE INFORMATION WILL BE AVAILABLE OVER THE NEXTFEW WEEKS. --END-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-54IA087-000632-B006-244http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-04-27.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084401 text/html 10519HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:43:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:27 GMTContent-length: 10303 NORML News - April 27, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. April 27, 1995 NORML REITERATES ITSCOMMITMENT TO NON-VIOLENCE Following the tragedy in Oklahoma City, it hasbeen suggested that groups that are critical of governmentpolicies are somehow encouraging violence. Since itsinception, NORML has had a commitment to non-violence in thetradition of Gandhi and Martin Luther King, Jr. NORML's principalmessage is that marijuana prohibition is unjustified violenceagainst peaceful marijuana users. There have been almostten million marijuana arrests since 1965. Each of theseinvolves coercion and the threat of state violence. Richard Cowan, the National Director of NORMLsaid, "Our message to the government, like that of the'velvet revolution' that peacefully overthrew Communism inCzechoslovakia, is that they need not fear us because we are notlike them. We want to end violence, not spread it." NORML does not see the proposed anti-terroristlegislation as a significant new threat to marijuana users, whohave almost no Constitutional rights remaining. It is thenarcocracy, not some "new world order," that is thereal and present danger to our liberty. For sometime NORMLhas been trying to get the media interested in the role of theNational Guard in domestic law enforcement, but to noavail. As one witty observer complained, "Why is itthat Americans are paranoid about the wrong things?" The problem with paranoia is that when you are fighting imaginarydevils you cannot see the very real evils. Affirmative Medical Necessity Defense BillBeing Considered In California Sacramento, CA, On Tuesday, May 2nd, theAssembly Committee on Public Safety will be voting on proposedbill A.B. 1529. Supported by John Vasconcellos (D-SanJose), this legislation would exempt medical marijuana patientsfrom prosecution for possession or cultivation of marijuana givena physician's prescription. [For more information on A.B. 1529, pleasecontact Dale Gieringer, California NORML, (415) 563-5858.] NIDA To Hold A National Conference OnMarijuana The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) willhold a National Conference entitled Marijuana Use: Prevention,Treatment, and Research on July 19 & 20,1995. The Conference will be held at the Crystal CityMariott Hotel, 1999 Jefferson Davis Highway, Arlington, VA 22202. The stated purpose of the Conference is to, "Increase publicunderstanding about the consequences of marijuana use by dispellingmyths and providing science-based information on the drug."[emphasis added -ed.] [For Conference Schedule, Registration Form, andHotel Information please contact: Marijuana Conference LogisticsCoordinator, National Marijuana Conference (CRP1O4), CircleSolutions, Inc., 8201 Greensboro Drive, Suite 600, McLean, VA22102; Fax: (703) 821-2098; Voice mail box (703) 902-1440;Internet address: CIRCONF@DGS.DGSYS.COM] Major Increase In British Teens UsingCannabis April 24, Reuters reports that,"The number of 15 and 16-year-old British boys who have smokedcannabis has tripled in the past three years and one third nowsay they have used the illegal drug." [thesefigures are the result of a recent poll conducted by ExeterUniversity for the BBC -ed.] The survey found that 32.9percent of boys aged 15 and 16 and 27.3 percent of girls admittedhaving smoked cannabis in 1994. This is compared to 11.3 percent of boys and 8.9 percent of girlsin 1991, according to Reuters. (Conveniently) The BBCAirs A Rabid Anti-Marijuana "Documentary" April 24, London, UK, The traditionallyrespected, high profile documentary program Panorama presentedsome of the most extreme anti-cannabis propaganda that the UKpublic has ever seen. The majority of the of the programwas filmed in the USA focused on four main health risksassociated with the use of cannabis, namely: addiction, birthproblems, mental deterioration and cancer. Various parts of the program were split up with excerpts ofgroups of teenage age school children suggesting that cannabis:"isn't all that bad;" "it's just a bit offun;" and "it could be bad if you smoke it withtobacco" as the only defense against severalprofessors who were damning cannabis to hell. The Legalize Cannabis Campaign (LCC) is strongly contesting thecontent and obvious bias of the program. It appears thatthis program has greatly raised the stakes in the UK's ongoingpublic debate about how or if the cannabis laws need to bemodified. [For further information on the BBC program Panorama:"High Risk" or on the Legalize Cannabis Campaign,please contact David Colbourne or Rob Christopher, BM Box 2455, LondonWC1N 3XX, (from USA) 011-44-1-71-739-9155 (p) /011-44-1-739-8522(f)] Surprising Police Views Of The "DrugWar" April 9, A San Francisco Examinereditorial reported on a survey of nearly 500 police chiefs, policeofficers, district attorneys, public defenders, judges, andStanford students, which examined their attitudes toward"drug warring". The survey was conducted by Hoover Institute research fellowJoseph D. McNamara, former police chief of San Jose. The Examinereditorial reports that the survey "found that 95 percent of thepolice officers believed the U.S. was losing the war on drugs and98 percent thought drug abuse was not primarily a policeproblem. Just over 90 percent of the cops said increased preventionand treatment could control drugs more effectively. Morethan 30 percent of the cops said that legalization ordecriminalization would lead to or cause a decrease in drug useor else not affect it. A majority of all those surveyed said the answer was not moremilitary intervention, prisons, police or prosecutors." [For a copy of the Hoover Institute's survey of law enforcementofficials, please contact research fellow Joseph McNamara, HooverInstitute, Stanford, CA 94305-6011.] Jimmy Montgomery: The Importance OfPublicity April 27, In the past week, due in part topublicity being monopolized by the terrible bombing in Oklahoma,prison officials have resumed neglecting treatment of JimMontgomery. In the entire time he has been in prison, hehas not had a fresh change of clothing. He's still in theclothes that he wore when he entered the prison---nearly threeweeks ago. He has also been denied the ability to shower. Worst of all, he has been put back on oral anti-biotics ratherthan injected anti-biotics (which greatly upsets Jimmy'sdigestive track and is not effective in treating the chronicinfections of his lower body). [To help secure Jimmy Montgomery's release from this cruelimprisonment, please contact the Governor of Oklahoma, FrankKeating, (405) 521-2342. OK NORML can be reached by contactingMichael Pearson, (405) 840-HEMP.] --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-55IA087-000632-B007-9http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-04-20.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084412 text/html 10452HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:44:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:33 GMTContent-length: 10236 NORML News - April 20, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. April 20, 1995 Baltimore Sun's Front PageAfflicted By "Reefer Madness" DEA Admits Shifting Agents From Cocaine To Marijuana Hunt April 14, The Baltimore Sun in alengthy headline story, "Authorities hit the marijuanatrail, Police see resurgence of '60s drug" pushed most ofthe DEA's most successful propaganda lines. The Sun,once the paper of H.L. Mencken, begins by giving the impressionthat marijuana law enforcement has flagged during recentyears. Actually, the number of arrests has been increasing andthe 10 millionth marijuana arrest since 1965 will soon takeplace. The article by Marcia Myers also parrots the DEA line thatmarijuana is "3 to 5 times stronger than it was 20 yearsago," although even the head of the National Institute onDrug Abuse claims only a 3-fold increase and there is littleevidence to support any actual increase. The head of Maryland'smarijuana eradication program is quoted as saying that growers"have been able to cultivate a crop that will literallyknock your socks off." In addition to citing this purported epidemic in barefootedness,the article says that what it calls "marijuana related"emergency room admissions have tripled in the last fouryears. Actually, these numbers represent only emergencyroom "mentions" of marijuana, and do not indicate that marijuanawas the cause of the visit. Had the reporter bothered tocheck with the primary source on this data, she would havelearned that approximately 80% of such "mentions"involve people who are actually having problems with other drugs,but also "mention" having used marijuana. The article did break new ground in two areas: 1.) Itactually reported that forfeiture encourages police to work onmarijuana cases since the police agencies get to keep theproperty they seize. 2.) It also revealed that theBaltimore office of the DEA has shifted agents away from cocainecases to go after marijuana. They call this a "morebalanced approach." This approach would be more"balanced" only if one thinks that marijuana is somehowas much a problem as cocaine, which this article implies. Perhaps in the future The Sun will take a "morebalanced approach" to journalism and include a few morefacts with its ration of DEA propaganda. Hair Testing For Marijuana CalledUnreliable, But Proceeds Anyway April 7, In a copyrighted story by C.Eugene Emery, The Providence Journal reported that eventhough the developer of the new hair test for drugs acknowledgesthat the test is not a reliable indicator of marijuana use, theyare testing for it anyway. The test, marketed by Psychemedics of Cambridge, Mass. isdesigned to detect trace residues of illicit drugs that may havebeen used over the last several months. One advantage ofhair testing over urine testing is that cocaine and heroin arenot detectable in urine after a day or two, while marijuanametabolites can be detected for weeks. The urine testinghas the effect of encouraging the use of cocaine and other harddrugs over marijuana. Urine testing is also consideredrelatively easy to beat. In the Providence Journal story J. Michael Walsh of theNational Institute for Standards and Technology and formerexecutive director of President Reagan's Drug Advisory Councilwas very critical of the reliability of hair testing in general,but especially when used for detecting marijuana. Walshtold the Providence Journal (which uses the hair test)that, "It is just inappropriate to deny employment or takeadverse action against an employee on the basis of such atest." [For more information on hair follicle testing, contact Allen St.Pierre at NORML, (202)483-5500.] National Review Reports OnJimmy Montgomery; Paraplegic Now Receiving Better Treatment;Hopeful Of Release Soon. In an editorial in its May 1 issue,William F. Buckley, Jr.'s National Review commented on the caseof Jimmy Montgomery, a paraplegic sentenced to 10 years inOklahoma prisons for less than 2 ounces of marijuana. NRnoted that former deputy drug czar John P. Walters criticized ABC Newsfor reporting on the Montgomery case. Walters showed noconcern for Montgomery but rather complained, "ApparentlyABC couldn't find a grandmother on death row for carrying a roachclip..." NR observes that "something is seriouslywrong with a drug policy that condones such treatment -- a pointthat the drug warriors tacitly acknowledge by changing thesubject." In the meantime, Montgomery is now receiving proper medical careand has been moved to another prison facility. It is hopedthat this move is in preparation for his being released to"house arrest." Michael Pearson of Oklahoma NORMLreports that the numerous calls received by the Oklahomagovernor's office helped save Jimmy's life. NORMLexpresses its gratitude to all who called. NORMLalso expresses its sympathy to the citizens of Oklahoma City forthe tragic deaths in the Federal Building bombing. Huntingdown these cowardly murderers is the proper use for lawenforcement. Prohibitionists React Hysterically To ABCNews Program Critical Of Drug Prohibition And Condemn "DrugLegalization In Europe" The complaints of John Walters about ABC'sreporting on the Jimmy Montgomery case were in a WashingtonTimes op-ed article published the day before the ABC programactually ran. Walters also continued the prohibitionistpractice of claiming that "drug legalization in Europe"has been a failure. He was later joined in the chorus by A.M. Rosenthal, former managing editor of The New York Times,who typically cited Zurich's Needle Park as an example of thefailure of "drug legalization." None of themoffered any analysis of the Dutch policy of tolerating cannabis salein "coffee shops." Instead they tried to paintHolland as a violent crime-ridden country. Long Island Student Suspended Just ForWanting To Write A Paper On The Economics Of Hemp April 19, A high school student from LongIsland (NY) called NORML's national office to report that she wassuspended from school briefly for having indicated that she wasgoing to write her term paper on the economics of hemp. Herprincipal relented when she mentioned something about the FirstAmendment ... which was also written on hemp (paper). Atlantic Monthly Work OnMarijuana Prohibition Wins Prestigious "National Magazine Award." The Atlantic Monthly's two part article (August/September,1994) on marijuana prohibition by Eric Schlosser won theNational Magazine Award reporting prize. Schlosser wroteabout the extremely high sentences given to people convicted ofmarijuana trafficking offenses in contrast to lesser penaltiesgiven to people convicted of violent offenses. NORMLcongratulates Schlosser and The Atlantic. --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-56IA087-000632-B007-32http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-04-13.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084422 text/html 11916HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:44:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:37 GMTContent-length: 11700 NORML News - April 13, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. April 13, 1995 HUNDREDS PROTEST AGAINST DRUG ENFORCEMENTADMINISTRATION'S HARASSMENT OF SICK AND DYING AT SAN FRANCISCOCANNABIS BUYERS CLUB AGENTS FOLLOW AND VIDEO TAPE PATIENTS AS THEY LEAVE CLUB PREPARING A BUST? April 11 - Over 500 citizens demonstratedpeacefully in front of the Federal Building in San Franciscoagainst the harassment by DEA agents of patients leaving thenations largest Cannabis Buyers Club. Agents of the DrugEnforcement Administration conspicuously followed and video tapedpersons leaving the Club. The Club was originally foundedto provide people with AIDS access to cannabis to overcome thenausea and loss of appetite associated with the disease and the medicationsgiven for it. The Club now openly provides cannabis to over4,000 sick, dying, and disabled Americans with a wide range ofmedical problems. Patients must bring letters from their doctorssaying that no legally available medications help them. It is believed that the DEA's actions may be in preparation forshutting down the club, which operates in open defiance of theDEA's suppression of any use or study of cannabis for medical purposes. A hearing will be held later this month by the San FranciscoBoard of Supervisors to determine if the city should declare amedical emergency to try to forestall any such action by the DEA. Nothing that the city could do would be legally binding on theDEA, but it is thought that the DEA might be inhibited by thefear of adverse publicity. So far the national media havelargely failed to report on the persecution of those who usecannabis medically, but large scale demonstrations in SanFrancisco might draw unwanted attention to this policy. This is a risk that the DEA may have to take to maintain itsreputation for utter ruthlessness and avoid clear proof of theneed for medical cannabis. When Richard Cowan, NORML's National Director, visited the clubin February a staffer told him that one of the first things theyhave to do with their clients is help them get over their fear of theirgovernment. Even in liberal San Francisco, sick, dying, anddisabled Americans have to live in fear of the Federalgovernment. This harassment of people leaving the Club mayalso be intended to reinstall such a fear. The Club will beopen on Good Friday. Will the DEA crucify the helpless? [For further information contact Americans for Compassionate Use,Dennis Peron, at (415) 864-1961.] MEANWHILE IN OKLAHOMA, PARAPLEGIC JIMMYMONTGOMERY IS HAND-CUFFED TO A PRISON BED; LIFE IN DANGER; DENIEDPROPER MEDICAL TREATMENT; NO ACCESS TO SHOWER April 13 - Lexington, OK, Jimmy Montgomery, aparaplegic who was featured on a recent ABC News Special aboutthe excesses and failures of the Drug War, spends his dayshandcuffed to a prison bed in Oklahoma without adequate medicaltreatment for the anti-biotic resistant infections in his lowerbody. He is no longer in a cell with 40 other prisoners,but he has no access to a shower, even though the prison in whichhe is confined received Federal funds two years ago for buildingsuch a facility for the disabled. Friends believe that Montgomery, who is serving 10 years for lessthan 2 ounces of marijuana, may die within days if he is notmoved to University Hospital in Oklahoma City. There hecould be properly treated and could be visited by his mother whois unable to visit him in prison. What a mockery it wouldbe if he died over Easter weekend while politicians, bureaucratsand prison guards celebrate their "salvation." Jesus wept. [For more information contact Mike Pearson at Oklahoma NORML at(405) 840-HEMP or Governor Frank Keating at (405) 521-2342.] Representative Solomon Introduces A Bill ToDeny Tax-Exempt Status to Organizations "WhichPromote The Legalization Of Certain Drugs." April 6 - Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon,(R. NY) chairman of the powerful House Rules Committee hasintroduced a bill (H.R. 1453) to deny tax-exempt status toorganizations such as NORML and the Cato Institute, the widelyrespected libertarian think tank, that "advocate the legalizationof certain drugs." Previously, Rep. Solomon has alsointroduced legislation to prohibit the expenditure of governmentfunds to study alternatives to drug prohibition. Representative Solomon's fear of truth is well founded. Hecertainly must know that any such study would result in acondemnation of marijuana prohibition, as have all other largescale studies conducted over the last hundred years. Lastyear on the floor of Congress Mr. Solomon called NORML"wacky but dangerous." [U.S. Rep. Gerald B.H. Solomon can reached for comment at (202)225-5614.] U.S. Sentencing Commission Accepts NORML'sRecommendations To Reform Federal Sentencing Guidelines ForMarijuana April 10 - Washington, D.C. -- The U.S.Sentencing Commission announced it's approval of a proposedamendment (#37) to federal sentencing guidelines pertaining tothe government's assigned weight of marijuana produced per plant. Since the late 1980's, the federal guidelines for domesticallygrown marijuana offenses have not been based on the actual weightof the plants, but rather on an arbitrarily assigned weight equivalent. Under the current guidelines, 49 plants or fewer are consideredto weigh 100 grams each, but 50 or more plants are considered toweigh 1,000 grams each. The Commission was persuaded by representatives from NORML, TheDrug Policy Foundation, Families Against Mandatory Minimums(FAMM) and the Cato Institute who testified that presentguidelines have created a "sentencing cliff" in whichpersons convicted of cultivating 50 plants must be incarceratedup to four times longer than an individual convicted ofcultivating 49 plants. Further, a change in the guidelines helps to rectify the"home cultivation/bulk possession" discrepancy. Forexample: an individual convicted of cultivating marijuanamust serve the same five year sentence as someone who possessed99 kilograms (218 pounds) of 'packaged' marijuana, despite thefact that the plants would have produced less than 10 kilograms(22 pounds) of usable marijuana. The U.S. Sentencing Commission voted 7-0 toapprove a 100 gram per plant ratio for all plants, regardlessof the number involved. Unless Congress intervenes, theSentencing Commission's recommendations will become law onNovember 1, 1995. NORML salutes the tireless efforts of FAMM for its great workon this issue! [For further information on the U.S. Sentencing Commission'srecommendations please contact the commission at (202) 273-4590or Julie Stewart of Families Against Mandatory Minimums (FAMM) at(202)457-5790.] Iowa Senate RemovesMandatory Minimum Sentences For Drug Offenders April 12 - The Des Moines Registerreported that the Iowa Senate "in an effort to clear out prisonspace for the most serious criminals [passed a bill] that wouldwaive the mandatory minimum sentence now on the books for drugoffenders if they didn't use a firearm or commit an assault inconnection with the crime." Iowa NORML state coordinator Carl Olsen believes the governorwill sign the bill into law. [For more information on this recent development, contact IowaNORML, Carl Olsen, at (515) 262-6057 or iowanorml@commonlink.com.] Orwell Watch: FDA Clears TheWay For Patch Testing In U.S. April 12 - PRNewswire reports that STCDiagnostics has announced that the USDA Panel for ClinicalChemistry and Toxicology has recommended clearance of STCDiagnostics' enzyme immunoassay test kits for use with thePharmChek Sweat Patch collection device. The patch, which will be marketed to the parole, probation, andrehabilitation markets, acts as a collection device for sweat and allowsfor continuous monitoring of "substance abuse" over aseven-day period. [emphasis added -ed.]. It isnot immediately clear whether these patches will be used inemployment testing. --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-57IA087-000632-B007-60http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-04-06.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084444 text/html 5747HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:44:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:44 GMTContent-length: 5532 NORML News - April 6, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. April 6, 1993 Update: Jimmy MontgomeryShares Prison Cell With 40 Prisoners April 6, Wheelchair-bound Jimmy Montgomeryhas been forced to share a cell with forty other prisonerswho risk infection from the chronic anti-biotic resistantinfections afflicting the lower half of his body. OnMonday, Jimmy was picked up by law enforcement officials and sentback to prison in Lexington, Oklahoma to serve the balance of aten year sentence for possession of less than two ounces ofpot. According to Oklahoma NORML Coordinator MichaelPearson, cannabis reform activists in Oklahoma (and nationwide)have been calling the Governor and the chief of the Bureau ofCorrections. Pearson says that "Jimmy's case is getting incrediblestatewide media exposure. The Montgomery case is seen byeven the most conservative politicians as demonstrating why non-violentoffenders shouldn't be taking up valuable prison space." [The Governor of Oklahoma, Frank Keating, can bereached at 405-521-2342. OK NORML, Michael Pearson, can bereached at 405-840-HEMP.] Meanwhile... Willie Nelson's Pot ChargesDropped April 4, Waco, TX About the time thatOklahoma was re-imprisoning Jimmy Montgomery, an undoubtedlyrelieved McLennan County District Attorney decided to dropmarijuana possession charges against Willie Nelson rather thanappeal an adverse cour ruling. The court had ruled that theenormously popular Texas singer/songwriter had not been properlyadvised of his rights and also that there was not probable causeto search his Mercedes. Police had spotted the remains of analleged marijuana cigarette in the ash tray of Nelson's car whenthey found Nelson taking a roadside nap. Since many Texanswho drive Mercedes roll their own tobacco cigarettes as an economymeasure, the police were not justified in assuming that thecigarette was anything other than harmless tobacco, which isstill legal. Nelson is very candid about his marijuana use andhas even talked about having smoked marijuana on the roof of theWhite House when Jimmy Carter was President -- a few years after Montgomerywas paralyzed in an industrial accident. Had Nelson beentried and convicted he could have been sentenced to six months injail ... and the District Attorney might have had to leave thecountry. [The contrast between the treatment of Nelsonwith that of Jimmy Montgomery illustrates the extreme disparityin consequences for the one thousand Americans who are arrestedeveryday on marijuana charges. For some, it is only anembarrassment. Others find their lives ruined. It is betterto be rich, famous and healthy than to be poor, obscure andcrippled -- especially if you want justice.] Police Chief Of Hawaii County Suffers From ACase Of 'Reefer Madness' March 24, In a letter written to U.S.President Bill Clinton, Hawaii County Police Chief Wayne G.Carvalbo stated: "We request the reference to"hemp" be deleted from executive Order Number 12919 ...From a local law enforcement standpoint, we view the promotion ofhemp in Executive Order 12919 as a vehicle being utilized by promarijuana groups to promote the legalization of marijuana. The proponents are using the false environmental arguments topromote the use of a drug that bears substantial health risks tothe user." --End-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-58IA087-000632-B007-82http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-04-04.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084455 text/html 5585HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:44:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:48 GMTContent-length: 5370 NORML News - April 4, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ Special Bulletin - Special Bulletin - SpeicalBulletin - Special Bulletin April 4,1995 OKLAHOMA RE-IMPRISONS PARAPLEGIC JIMMYMONTGOMERY ON POT CHARGE; FAMILY FEARS FOR HIS LIFE April 4 - Today the State of Oklahomare-imprisoned paraplegic Jimmy Montgomery who has been confinedto a wheelchair for over twenty years and who suffers fromchronic anti-biotic resistant infections in his lower body. Montgomery was sentenced in 1992 to ten years in prison forpossession of less than two ounces of marijuana. In 1993,after serving almost a year of his sentence and nearly dyingtwice because of the failure of the state of Oklahoma to provide adequatetreatment for the highly communicable infections, Montgomery wasreleased on an appeals bond arranged by NORML Legal Committeemember C. Rabon Martin. Montgomery was actually convicted of possessionwith intent to distribute marijuana, based on the testimony of anacquaintance who had been arrested -- by a lawman named Lawless-- for cocaine possession. This man was then given alighter sentence in exchange for testifying against Montgomery. The police then attempted to seize the house in which Montgomerylived. The house belongs to his elderly mother and therewas never any allegation that she knew of any of the allegedmarijuana use. Marijuana is widely -- but illegally -- used bypeople with spinal chord injuries for the relief of pain andspasm in their paralyzed limbs. Presumably the state ofOklahoma will give Montgomery opiates, tranquilizers and musclerelaxers instead of marijuana. Unfortunately, the statepreviously failed to provide adequate medical care for him, whichendangered not only Montgomery, but also the other prisoners withwhom he was confined. Montgomery's family fears for hislife, not only from the infections, but also from other prisonerswho may fear infection by being confined with him. (Montgomery was also convicted of possession of"drug paraphernalia" -- pipes -- and of possession oftwo guns in the commission of a drug related felony. Drive-by shootings by people in wheelchairs are a major problemin small towns in Oklahoma. The only evidence of intent to distributewas the testimony of another officer who claimed that he hadnever seen anyone with two ounces who was not a majordealer. This officer was subsequently arrested and chargedwith embezzling from the police property room. Nonetheless,the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed the convictionand sentence based solely on this officer's testimony -- withoutissuing a written opinion to explain this action.) Montgomery's appearances at the National PressClub and at a protest in front of the White House on November 15,1994, National Medical Marijuana Day, were ignored by thenational media -- although some did complain about the smell ofmarijuana smoke at the Press Club. NORML notes that ThomasJefferson said "I tremble for my country when I reflect thatGod is just; that his justice cannot sleep forever." Mr. Montgomery's attorney, C. Rabon Martin willbe seeking a writ of habeas corpus in U.S. District Court inOklahoma City. Martin can be reached at 918-587-9000. The Governor of Oklahoma, Frank Keating, can be reached at405-521-2342. An ABC Television News Special "America'sWar on Drugs: Searching for Solutions" will feature theJimmy Montgomery story on Thursday, April 6 at 10PM Eastern. --END-- ALMOST 10 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 90 SECONDS! WT01-B20-59IA087-000632-B007-109http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-03-30.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084515 text/html 11521HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:45:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:53 GMTContent-length: 11305 NORML News - March 9, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 30, 1995 Editor of Arkansas Times Comes out of Her"Smoky Little Closet" Writing in her regular column, Mara Leveritt, the senioreditor of the widely respected weekly Arkansas Timesrevealed that she has smoked an average of one "joint"per day for the last twenty years. Leveritt, who was namedArkansas Journalist of Year by the University of Arkansas explainedthat her purpose was not to encourage the use of marijuana, butto spur a more rational discussion of marijuanaprohibition. By speaking out she hopes to make it moredifficult to demonize marijuana users. She said that "we have come to accept as normal a mostdangerous form of political correctness: a situation in whichthose on one side of the issue feel safe to speak, while any would-beopposition exposes itself to heightened scrutiny." Shewent on to say that "If long term, regular users like myselffelt free to articulate their experiences with marijuana, thewalking, talking evidence that we represent would put ourmarijuana laws to shame.... And as we get older, our livesbegin to make the lies that have been broadcast about marijuanalook even more ridiculous." In the Associated Press story on the article, Leverittacknowledged having belonged to NORML. NORML salutes her courageand urges others who talk about the truth to stop living a lie. Speaking the truth is a wonderfully liberating experience. We have it on the highest authority that it will make us free. [Ms. Leveritt can be reached at 501-375-2985.] Alleged white House Shootist ReportedlySmoked Pot and Listened to Rush Limbaugh A Dangerous Combination? According to the testimony of a friend, Francisco Duran, whois accused of spraying the White House with bullets, allegedlysmoked marijuana and listened to Rush Limbaugh before setting out forWashington. His friend who smoked marijuana with him, butdid not listen to Rush Limbaugh, said he tried to talk him out ofhis plan to attack the President. Since marijuana -- unlikealcohol -- is not conimonly associated with acts of violence,marijuana users who listen to Rush Limbaugh are urged to watchout for violent impulses. New Test Allows Parents to Test TheirChildren's Rooms for "Drugs" In a major breakthrough in the technology of cementing familyvalues Barrington Technologies of New Providence, New Jersey, hasintroduced a home drug detection kit, "DrugAlert," that allowsparents to surreptitiously check their children's room andpersonal belongings for drug residues. A March 29 Washington Post story on the test quoted astaff therapist at the Family Therapy Institute of Alexandria,Virginia, saying that "It usually takes two or three yearsafter a child is using before their behavior becomes so deviantthat parents are aware of their drug use, and by that time theyare well into addiction." He did not suggest at whatage parents might start using these tests, but presumably itshould be up to three years before there is any indication of aproblem. According to the Partnership for a Drug-Free (sic)America, the median age of first drug use by children is 12 andhalf. Therefore regular testing might begin at age 9. The Washington Post story also reported on home urinetests that are being sold. Parents can also collect theirchildren's urine samples from an early age. There areconflicting opinions on the relative merits of surreptitious andforced testing as tools to help the child mature in a drug-freeenvironment. The DrugAlert kit supplies a small pre-moistened pad whichpicks up drug residues when wiped across items that may have comeinto contact with illicit drugs. To demonstrate the technology,company executives spread cocaine over common objects - such as abaseball trophy which one would expect a drug using child tobring into contact with drugs. The surfaces were then wipedwith the DrugAlert pad and the pad was tested and demonstratedthe presence of the cocaine. It was not explained wherethe company got the cocaine, whether from the DEA, the CIA, orthe Iran/Contra connection. The company warns that children might pick up drug residueswithout actually using drugs, and a company executive alsoadmitted that the company had not considered the possibility that childrenmight use the test to check their parents rooms for drugs. Perhapsthe D.A.R.E. program could provide children with the tests sothat more parents could be reported to the police and therebysaved from drugs. Employers [such as editors orproducers -ed.] might test their employees' personal belongingsto detect drug traces. Presumably the tests will not detectthe residues of alcoholic beverages so that teenage bingedrinking will not be detected and personal liberty will not beundermined. Marijuana Plants Thrive In Downtown Tel Aviv Is Marijuana Decriminalization Coming To Isreal? February 24, The Jerusalem Post (JP) ran an articlefeaturing the actions of the country's most evident marijuanareform organization, The Green Revolution. * Israel has a growing marijuana-smoking population and many of them believe that the drug, being natural rather than chemical, should be legalized. Recently, the drive towards legalized growing and smoking ofcannabis gained new momemtum. While the legalizationmovement has been going on here for some time, the movement inTel Aviv has exploded. Over the past year, there have beenrallies and smoke-ins at Tel Aviv nightclubs, and organizers haveproduced T-shirts, bumper stickers, buttons and pamphlets carryingthe familiar shape of the cannabis leaf. But buttons and signs aren't enought to bring about such aradical change. [Marijuana reform group] The GreenRevolution has discovered the green thumb. Armed withseedlings and a smile, about 15 revolutionaries have turned togardening. Their mission: to turn Tel Aviv into a marijuana jungle. On one Friday afternoon in January, members of the group targetedthe Tel Aviv landscape, tilling the soil with about 1,000seeds. The result: marijuana is growing all over downtownTel Aviv. * [The JP further reports] After the Green Revolution made its strategy public, hundreds of others planted seeds, and not just in Tel Aviv. Sprouts have been spotted in Or Yehuda and Givatayim. Budding cannabis has been spotted around Tel Aviv City Hall, in the planters of Carlebach Steet office buildings and down other main streets. * [But, there are detractors. -ed.] Dr. Benny Avrahami, director of the Tel Aviv Municipal Anti-Drug Authority. He admits that marijuana is hardly in the same league as hard drugs...though he considers marijuana to be the "gate-opener" to harder drugs. * Avrahami thinks that legalizing marijuana could lead to the collapse of Isreali society. "If marijuana was to become legalized, in my opinion,it would be social suicide for Isreal [emphasis added-ed.]. So many of our youth would feel free to use it andthe more users, the more addicts. How can we afford to havethis when they are in the army and part of a society that may becalled up at a short notice to serve?" * One month after the fast seeds were planted, the group set out to see what had become of their gardening adventure. The payoff: 5-cm.-high marijuana plants around downtown... [Green Revolution members] will continue their fight for legalization, planting and campaigning, because they really want to be law-abiding citizens. But until that happens-- they'll just keep breaking the law. REMINDER: ABC News Special To Focus On The 'War On Drugs' ABC News will air a special program. "America's War On Drugs: Searching For Solutions", on Thursday, April 6, 1995, 10:00 - 11:00 PM, ET. NORML members from Oklahoma, such as medical marijuana patient Jimmy Montgomery and his lawyer, NORML Legal Conumttee member C. Rabon Martin, will be featured in the broadcast. --End-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-60IA087-000632-B007-130http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-03-23.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084531 text/html 10417HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:45:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:57 GMTContent-length: 10201 NORML News - March 9, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 23, 1995 Alcohol Industry Association Hires FormerHead Of Drug Enforcement Administration John C. Lawn, the former head of the Drug EnforcementAdministration (DEA) has been appointed as Chairman and CEO ofthe "Century Council," which is described in theMarch/April issue of Healthy Drinking magazine as being"the most prominent of the hundreds of programs supported bythe licensed beverage industry." The appointment is seen as an extension of the efforts of thealcohol industry to separate itself from the illegal drugs. HealthyDrinking, supported by the alcohol industry, hails theappointment, "anxiously" hoping that Lawn's connectionsin the prohibitionist propaganda industry will help de-couplealcohol from other drugs in prohibitionist propaganda. The magazine wrongly states that the DEA has "scrupulouslyavoided confusing use with abuse and drinking with drugging, astance which seems beyond the ken of other federal agencies like Healthand Human Services." The alcohol industry seemsunaware that the DEA is now claiming that alcohol prohibition wasa success. For example, an official 1994 DEA publication,"How to Hold Your Own in A Drug Legalization Debate"(page 29) cites two prohibitionists who claim that alcoholprohibition worked because it reduced alcohol consumption. The Michigan Drug Czar Robert Peterson is quoted as saying that"Since the repeal of Prohibition, alcohol consumption has tripled." This sort of statement is common in prohibitionistpropaganda. Much of the hard core constituency of drugprohibition also supports alcohol prohibition -- but theygenerally keep it low key. Meanwhile, the magazine approvingly quotes Lawn using a standardDEA line: "Illicit drugs .... are illegal because they aredangerous." Does this indicate that the alcoholindustry is betting its future on the assertion that alcohol is not"dangerous" by the standards of a government that is waginga war on marijuana, which by every objective measure is far lessdangerous than alcohol? Richard Cowan, the National Director of NORML, said that"the appointment of Lawn is not only cynical andhypocritical, but also very misguided. The alcohol industryis not going to protect itself from the prohibitionists bypretending that alcohol isn't a drug. Lawn may well be ableto marginally influence some of the prohibitionist propaganda orlegislation passed by alcohol using (and abusing) legislators,but this is more likely to lull the alcohol industry intounwarranted complacency rather than to protect them. The alcohol and tobacco industries need to learn that their bestprotection from the therapeutic state is to tell the truth aboutfreedom and stop trying to pretend that their products aren't'drugs.' Further, does the alcohol industry really want todeclare war on its natural allies in the anti-prohibitionistmovement in order to appease the prohibitionists who have themnext on their lists? Who is advising the alcohol industryon this, the ghost of Neville Chamberlin? Or perhaps theghost of Harry Anslinger?" For more information on the alcohol industry contact HealthyDrinking at 206-525-0449. For more information of acomparison of alcohol and marijuana contact Allen St. Pierre atNORML 202-483-5500. Special Announcement: ABC NewsSpecial To Focus On The 'War on Drugs' ABC News will air a special program, "America's War OnDrugs: Searching For Solutions", on Thursday, April 6, 1995,10:00 - 11:00 PM, ET. In a one-hour news special, ABC News correspondent CatherineCrier [a former Felony Chief Prosecutor and a State CivilDistrict Judge, 162nd District-Dallas County, TX -ed.] examines somecontroversial alternatives to the 'War on Drugs' model: thedecriminalization or legalization of some drugs, and "harmreduction" -- the treatment of addicts with drugs andtherapy rather than incarceration. The hour takes Crier to cities around the country, and to Europe,where tactics that to many appear risky and dangerous arecurrently employed. Should and could they be successfullyused here? Experts -- and addicts -- offer their thoughts. Federal Execution Delayed For ConvictedMarijuana "Kingpin" March 22, The Washington Times reported that inBirmingham, Alabama, "A judge yesterday blocked theexecution of a drug kingpin nine days before he was to become thefirst person put to death by the U.S. government since 1963. Defense attorney Natasha Zalkins said new and "verysensitive" evidence had come to light that proved DavidRonald Chandler's innocence. U.S. District Judge James H.Hancock ruled additional time was needed to consider theevidence. Chandler, 42,...had been scheduled to die by injection March 30at the federal prison in Terre Haute, IN. Nearly Fifty Percent Of Coloradans ApproveOf Hemp Cultivation March 20, The Denver Post ran a telephone poll ofColorado residents in which they asked numerous politicalquestions. One of which was: [Should Colorado] allow the growing of industrial grade hemp,that is, plants that have virtually no intoxication value? Favor.............48% Oppose............28% Undecided.........25% Brazil May Decriminalize Personal Use OfMarijuana! March 19, The Associated Press (AP) reports that "Fromthe Amazon jungle to Ipanema beach, marijuana is part of a dailyroutine for many Brazilians. Routine, but illegal. Now, for the first time, the country is seriously discussing aproposal to end jail time and fines for the use and possession ofthe drug. AP reports that Congress is scheduled to vote ondecriminalization by July. Attorney General Nelson Jobim islobbying for the bill. "It's absurd," to putusers in jail Jobim said in an interview. Under current law, marijuana users can be sentenced to 2 to 3years in prison for possessing as little as 20 grams ofmarijuana. According to AP, three South American nations --Argentina, Uruguay and Venezuela -- already have systems similarto the one proposed by Jobim, while the possession of smallamounts of marijuana is completely legal in Columbia and Peru. [Decriminalization] has even been endorsed by Cardinal LucasMoreira Neves, the conservative Roman Catholic archbishop ofSalvador and primate of Brazil. AP reports that for many Brazilians, the government issimply recognizing a practice that is too widespread to besuppressed [When will the U.S. government acknowledge this?-ed.]. [On March 23, NORML's National Director Richard Cowan andstaff met with Brazilian Judge Marco Da Silva, Advisor to thePresident of the Sao Paulo State Supreme Court, on the matter ofmarijuana decriminalization. NORML will endorse the attemptsin Brazil to decriminalize marijuana and demonstrate, to thejudge and his contingent, the success' of marijuanadecriminalization in eleven states in America and especially inThe Netherlands.] --End-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-61IA087-000632-B007-152http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-03-16.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084539 text/html 11385HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:45:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:28:01 GMTContent-length: 11169 NORML News - March 9, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 16, 1995 NORML Testifies Before U.S. SentencingGuideline Commission March 15, Washington, D.C., NORML National Legal Committeemember Marvin Miller, Esq., of Alexandria, VA led a group ofNORML witnesses who testified before the U.S. SentencingCommission and urged the adoption of proposed guideline changesthat would benefit marijuana-related defendants in federal court. Miller, a former member of the NORML Board of Directors and anationally prominent criminal defense attorney, urged thecommission to adopt two proposed guideline changes. The first,proposed amendment #37, would correct an inequity in the currentguidelines regarding the weight assigned to marijuana plants, forpurposes of sentencing. Currenfly, if the offense involves lessthan 50 marijuana plants, each plant is presumed to weigh 100grams. However, if the offense, involves 50 plants or more,each plant (including the first 49) is presumed to weigh one kilo(1000 grams). This formula has created a "sentencingcliff"-- causing an individual convicted of possessing 50plants to receive a significantly longer sentence than anindividual convicted of possessing 49 or fewer plants; and anindividual convicted of possessing 100 plants (even if they areseedlings) is sentenced the same as someone convicted ofdistributing 100 kilos of bulk marijuana (although the 100seedlings would not possibly produce anywhere near that amount of usablemarijuana). Miller testified that the 100 gram per plant formula reflectsmore accurately the actual potential yield from a singlemarijuana plant, and urged the Commission to amend the guidelinesaccordingly. Miller also testified in favor of proposed guideline amendment#42, regarding the treatment of wet marijuana (fleshly harvestedmarijuana) for sentencing purposes. Currently the wetmarijuana is weighed as is, with the defendant receiving a longersentence under the current weight-driven guidelines. Underthe proposed amendment, when marijuana has a moisture contentsufficient to render it unusable without drying it, anapproximation of the weight without such excess moisture contentis to be used. Miller told the Commission they should belooking at the usable amount of marijuana, rather than the bulkamount -- for sentencing purposes generally -- and urged them to scaleback the penalties overall. In addition, NORML Board member David Boaz, Executive VicePresident of the Cato Institute, testified on behalf of theInstitute regarding marijuana. Boaz pointed out to the Commissionthat there were approximately 784 marijuana offenders convictedin 1992 for whom the minimum guideline range was greater than theapplicable minimum mandatory sentence. "The cost ofkeeping those 784 people in prison for one year is$16,310,000. If we estimate that they would average fouradditional years in prison based on current guidelines, thetaxpayers would be paying more than $65 million in additionalcosts for those prisoners... We would be better served bykeeping violent criminals in prison longer by freeing up beds nowused by marijuana offenders." Other NORML witnesses included former Board member andcultivation expert Ed Rosenthal of California, and NORML/BACHactivist Lennice Werth of Virginia (who uses marijuana as a medicine). Rosenthal focused on the issue of the presumed weight of amarijuana plant, and Werth urged the Commission to find a way inthe guidelines to accommodate those who cultivate marijuana formedical use. These standout activists were joined by FAMMDirector Julie Stewart and the Drug Policy Foundation LegislativeDirector Cheryl Epps. Also present, but not testifying, wasNORML Board member Keith Stroup. [The U.S. Sentencing Commission's recommendations will become lawin 180 days unless the Congress enacts laws otherwise. Formore information on the U.S. Sentencing Commission hearings andthe time frame in which the Commission can act on NORML'srecommendations, contact the U.S. Sentencing Commission's officeof Public Relations at 202-275-4500.] U.S. Congressman Seeks To Halt Free-SpeechOn Information Superhighway (Or George Orwell Call Home) October 6, Washington, D.C., prohibition fanatic U.S.Representative Gerald B.H. Solomon (R-NY) extended his oppositionto any criticism of prohibition to include the Intemet. The followingare excerpts from an October 6 speech Rep. Solomon delivered onthe House floor: "Mr. Speaker, it was recently brought to my attention thatdrug legalization advocates are using the electronic informationsuperhighway to organize the legalization movement and share informationon drug use. The information superhighway was certalnly notcreated to propagate such misinformation and the criminalactivity associated with it. This use was brought to my attentionby drug legalization opponents who use the informationsuperhighway everyday in their vocations. [Anti-prohibitionists don't use computers in their vocations?-ed.] Apparently the National Organization for the Reform of MarijuanaLaws (NORML) recently entered remarks which I personally made inopposition to drug legalization on this House floor as an exampleof 'rabid, right-wing prohibitionist propaganda.' Because Ibelieve, along with 95 percent of America [myth of consensus-ed.], that the use of illicit drugs is wrong, I was singled out asan enemy of drug users. Well, Mr. Speaker, I amhonored. The use of illegal drugs is an anathema tothe social and moral fabric of our Nation." "Pro-drug use and legalization messages on the informationsuperhighway through Internet are wrong... As more and moreAmericans jump onto this latest technological advancement, moreand more citizens will have access to this ill-advisedinformation." "Drug legalization advocates from all over the country areusing this universal technology to further their movement anddeceive Americans. As Congress reviews this very important technologyduring the 104th Congress, the use of this service by pro-drugorganizations and individuals for the propagation of this ilkmust be addressed. As a nation founded on the freedomsof speech and press, the rights of life, liberty, and the pursuitof happiness must not be trampled by the disease of illegal drugs." [Emphasis added -ed.] NORML National Director Richard Cowan comments:"Representative Solomon continues to demonstrate his fear offree and open discussion. This is typical of the statistmind-set. NORML believes that freedom has nothing to fearfrom the truth--so it is appropriate that Solomon is runningscared." 'Drug Peace' In the Middle East? March 14, The Hayward Daily Review reports that "apanel of experts Monday recommended that Israel's parliament easelaws agalnst the use of marijuana and hashish." Marijuana "Kingpin" Qualifies For FirstFederal Execution In 32 Years March 13, Reuters reports that U.S. authorities havenotified David Chandler, 42, that his death sentence will becarried out March 30 in the first federal execution in 32 years. According to Reuters, Chandler was convicted in 1991 inAlabama of hiring another individual to kill a member of hismarijuana smuggling ring who had become an informant. Chandler is the first federal inmate to receive a death sentenceunder the 1988 Omnibus Crime Bill. The federal Bureau ofPrisons sald five other inmates are awaiting execution under thesame drug kingpin law. Reuters reports that prison officials acknowledged thatChandler's execution, which would be carried out by lethalinjection, could be delayed by his filing of a new appeal. [NORML strongly protests the potentialexecution of David Chandler. Mr. Chandler should not beexposed to an ill-conceived death penalty statute solely becauseof his alleged role in a marijuana trafficking operation. Executing this man, in the name of the 'Drug War', will not deteror hinder a single nanogram's worth of "drugs" frombeing cultivated, sold or consumed in the U.S. So why doit? For more information on Mr. Chandler's dreadfulplight, contact the Alabama ACLU, Olivia Turner, 205-262-0304.] --End-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-62IA087-000632-B007-189http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-03-09.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084612 text/html 10905HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:45:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:21 GMTContent-length: 10689 NORML News - March 9, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 9, 1995 Founder of 'Our Church' Receives 10-YearSentence In Marijuana Case February 11, The Morning News (of Northwest Arkansas)reported that Tom Brown, the controversial founder and formerleader of Our Church, was sentenced in federal court to 10 years inprison. Brown was also fined $17,500 and had 39 acres ofland forfeited to the government. Brown asserts that the church uses marijuana as part of itsreligious service. The Morning News reported that"Our Church and its members say they have a constitutional rightunder freedom of religion to use [marijuana, as a form ofsacrament,] during their church services. [Brown] attempted to argue his case at the sentencing hearing,but [U.S. District Judge] Waters wouldn't allow it. Brown,disregarding Waters...said he would have been found innocent ifhe had been allowed to argue that his religious freedom permittedhim to use marijuana in church services. "It was an invalid indictment, an invalid prosecution, aninvalid conviction," Brown said. Medical Marijuana Legislation About To'Disappear' From Colorado Law March 6, The Colorado House effectively ended one of thenation's first medical marijuana laws when it passed Senate Bill95-1020. The official death of the medical marijuana lawwill occur when Governor Roy Romer (D) signs the new bill --which deletes older, "obsolescent" legislation -- intolaw in the coming weeks. The "Dangerous Drugs Therapeutic Act" which establishedprovisions for the disbursal of marijuana for medical purposeshas been on the books since 1979. However, due to the law's wording--whichnecessitated approval from the National Cancer Institute, the FDAand the DEA--reportedly no one ever received cannabis to smokeduring the program's 16-year existence. [Conversely,] Missouri Senate To Consider"Medical Necessity" Defense For Citizens Using Medicinal Marijuana February 28, The Missouri Senate agreed to hear Senate Bill457, introduced by Sen. Joseph Moseley, which succinctly states: No criminal or civil penalty shall apply to any person for the act of possessing marijuana provided that requirements of the following two subdivisions of this section are met simultaneously: (1) A practitioner authorized to prescribe Schedule II controlled substances for human use certifies in writing that the person is under the professional care of the practitioner for a duly diagnosed condition; and (2) The aforementioned practitioner certifies in writing that the person needs marijuana as part of a therapeutic regimen directed against the duly diagnosed condition. [For more details on MO SB 457, contact Missouri NORML's DanViets at 314-443-6866/874-2244.] Texas Criminal Defense Attorney Indicted OnMarijuana Charges Goes On Hunger Strike To Protest Lack Of Marinol February 23, The Beaumont Enterprise reported that a formerJefferson County prosecutor and criminal defense lawyer isprotesting his marijuana-related arrest by refusing to eat solidfoods. In what can only be described as a bizarre case, Alan D.McLemore, 43, was arrested at his home February 8 on marijuanacultivation and gun charges. [Background] McLemore has had a life long battle with clinicaldepression. In time, McLemore received a prescription forMarinol [synthetic marijuana pill -ed.]. McLemore found thatMarinol not only stabilized his depression, it also curbed hiscraving for alcohol. Due to the high cost and very limitedquantities of Marinol, McLemore supplemented medication with marijuana. Finally able to lead a normal life, McLemore got a law degree,became an assistant district attorney, and eventually opened hisown law office. Upon his arrest in February, McLemore, after posting bond,returned to jail because he felt as though he could not honor thejudges order that he not consume marijuana while out onbond. McLemore stated that he didn't want to have hismother lose her home (McLemore's mother put her home up for the$l00,000 bond) because of his desperate need for an effectivemedicine. During McLemore's hunger strike, he has lost as much as 25pounds. McLemore, in an issued statement from jail,reported by the Beaumont Enterprise, said, "Uncaringlegislatures, that have been totally corrupted by money, havedenied me and millions of others the relief this wonderful plantprovides. I have no liberty; the pursuit of happiness hasbeen denied me; and life is therefore a burden that I'm anxiousto relinquish. [For more information on this medical marijuana case, contacteither Houston NORML's Ralph Hodges, 713-797-6567 or JudyMcLemore (Alan's mother), 409-423-2429.] Largest Drug Testing Company Reports A SteepDecline In Positive Drug Tests -- Except MARIJUANA! March 6, SmithKline Beecham Clinical Laboratories reportedthat there has been a drastic reduction in the number of peopletesting positive for drug use -- while at the same time, the rateof positive test results for marijuana shot up. SmithKline found that of more than 3.6 million drug testsperformed at their labs last year, 7.5 percent were positive fordrug use, a drop of 0.9 percentage points from 1993. Thosetesting positive for marijuana use rose 7.2 percents to 47.1percent of all positive tests. Second was cocaine at 23.9percent. The Associated Press reports that SmithK1ine Beecham said"a change in the screening threshold for marijuana requiredby the Department of Transportation (DOT) could account for the increasein positive tests for marijuana use. [NORMLagrees. Beginning on January 1, DOT regulations mandatethat the threshold for positive marijuana screen be lowered from100ng to 50ng. Reducing the "cut-off" level by50% readily explains why positive urinalysis' for marijuana wentup. -ed.] The survey isn't based on a scientific sampling of workersnationwide. [For a copy of this report, contact Tobey Dichter, SmithKlineBeecham Clinical Laboratories, 800-877-7478 or 610-454-6201.] Head Of DEA Claims That The U.S. Is Losing"War On Drugs" March 9, The Boston Herald reported that the DEA'stop-cop believes that after 15 years and $34 billion, the muchhyped War on Drugs is a half-hearted campaign... "No matter how much we seize, it doesn't seem to change theamount coming into the country", said Thomas A. Constantine,chief of the Drug Enforcement Administration. Constantine went on to say that, "To use that euphemismof a 'War on Drugs' or a 'War on Crime', I have notseen that yet." He further added,"When you have a war, that means as citizens--you makesacrifices (harkening back to the World War II days of foodrationing and Gold Star mothers). That's what I call awar and it's a national will." [emphasis added-ed.] Richard Cowan, NORML's National Director, asked, "Just whatsacrifices does Mr. Constantine have in mind? As a nation,we've arrested almost ten million Americans on marijuana charges. How many more Americans does Mr. Constantine want tosacrifice?" --End-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-63IA087-000632-B007-211http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-03-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084621 text/html 10646HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:46:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:26 GMTContent-length: 10430 NORML News - March 9, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. March 2, 1995 Sunday Los Angeles Times Front Page: S.F.Cannabis Buyers' Club February 26, The Los Angeles Times published a detailedarticle on the Cannabis Buyers' Club in San Francisco. Thefollowing are selected excerpts; This is a different kind of drug store...dozens of people sit onrummage-sale couches and folding chairs, smoking high-grademarijuana. It is business as usual at the Cannabis Buyers' Club, aflourishing illegal marijuana market rooted in civildisobedience. But this is a club no rational person wouldaspire to join. Doing your shopping here means you are sickor dying. The underground pharmacy is part of a growing movement aimed atgaining sick people the right to use marijuana. Across thecountry thousands of patients with AIDS, cancer, glaucoma, epilepsy,multiple sclerosis and other illnesses defy the law daily totreat their ailments or ease their pain. In San Francisco, long known for its tolerance, authorities havechosen to ignore the law, saying that sick people who can benefitfrom the plant should be able to buy it. 'I have no problem whatsoever with the use of marijuana formedical purposes," said [San Francisco] Mayor Frank Jordan,a former police chief. "I am sensitive andcompassionate to people who have legitimate needs. Weshould bend the law and do what's right." [Emphasis added -ed.] [In opposing the use of marijuana as medicine] Mike Heald, DrugEnforcement Administration spokesman, said marijuana is strictlycontrolled because the public does not believe that smoking it isproper behavior. [Mr. Heald is enveloped in the "mythof consensus" -ed.] He said marijuana, like alcohol andtobacco, is a "gateway" substance that leads to the useof hard drugs such as heroin, cocaine, and LSD -- a contentiondisputed by marijuana advocates. The club was founded in 1991, and more than 3,000 people bearingnotes from their doctors have flocked to the...club. [Some that have claimed to have benefited from the club] * AIDS patient Jon Bush gained 30 pounds in the past six months[with the use of marijuana] * Hazel Rodgers, 75, volunteers her time at the club while at thesame time using marijuana to treat her glaucoma. Rodgerswas referred to the club by [SF] county supervisor Angela Alioto. "I am an extremely strong advocate of medicinalmarijuana," Alioto said, "I saw it work". [Alioto'slate husband used marijuana to treat the adverse reaction fromhis cancer chemotherapy treatments. -ed.] California Assemblyman's Bill Could RelieveThe Need For Cannabis Buyer's Club March 1, Sacramento, CA, California Assemblyman JohnVasconcellos (D-San Jose) is sponsoring a medical marijuana bill,AB 1597, which would exempt patients with a physician's recommendationfrom laws against personal possession and cultivation ofmarijuana. The bill is similar to the medical marijuanainitiative being proposed by Californians for Compassionate Use (CCU)for the 1996 ballot. [For more information, contact either CCU at 415-864-1961 orCalifornia NORML at 415-563-5858.] Iowa State Senators Urge Senator Harkin ToSupport Medical Marijuana Research February 21, Three prominent state senators from Iowa sent aletter to Senator Tom Harkin (D-IA) prodding him to pressure theDepartment of Health and Human Services (HHS) to allow a longdelayed medical study of the therapeutic effects of marijuana onpatients with AIDS. [This letter is representative of thenumerous letters that have been sent by elected state officialsall over the U.S. to federal representatives and officials withinthe government. To date, 36 states have passed legislationexpressing their desire to see marijuana be made more readilyavailable for patients coping with life and/or sense-threateningdiseases or ailments. The problem is a recalcitrant andunresponsive federal bureaucracy. -ed.] A selected excerpt of theIA state senators letter follows: "We are respectfully asking that you consider contacting Dr.Philip Lee, Asst. Sec. for HHS, and express your support forallowing the first research project concerning medical marijuanain over a decade. Our only objective is to find out exactlyhow safe and effective marijuana is in treating glaucoma,multiple sclerosis, AIDS and AIDS-related wasting syndrome, andcancer. Many patients in Iowa, as well as the rest of theUnited States, are eagerly anticipating the results from Dr.Abrams' study [the long delayed study -ed.], and we ask that youencourage this to happen." [For more information on the struggle for legal access tomedicinal marijuana in Iowa, contact Iowa NORML's Carl Olsen at515-262-6957. For further information on the long delayedAbrams' study and a listing of federal representatives who arelobbying HHS to allow the study to proceed, contact MAPS' RickDoblin at 704-358-0138.] Liberty Lovers -- Beware The Ides Of March! [Excerpts from FIJA release] On March 15, wholesale floristYvonne Regas of Sparks, NV will be arraigned in U.S. DistrictCourt in Reno, on charges of (1) Conspiracy to Obstruct Justice; (2)Aiding and abetting Obstruction of Justice; and (3) JuryTampering. Before deciding that such dastardly behavior deserves swift, surepunishment -- such as the three to six years in prison this couldcost Ms. Regas, if convicted -- consider what she actually did:she and a few friends put brochures published by Fully InformedJury Association (FIJA) under the wiper blades of cars parkednear the courthouse, during the trial of her son and ex-husband,among others, on drug charges. That's it. These brochures -- which have been distributed similarly byuntold numbers of people at hundreds of court houses around thecountry over the past five years -- explain the rights, powers, andresponsibilities of trial jurors. Often, the brochures arehanded to all who enter the court house. The point of the leafleting has been to advise jurors that theypossess the power to judge the law itself, and not just "thefacts", as most modern jury instruction insist. "Jury nullification of law" means that "thegoverned -- if informed of their power as jurors -- can"just say no" to bad laws, and thereby check andbalance the government. [It is for this reason that NORMLsupports the efforts of FIJA. Just imagine if every juror in amarijuana-related case knew that they possess the power andauthority to nullify "bad law". Is it possiblethat there would be a marked reduction in criminal convictionsfor marijuana-related "crimes"? Further, wouldthe government then realize that they've been operating under the`myth of consensus' and substantively amend the law? -ed.] The Regas case has attracted some of the nation's premierconstitutional lawyers: Dr. Nancy Lord, Larry Becraft, and(possibly) Jonathan Emord. They see this as a watershedcase for both the First and Sixth Amendments, and believe thatconviction of Ms. Regas could result in erosion of the rest ofthe Bill of Rights. If Regas is convicted, Nancy Lord fears it could also lead toprosecutions [and certainly intimidation -ed.] of FIJA activistsaround the country. [To find out more about the Regas case, contact LAWYERS FORLIBERTY, c/o Nancy Lord, 1718 Peachtree St. NW, ste. 499,Atlanta, GA 30309 or call 404-963-6932. For further informationon FIJA, contact Larry Dodge at 214-357-0902.] --End-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-64IA087-000632-B007-230http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-02-23.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084630 text/html 10942HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:46:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:30 GMTContent-length: 10726 NORML News - February 23, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 23, 1995 Drug Watch International And The DEA CombineForces To Kill Colorado Hemp Bill With Two Powerful Weapons: Lies And Threats February 16, Denver, CO, Colorado's Senate Committee onAgriculture, Natural Resources and Energy voted down Senate Bill132, the Colorado Hemp Production Act. The bill, sponsored by state senator Lloyd Casey (D-Northglenn),sought to 1.) establish a commission to study hemp as a cash cropand the federal laws governing hemp cultivation [Similar to thecommission recently established by Kentucky's governor. -ed.],and 2.) create a 'vehicle' for the establishment of a legal hempindustry in Colorado. The measures were voted down 4-3 and 6-1respectively. While it is unfortunate that the citizens of Colorado aretemporarily unable to enjoy the economic benefits of a legal hempindustry, the most disturbing aspect of these hearings was the apparentimpact of testimony provided by The Drug EnforcementAdministration (DEA) and Drug Watch International (DWI)[prohibitionist organization -ed.]. First, DWI representative Beverly Kinard gave bizarre testimonythat included wild misrepresentations about hemp production, thehealth effects associated with marijuana use and the groups andindividuals who advocate changing the laws governing marijuana.Some of Mrs. Kinard's more notable direct quotes follow: -The Dutch National Board of Drug Prevention is extremely concerned because even with low THC marijuana, high concentrations of THC may be produced in some organs. [There is no such office entitled the "Dutch National Board of Drug Prevention". -ed.] -Legalizing drugs in the Netherlands brought the crime rate up 400%. ["Drugs" are not legal in Holland and the violent crime rate has declined over The last 12 years. -ed.] -Hemp oil [derived from marijuana seeds -ed.] causes skin cancer overnight on laboratory rats. [Hemp seed oil is sold in health food stores. -ed.] -Marijuana affects every cell, every system and every organ in the body. The mental disorders include acute toxic psychosis, panic attacks, flashbacks, delusions, depersonalization, hallucinations, paranoia, depression and UNCONTROLLABLE HOSTILITY. [Emphasis not added! If so, why has violent crime declined in Holland? -ed.] While NORML contends that nearly all of Mrs. Kinard's testimonywas nonsensical, the DEA proved DWI one better. SpecialAgent in Charge of the DEA's Rocky Mountain Field Division, PhilipW. Perry, testified that the DEA strongly opposes anydemocratically-inspired challenges to their supreme control ofmarijuana prohibition. In his written testimony, AgentPerry asserts that "In cases where federal and state law arein opposition, the question of which law would control is wellsettled." Agent Perry felt it necessary to reiteratefor the committee: "Let us be clear that what we are talkingabout in this Bill is marijuana. Calling it"hemp" on the basis of an artificial threshold level ofpsychoactive ingredient does not erase the fact that it isbotanically and legally the same plant." [Yes, that isexactly the point! -ed.] Agent Perry concluded by forcefully reasserting the federalgovernment's recalcitrant position regarding hemp and even morebizarre, his interpretation of the parental-like role of federallaw enforcement: "Although I am not an expert in theeconomics of crop production [question: why then are youtestifying in an agriculture committee hearing? -ed.]...With 31years of service in law enforcement...I can tell you, in myprofessional opinion, this legislation is no more than a shallow rusebeing advanced by those who seek to legalize marijuana. Thepeople of Colorado deserve to be protected from this sort ofsubterfuge. The federal criminal law on this subject does provide suchprotection and will be enforced with all the vigor at DEA'scommand." [Emphasis added. -ed.] [For more information on this legislative debacle, includingcopies of the DWI and DEA's tendentious written testimonies,please contact Allen St. Pierre, NORML, 202-483-5500.] DEA's Next Target: Hawaii February 13, Kailua-Kona, In a letter from the mayor of HawaiiCounty to the DEA, Mayor Stephen K. Yamashiro's executiveassistant asserted that the Mayor is totally supportive of hemp activistRoger Christie's efforts to establish a legal hemp industry onHawaii. Executive Assistant R.B. Legaspi writes, in part, that Mr.Christie has secured the Mayor's endorsement and that "TheMayor [has] offered the use of county lands for an experimentalproject growing low grade hemp for commercial purposes. In his letter, Mr. Legaspi pointed out to the DEA that this pastJune 7, President Clinton signed Executive Order 12919, whichamongst other things, recognizes hemp as a "FoodResource". The letter concludes with a reiteration, "Mayor Yamashirodoes endorse...the cultivation of hemp and its conversion toproducts useful to mankind." [Editor's note: Despitethe Mayor's pragmatism and support, the County of Hawaii is notgoing to be able to legally cultivate hemp. The DEA willlikely employ the same heavy-handed tactics that it successfullyused in the above cited case in Colorado and deny Mr. Christiehis permit needed to legally cultivate hemp. The disproportionallevel of influence and power the DEA asserts overdemocratically-elected local and state officials is a clearviolation of the 9th and 10th Amendments.] [For further information on Hawaii's efforts to legalize hempproduction, please contact either activist Roger Christie,808-961-0488 or Mayor Stephen K. Yamashiro, 808-961-8211.] Top U.S. General Says The U.S.'sMultibillion - Dollar 'Drug War' Has Accomplished Little February 16, The Associated Press (AP) reported that Gen.Barry R. McCafferey recently told law makers that despite a wellorganized and costly-counter-drug operation, "these currentefforts are not achieving their purpose. "A multiyear effort involving substantial resources andenormous energy and creativity," McCafferey said, "hasnot had the effects we desired." AP reports that McCafferey portrayed an insatiable drug marketable to adapt to law enforcement agencies by quickly changingdrug routes and methods of production. Gen. McCafferey acknowledged the difficulty of tackling the drugproblem, but like any true believer he concluded: "I Thinkpart of the problem has been our decision to call it a war...Iprefer to think of it as a cancer. I don't think aboutachieving victory but about dealing with the problem." [NORML's National Director Richard Cowan's comment: "Withthis kind of mentality, America will always be engaged in a"drug war" until we die of the cancer of prohibition-ed.] The New York Times Magazine Runs A Very HighTimes-Type Article February 19, The New York Times Magazine ran a lengthycover article entitled "Marijuana in the 90's". The article examined indoor marijuana cultivation from the pointof view of an avid gardener [Writer Michael Pollan is HarperMagazine's gardening editor. -ed.]. The article examinesand rightly lays blame for the phenomenal explosion of indoormarijuana cultivation at the U.S. government's feet. Thearticle extensively examines the economics of contraband both inthe U.S. and The Netherlands. The pictures alone areamazing. This is a must read article! [For more information on this 10-page article, please contactAllen St. Pierre, NORML, 202-483-5500.] -End- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-65IA087-000632-B007-260http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-02-16.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084651 text/html 9309HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:46:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:36 GMTContent-length: 9094 NORML News - February 16, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 16, 1995 Michigan Lawyer Still Being Persecuted ByThe Feds After Serving Eight Months In Prison For ONEJoint! February 16, Bay City, Michigan, in the latest twist in afederal marijuana case involving attorney Edward Czuprynski, thefull U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, all fifteenjudges, ruled en banc that a search of Czuprynski's lawoffice and home was constitutional. Czuprynski was federally indicted in May, 1992 for 1.6 grams ofmarijuana [about a joint -ed.]. Following a trial, he wassentenced to serve a whopping 14 months in a federal penitentiary. After eight months, however, a panel of three judges on the U.S.Court of Appeals ordered Czuprynski's release from prison in Julyof 1993 and ruled in his favor four months later on constitutionalgrounds, the first of seven issues Czuprynski raised on appeal. Upon the government's appeal, the full court's recent decisionexamined only one raised constitutional issue and sent the caseback to the original three judge panel to review and rule on theremaining six issues. In the 11-4 split decision, the dissenting justices commentedthat they "can not condone the type of prosecutorialoverkill that has taken place here," adding that "itonly points out the great expense of this court's time andresources in hearing a case en banc [which involves] suchan insignificant amount of marijuana." Czuprynski said he is considering an appeal to the U.S. SupremeCourt and has secured the commitment from the American CivilLiberties Union and the National Lawyers Guild to support hiseffort. Czuprynski commented that "I may have lost the latestbattle, but I'm confident I'll win this war," adding that,"the conviction against me resulted from a real railroadingthat trampled all over my rights." [For further information on this truly bizarre case, contactattorney Edward Czuprynski at 517-894-1155. The U.S.Attorneys Office that is prosecuting [persecuting -ed.] Mr.Czuprynski can be reached for comment at 517-895-5712.] U.S. House Resolution 97 -- Seeks To CreateLaw Enforcement "Rapid Strike Force" To Aid America's Failed Drug War January 4, U.S. Representative Barbara Kennelly (D-CT)introduced a bill to the Committee on the Judiciary that would,among other things: -Empower the Attorney General to establish in the FBI a unit,to be known as The Rapid Deployment Force (RDF), which shall bemade available to assist units of local government in combatingcrime. -The RDF will be comprised of approximately 2,500 Federallaw enforcement officers with training and experiencein...drug-related crime. [emphasis added -ed.] -Members of the RDF who are deployed to a jurisdiction shallbe deputized...as to empower such officers to make arrests andparticipate in the prosecution of criminal offenses under State law. (For a copy of H.R. 97 [cite as: Rapid Deployment Strike ForceAct -ed.], contact Rep. Kennelly at 202-225-2265.) MTV Affirms Its Censoring Of Music Videos February 10, a Johnson County Community College NORMLmember e-mailed an inquiry to MTV regarding it's censoring of TomPetty's hit music video "You Don't Know How ItFeels". MTV's reply follows: MTV has very strict program standards...MTV will not air videos,images, or messages that promote or condone the use of illegalsubstances. We asked Tom Petty's record label to edit "YouDon't Know How It Feels," deleting the reference to smokinga joint so that the clip would meet our standards guidelines. Pot Case Could Set Precedent In Kansas February 3, The Topeka Capital-Journal reported on theconviction of two Douglas County residents suspected of watering172 marijuana plants. The defendants Nancy Hadley andMichael Wyman were charged with multiple felonies [includingintent to distribute, conspiracy, etc...] that could have yieldedthem more than 40 years in prison. Wyman's attorney, Pedro Irigonegaray, commented that thedefendant was willing to admit to the possession charge, but notto the multiple charges for distribution. NORML National Legal Committee (NLC) member William K. Rork,Hadley's attorney, asserted that the government erred inassigning the potential weight of the 172 plants at 840 pounds. Rork and Irigonegaray called upon High Times editor EdRosenthal, an expert on cannabis cultivation, to refute thegovernment's assertion. Rosenthal testified that 1.) the total bud yield from the 172plants when mature would have been approximately 9.6 pounds and,2.) the shelf life of marijuana is indefinite if frozen. Therefore, the defendants were able to effectively claim that themarijuana they were alleged to possess was compatible withpersonal use. The jury agreed. Hadley and Wyman will likely receiveprobation on two misdemeanor charges according to Irigonegaray. The Capital-Journal reports that one officer said thiscase sets a dangerous precedent [For law enforcement! -ed.]. [For more information on this potentially precedent settingcase in challenging the weight assigned to grown marijuana --that at the very least has a substantial impact on sentencing -- contact NORMLNLC member attorney William Rork at 913-233-7428 or cannabiscultivation expert Ed Rosenthal, 510-533-0605.] Trading The Fourth Amendment For A Baggie OfPot If anyone doubts the importance of the role played bymarijuana prohibition in undermining the Constitution, considerthe case currently before the Supreme Court, Arizona v. Evans (#93-1660). The case at bar, which threatens the Fourth Amendmentrequirements of a valid warrant, involves an arrest forpossession of "a baggie" of marijuana. Because marijuana is so widely used by so many Americans, theenforcement of prohibition frequently brings up constitutionalchallenges that impact the lives of all non-violent citizens. --End-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-66IA087-000632-B007-284http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-02-09.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084701 text/html 10107HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:46:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:40 GMTContent-length: 9892 NORML News - February 9, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 9, 1995 COMBINED HEADLINE:Conservatives And Liberals Agree On The Excess Of The 'Drug War' USA Today Editorial In StepWith The National Review I.) February 8, USA Today ran an editorial inresponse to the Clinton administration's request for an increasein "drug warring" funds. Selected excerpts fromthe editorial follow: -Something just doesn't make sense about the USA's drugwar. It's like no one wants to win. Tuesday, theClinton administration paraded out a new drug fighting plan for1996. It proposes spending a record $14.6 billion -- $1.3billion more than this year. -Federal and state governments have spent $250 billion trying to"control drugs" in the past 15 years, with the bulk ofthe money going to law enforcement. -And still, Congress appears dissatisfied. Preening for hispresidential bid, Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, says the Clintonadministration drug policy "is still based on theblame-the-society-first approach to crime and punishment." That's a great sound bite. But it ignores the facts. And as long as politicians continue to do that, the nation will continue to lose the war on drugs. [emphasis added -ed.] II.) February 20, The National Review's "TheWeek" editorial section observed: After campaigning as a tough-on-crime conservative, New York Governor George Pataki wants to cut sentences for drug dealers. There is no contradiction here. To fulfill his promise of keeping violent criminals locked up longer, Governor Pataki needs to free up prison space increasingly occupied by non-violent drug offenders. ... Resources that could be used to incapacitate robbers, rapists, and murderers are instead used to imprison small-time drug dealers [and individuals who simply possessed small amounts of contraband --ed.]. Pataki has recognized the recklessness of this policy. Will Congress? [emphasis added -ed.] [For more information about what actions New York state and Gov.Pataki might take on criminal justice matters, please correspondwith either NORML Board member, State Senator Joseph Galiber,518-455-2061 or The Partnership for Responsible Drug Information,Inc., David Crockett, 718-392-5036.] A Baltimore Grand Jury'sAssignment: Study The Drug War And Make Recommendations -- The Jury's in -- TheirRecommendation: Decriminalize Marijuana! February 9, The following are selected excerpts from the BaltimoreSun's front page article: -In a report meant to rekindle debate over drug policy, a Baltimore grand jury suggests that marijuana be "decriminalized"... -"It is time to take a very serious look at the drug problem in Baltimore City. Removing the profit from the drug trade maybe the only way to resolve it," says the report from the grand jury, which was assigned by a judge to study drug legalization. The grand jury says striking down laws against possessing small amounts of marijuana is an "honest response" to a finding that authorities seldom enforce such laws. -The report was hailed by Mayor Kurt Schmoke, who since 1988 has advocated a national debate on alternative approaches to fighting drugs. "I was pleased they came down on the side of making the war on drugs more of a public health war rather than a criminal justice war." -When the grand jury was sworn in for a four-month term on Sept. 12, Baltimore Circuit Judge Joseph P. McCurdy Jr. told it to look into the issue of drug decriminalization. "Many of us feel that the war on drugs has not succeeded, that we are losing ground with each passing day, that we are wasting resources and that we have to look at this problem anew," he said. [Amen. -ed.] David C. Condliffe, executive director of the Drug Policy Foundation, praised Baltimore as a city on the cutting edge of a "sane" drug policy. He noted that the Clinton administration yesterday announced a policy that shifts a larger percentage of drug fighting money away from treatment and prevention, and toward law enforcement. Pointing to the grand jury report, he said, "Washington is simply out of step with the citizens." [NORML concurs -ed.] [For more information on the Baltimore grand jury's 20-pagereport, please contact David Fratello, Drug Policy Foundation,202-537-5005.] French Commission Narrowly Votes To"Decriminalize" Marijuana February 4, Le Monde reports that members of theHenrion commission, appointed in March by Simone Veil, Ministerof Social Affairs, Health and Cities, to study a 1970 lawconcerning the criminal penalties for drug possession in France,have made some remarkable observations and recommendations. The commission was asked whether the distinction between hard andsoft drugs should be upheld. According, to Le Monde"the commission judged that 'one can simply state that drugsare more or less dangerous,' cannabis and its derivatives(marijuana, hash, hash oil) being classified among the leastdangerous. By a close vote (9 out of 17), a majorityfavorable to the decriminalization of the use and possession ofsmall amounts of quantities emerged." Le Monde reports that there are varying estimates of howmany French citizens consume marijuana. The governmentestimates 1 to 3 million users, while Sofres estimates a range of4 to 5 million marijuana consumers. The nine members supporting marijuana decriminalization purposed: -Prohibiting the consumption of marijuana prior to the age of 16. -Prohibiting the consumption of marijuana in public places. -Strengthening the laws against driving while intoxicated on marijuana. -Creating misdemeanor laws dealing with individuals under the influence of marijuana. -Strictly banning the use of marijuana by public safety professionals (e.g.: flight controllers, high speed train operators, airline pilots, etc...) The nine members of the commission that favor changing the lawswent on to further state "If there is no deteriorationin the situation over the next two years, one could then envisage true,regulated commerce under strict control of the State,"according to Le Monde. [emphasis added -ed.] -End- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-67IA087-000632-B008-3http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-02-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084713 text/html 10362HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:47:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:45 GMTContent-length: 10146 NORML News - February 2, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weekly service for the media on newsitems related to Marijuana Prohibition. February 2, 1995 European ParliamentCommission Favors Legalization of Cannabis Recognizing the success of the Dutch policy of separatingmarijuana from hard drugs, The European Parliamentary Commissionon Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs voted Monday for "cannabisdecriminalization." The full European Parliament isexpected to vote on this recommendation later in February. Usually the parliament follows the recommendation of the relevantcommissions, but the United States is expected to bring maximumpressure to prevent the replication of the Dutch success inseparating cannabis from hard drugs. (For more information contact the European ParliamentaryCommission on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs in Brussels.) Drug Czar and Partnership ForA Drug-Free (sic) America Hold a Closed -- by Invitation Only -- "Briefing" Washington -- At the last minute, it was decided that a"briefing" held this afternoon at the Old ExecutiveOffice Building adjacent to the White House by Drug Czar LeeBrown and James Burke, Chairman of the Partnership for aDrug-Free America and the former CEO of pharmaceutical giantJohnson and Johnson, was "by invitation only." This may have been done because of embarrassing questions havingbeen asked at their New York press conference on January16. Consequently, the media were excluded from theWashington version. This is unusual in Washington, wheremedia attendance at such "briefings" is generallyencouraged. At the New York meeting the Partnership announced a series of newradio and television and print ads which American media are nowrunning as a part of their support for the continuing arrest ofmillions of Americans for using marijuana. That briefing,like the ads, warned about the horrifying dangers of themarijuana crisis now sweeping America and causing terror in ourstreets, the main drug concern of both the White House and thePartnership. The purpose of the briefings -- and theapparent reason for their being by invitation only -- seems to bethe growing panic among prohibitionists about being askedcritical questions. The media have so seldom been critical ofany claims about marijuana made by the Partnership or the DrugCzar's office that the prohibitionists have not yet developed astrategy for answering them. Under the circumstances, it mayhave been decided not to risk having anyone present who mightdisrupt the meeting by asking questions. (Please do not call either the Drug Czar's office at202-395-6618 or especially the Partnership at 212-922-1560 andask them any questions. That sort of thing just upsetsthem.) Maine Governor EndsHelicopter Marijuana Searches On February 1 the Associated Press reported that MaineGovernor Angus King is discontinuing helicopter flights searchingfor marijuana growing in rural areas of Maine. Governor Kingsaid the flights were "too expensive for the return. Ithink it's intrusive." The Maine Civil LibertiesUnion, which has represented four Maine families who objected tothe invasion of their privacy by flights -- in which no marijuanawas found -- hailed the Governor's action. The AP story reporting the Governor's action quoted an anonymousundercover agent as saying that an anonymous "marijuanatrafficker" had told him that anonymous "local growershad increased their yield substantially in 1994 in response to acessation in flights." Presumably the AP was unable tofind any anonymous supporters of privacy rights to quoteanonymous victims of the overflights. NORML has published a special report on the role of the NationalGuard in domestic marijuana eradication including the extensiveuse of helicopters in both urban and rural areas. (For copies of this NORML Report contact Allen St. Pierre atNORML -- 202-483-5500. For more information on GovernorKing's decision to cancel helicopter overflights for marijuana cultivationcontact Maine Civil Liberties Union Legal Counsel, ChristopherBranson at 207-773-5651.) Chief Coroner of CanadianProvince of British Columbia Calls for Consideration ofLegalizing Cannabis. The Vancouver Sun Times reported in a January 21 storythat Vince Cain, the chief coroner of British Columbia, said that"the so-called war on drugs which is conducted by thecriminal justice system can only be regarded as an expensivefailure." Cain went on to say that "Police officershave told me they're wasting their time on this socialissue." These comments came in a report entitled IllicitNarcotic Overdose Deaths in B.C. published by the BritishColumbia provincial government. Although it is impossible to overdose on marijuana, Cain used thereport to urge that the provincial Attorney General considerlegalizing the sale of marijuana. The report was discussed furtherTuesday at a meeting of provincial and federal law enforcementofficials. A senior Royal Canadian Mounted Police rejectedthe report saying, "we want a drug free society." He then went on to say that the vast majority of Canadians haveused alcohol and tobacco. (Chief coroner Cain can be reached at 604-660-7737. TheB. C. Attorney General can be reached at 604-387-5008.) Kentucky Governor Creates"Hemp Fiber Crop Task Force" Kentucky Governor Brereton Jones, reversing his previousposition on hemp cultivation, has created a special task force tostudy the restoration of what once was one of Kentucky's most importantlegal crops. (Illegal marijuana is currently the mostvaluable cash crop in Kentucky.) In the late 19th century,Kentucky produced more than 90% of the nation's hemp, which isalso the marijuana plant. This action has long been urgedby former NORML Board member and Kentucky Democraticgubernatorial candidate Gatewood Galbraith. It is possible to grow varieties of hemp that have virtually nopsychoactive ingredients. It is generally recognized as oneof the most versatile agricultural plants, and it is cultivatedfor non-drug purposes in China and most of Europe. There isa strong demand for hemp fiber for clothing in America, but TheDrug Enforcement Administration opposes its cultivation in theUnited States because it would send the wrong message: thatAmerican farmers have been kept from growing an agriculturalstaple as part of the propaganda campaign for marijuanaprohibition. (For more information on the Hemp Fiber Taskforce call JimClaycomb at 502-564-2611) At Last, an O. J. SimpsonMarijuana Story (almost) On January 20, New York Newsday, in a cover story,reported that new NORML Board Member and 1993 Nobel Laureate, Dr.Kary Mullis, the inventor of DNA testing, has said that he wouldtestify that he "wouldn't rely on the tiny blood samplescollected as solid proof of anyone's guilt." Now, ifO. J. would just read Marihuana, the Forbidden Medicine(Yale University Press) co-authored by NORML Board Chairman,Lester Grinspoon, M. D. of Harvard, perhaps the book would bereviewed and someone might report on the arrest of sick and dyingAmericans as a part of the suppression of medical access tocannabis. --END-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-68IA087-000632-B008-24http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-01-26.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084727 text/html 8973HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:47:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:49 GMTContent-length: 8758 NORML News - January 26, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FORTHE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ Special Bulletin- Special Bulletin - Special Bulletin - Special Bulletin January 26, 1995 Dutch Justice Minister Wantsto "Regulate" Marijuana Supply In a January 21 interview with the Dutch newspaper DeVolkskrant (The People's Newspaper) published in The Hague,the capital of The Netherlands, the Dutch Minister of Justice, Mrs.Winnie Sorgdrager, said she wants to "regulate the supply ofcannabis products" being sold in more than 1,300 coffeeshopsaround the country. The article explained that Sorgdrager is following her party'sopinion "that the current policy allowing retail sale ofmarijuana and hashish has to have its logical sequel inarranging the supply of the products..." Dutch policy is that "the sale of cannabis products atthe 'frontdoor' of the coffeeshops is tolerated by the Justiceministry but the supply at the 'back door', or even more, largescale production, are strictly prohibited. Criminals havetherefore taken over that part of the market." Sorgdragersaid that she believes that "we have to dispose of thishypocrisy about that back and front door." She isworking with her colleagues in the Health Ministry on a DrugReport to be issued this summer. Most of the hashish sold is still imported (smuggled in), butmost of the marijuana is now grown in the Netherlands. Thesmuggling is especially dominated by violence-prone gangs fromNorth Africa and Lebanon. The article goes on to explainthat "Sorgdrager is seriously considering a division andregulation of the cannabis market...." separating thedomestic cannabis from imported hashish smuggled in by criminalsfrom abroad. The objective is to create a means ofsupplying the Dutch market while preventing exports. The Dutch have followed the current policy for many years, soif there were any serious social or individual health problemsassociated with cannabis use, it would have become obvious by now. It is also worth noting that, until recently, most of thecannabis consumed was imported hashish which is much more potentthan most marijuana. This means that the "new potent marijuana"line pushed by the DEA has no relevance to the Dutch experienceor to the supposed threat posed to America by the averagemarijuana consumed today which -- according to the U.S. NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse -- is between 3 and 4%, far below theaverage for hashish. The article also explained that Sorgdrager does not want touse the terms "liberalization" or "legalization"but prefers to use the term "regulation." TheDutch have long been pressured by France, Belgium and the UnitedStates to arrest marijuana users, but the Germans, Swiss and othersin Europe are moving toward the Dutch model. The Dutchpolicy generally is to try to reduce the level of violence intheir country, which nationwide has about half as many murders as doesWashington, D.C., alone. Amsterdam is slightly larger thanWashington, but has less than one tenth the number of murders. On January 12th, NORML carried an exclusive report on theprotests by the Dutch government to the United States concerningmisrepresentations by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administrationregarding Dutch drug policies and their socialconsequences. The DEA has not yet responded. Thestatement by the Dutch Justice Minister has also been ignored bythe American media, while The Wall Street Journalran an editorial today entitled "Eighth GradePotheads." If the editorial's hysteria was wellfounded The Netherlands should resemble the United States, Bosnia,or some other violence ridden society and should have a very highrate of marijuana use and hard drug addiction. Just theopposite is the case. While American prohibitionists commonly claim that "theDutch legalized drugs and it did not work," in fact alldrugs remain illegal in The Netherlands. As is the case inthe U.S., most Dutch "drug related" violence is theresult of prohibition, not of the drugs themselves -- except foralcohol -- again as in the U.S. While it is Dutch policy totolerate the small scale sale and possession of cannabis, -- andno one is arrested for the possession of personal amounts of anyother drug -- the sale of hard drugs is vigorouslyprosecuted. Any "cannabis coffeeshop" which issuspected of selling hard drugs is closed immediately. Oneof the primary objectives of the "coffeeshop" policy isto separate cannabis from the hard drugs. This policy has been very successful, hence the DEA oppositionto it. Maintaining the connection between marijuana and harddrugs is a vital component of U.S. drug policy. This is the basisfor the claims that marijuana is a "stepping stone","threshold", "gateway" to using other drugs. The success of Dutch policy demonstrates that this is just theopposite of the truth, so the Dutch policy must be misrepresenteduntil they can be pressured into merging the drug markets throughblanket prohibition as has been done in the U.S. In fact, very few marijuana users in America ever become harddrug users, but the ratio is even lower in The Netherlands. Ironically, marijuana use by Dutch teenagers is much lowerthan in the U.S. Over 30% of U.S. high school seniors haveused marijuana in the last year, while only 12% of Dutch 18 yearolds have ever used cannabis. It is Dutch policy tostrongly discourage teenage cannabis use through honest drugeducation that is credible and effective -- because it does not exaggeratein order to frighten politicians, editorialists and otherimpressionable subgroups. Richard Cowan, the National Director of NORML, announced todaythat NORML will begin a program to encourage American opinionleaders -- and ordinary citizens -- to visit The Netherlands tosee for themselves the success of Dutch cannabis policy. "When Americans ask what would happen if we legalizedmarijuana, they don't have to use their imaginations to findout. They can just use their passports. Americanscertainly don't need to go to Holland to get marijuana, but theyshould go to Holland to be reminded of what we all used to know:FREEDOM WORKS." (For more information on marijuana potency, Dutch cannabispolicy, the "gateway" theory, and surveys on Americanand Dutch teenage drug use, contact Allen St. Pierre at NORML 202-483-5300). -END- OVER 9 MILLION MARIJUANAARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-69IA087-000632-B008-46http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-01-20.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084742 text/html 9533HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:47:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:53 GMTContent-length: 9318 NORML News - January 20, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weeklyservice for the media on news items related to MarijuanaProhibition. January 20, 1995 Another Federal JudgeDeclines Drug Cases and Agrees That Marijuana Should Be Decriminalized December 25, The Buffalo News reported, "Troubledwith three long-term sentences he felt forced to make in recentweeks, U.S. District Judge, John T. Curtin says he will stophearing drug cases in the coming year rather than continue to bepart of a system of punishment that 'just isn't working.' Curtin, citing restrictive sentencing guidelines in federal drugcases, told The Buffalo News he will join a boycott that wasbegun last year by some other judges." Judge Curtin also told The Buffalo Newsthat, "He ... feels Congress should take a close look at thedecriminalization of marijuana, but not cocaine or other harddrugs. [Emphasis added -- ed.] Since May 1993, an estimated 50 senior federal judges (out of 849federal judges) have begun a boycott of drug cases. "Boycotting" judges have cited excessive punishment viamandatory minimum and guideline sentencing as their reasons fordeclining to hear drug cases. Curtin told The Buffalo News that the bigger issue is thattoday's anti-drug program isn't working. He said he wouldrather see the federal government spend more money on education, counseling,and drug prevention programs, rather than towards putting peoplein prison. "You don't even have to think of it in moral terms. Infinancial terms, it just isn't working," Curtin said. First Annual HEMP AID BenefitConcert Announced January 11, Atlanta, Georgia, In the tradition of Live Aid andFarm Aid, two marijuana activists have joined forces to presentHEMP AID - a Benefit for the Re-legalization of Marijuana. James Bell (Founder of Georgia NORML) and Theresa Yarbrough,current Director of GA NORML, hope that the First Annual eventwill not only raise consciousness of the impact that marijuanaprohibition has on the lives of millions of Americans, but thatit will also raise much needed cash which will be used to fightlegal battles and help to secure the freedom of marijuana prisoners. Bell knows the impact of the marijuana laws. He's presentlyfinishing a two year sentence in a Georgia Prison Work Camp (forthe sale of few ounces of marijuana). Yarbrough learned the peculiar and excessive effects of marijuanaprohibition when she was arrested in 1993 for possession of onepound of marijuana in her home. Later convicted, she was sentencedto ten years probation and banished from residing in GA'sDistrict 31 -- removed from her community for possessingmarijuana. Both activists have been instrumental in organizing some of thelargest pro-hemp events. The two organizers want it to beknown that 1.) HEMP AID is not intended to be a 'Let's smoke pot event'but a 'Let's help people event', 2.) negotiations are under wayto secure a national head-line rock group for the First AnnualHEMP AID Benefit. Date: Saturday, May 20th, 1995 Contact: Theresa Yarbrough at (706)-235-3475 Location: Piedmont Park, Atlanta, Georgia Access: FREE (donations are requested) Actor Tim Robbins TellsPlayboy He Favors Marijuana Legalization In the February issue of Playboy magazine, actor TimRobbins expounds, at length, on marijuana prohibition and some ofits effects: Playboy: If they put you in charge of the war on drugs,what would you do? Robbins: Legalize Marijuana. Playboy: And then? Robbins: And then we would save an enormous amount oftaxpayer money, specifically on the penal system, which isoverloaded with marijuana abusers. It's unbelievable. When I did the Shawshank Redemption, every guard I talkedwith who had worked in a prison had this opinion: Legalizemarijuana. There's no reason these kids should be here.... Marijuana is just like any other thing that might not be good foryou. If you do too much of it, it can screw up yourlife. But it [marijuana -- ed.] can't screw up your lifelike cocaine or heroin or downs or ups or LSD. Playboy: Is this an admission that you still smoke pot --or was that just a phase you went through as a kid? Robbins: I take the Fifth. Considering the fact thatit's still illegal ... put it this way: Considering the fact thatI've used it in the past, and know what it is, and seen theresults of it, I don't view it as a dangerous drug.... But I don't want to advocate anything like [smoking pot] inprint, because it's a different thing for different people.... Playboy: So what would you say if your kids came to youone day and said: "Dad, did you ever take drugs in theSixties and Seventies?" Robbins: I would say, "No, it was theEighties." Yeah, I would be honest with them. And I'd tell them exactly what each drug does to you. Playboy: You realize that, having admitted these thingsnow, you've just disqualified yourself from being a Supreme Courtjustice or the attorney general. Robbins: Well, I didn't say I inhaled. Police Respond To ArsonReport -- Find DARE Graduate Burning Mother's Marijuana December 15, Longmont, Colorado, The Associated Press (AP)reported that "Police responding to reports of an arsonattempt found an 11-year old boy who told police he was burninghis mother's drugs." AP went on to report that "The boy told an officer he hadbeen through the Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE) program,and when he found the suspected marijuana he became scared anddecided to burn it... The mother told police she had been storing the drug for a friendfor the past eight years, the report stated." AP reported that no charges were filed in the case and that thefamily's been referred to Social Services for follow-up visits. -END- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-70IA087-000632-B008-64http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-01-12.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084750 text/html 10121HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:47:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:26:57 GMTContent-length: 9906 NORML News - January 12, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ ... a weeklyservice for the media on news items related to MarijuanaProhibition. January 12,1995 Dutch Minister of ForeignAffairs Takes Issue With DEA Briefing Paper That Slanders Dutch Dutch Policy January 9, The Hague, TheNetherlands. Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Hans van Mierlocriticized the United States Drug Enforcement Administration(DEA) for misrepresenting the commitment of the Dutch governmentto enforce drug law violations, for misrepresenting theprevalence of cocaine consumed by the citizens of the city ofRotterdam, and for generally misrepresenting Dutch drug policy. At the request of a Member ofthe Dutch Parliament, Minister van Mierlo responded to a recentlyreleased DEA briefing paper entitled, "How to Hold YourOwn in a Drug Legalization Debate" [NORML Weekly NewsRelease, 11/3/94): The entire letter follows: "The Minister will point out to the American Authorities that Dutch drug policy is falsely represented in a manual of the American Drug Battle Agency [DEA --ed.]. The manual mentions that the police in the Netherlands are instructed not to take action against the street trade of any drug. That is not true. In many municipalities in the Netherlands, the policing and prosecution of street traders of drugs is a high priority. Special cell space is reserved for that purpose. Furthermore, according to the DEA manual, a study of the entire Rotterdam population of individuals fifteen years and older showed that 3.3% of this population uses cocaine. What the research showed was that 3.3% of the entire population of Rotterdam between fifteen to nineteen years old mentioned that they had used cocaine [emphasis added - ed.]. It is totally irresponsible to state that all of these people are cocaine users and ridiculous to relate the figures to the total Rotterdam population. Further, data in the manual is not all wrong, but stripped of their context and therefore easily misinterpreted. The mistakes made will be discussed with the American Authorities by the Minister of Foreign Affairs." Richard Cowan, NORML NationalDirector, said that "NORML is proud to have brought thismatter to the attention of the Dutch government. TheNetherlands is one of America's oldest allies. John PaulJones refitted his ships with Dutch supplies, including hemp ropeand sails, during the American Revolution and wrote movingly of thekindness of the Dutch people." NORML believes that the DEA liesabout Dutch drug policy to create the impression that Dutchtolerance of marijuana sales is a failure. In fact it is agreat success. If Americans want to see how freedom works,they should visit the Netherlands. Ohio's "Smoke A Joint,Lose Your License" Law Found To Be Unconstitutional On November 29, 1994, in animportant court test of a classic unfunded federal mandate,Medina County Municipal Court Judge Dale H. Chase ruled thatOhio's mandated suspension of an individual's driver's licensefor minor possession of marijuana is unconstitutional. An excerpt from Judge Chase'stwo-page decision follows: "...suspension/revocation of the driver's license of an individual convicted of possession of drug paraphernalia is a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States on the basis that there is no 'rational relationship' between a license suspension for violating a drug law and the Ohio statutes dealing with legal operation of motor vehicles. The decision to suspend a driver's license for a violation of certain statutes which are not related to operation of vehicles would be no different than a decision to suspend an individual's vendor's license or other license issued by the state to conduct activities within the State of Ohio, to the extent that the licensing statute is not rationally related to the criminal statute involved. Accordingly, the Court finds... mandating license suspension for certain offenses, is unconstitutional." [The case can be cited at Ohiov. Frye, Case No. 94 CRB 00792 or for more informationcontact Northcoast Ohio NORML, John Hartman, 216-521-9333.] U.S. Anti-Drug AgenciesContinue To Impede Medical Marijuana Research January 8, The San FranciscoExaminer reported that University of California-San Franciscoclinical researcher Dr. Donald Abrams' proposed medical study of marijuana'seffects on AIDS related wasting syndrome continues to be blockedby the U.S. government. For two-and-a-half years Abramshas struggled to get marijuana for an FDA approved study to testwhether smoking marijuana can stimulate the appetite and body weightof people who are wasting because of AIDS. He has gonethrough three medical committees and two regulatory agencies,found a foreign supplier of marijuana and solicited help from theDutch government. But he and the Community Consortium onHIV research still don't know whether they'll be able to do thetest, according to the Examiner. The Examiner articlestates that ,"Dr. Philip Lee, Assistant Secretary for Health [andHuman Services --ed.], has postponed two meetings to discuss theissue of smoking marijuana to stimulate appetite in AIDSpatients. A meeting is expected to take place within thenext two weeks, but indications from NIDA don't look good." The Examiner interviewed"a government official that confirmed what many observersalready know: Agencies determined to convince the public thatmarijuana is dangerous are not keen about a study that could showsome beneficial effect." [emphasis added --ed.] NORML would add that marijuanais already being used illegally by thousands of people with AIDSfor the wasting syndrome and chronic nausea caused by AIDS and byFDA approved pharmaceuticals such as AZT. --END-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-71IA087-000632-B008-83http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/WEEKLY95/95-01-05.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084800 text/html 8136HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:47:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:27:01 GMTContent-length: 7921 NORML News - January 5, 1995 NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OFMARIJUANA LAWS 1001 CONNECTICUT AVENUE NW SUITE 1010 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036 TEL 202-483-5500 * FAX 202-483-0057 E-MAIL natlnorml@aol.com Internet http://www.norml.org/ NEWSRELEASE ** NEWS RELEASE ** NEWS RELEASE January5, 1995 LaGuardia Report Turns 50: Massive Marijuana Study Found Dangers Highly Exaggerated Contact: NORML Board Chair Lester Grinspoon, M.D., Harvard Medical School professor -- 617-277-3621 January 11,1995, will markthe 50th anniversary of the public release of The MarihuanaProblem in the City of New York: Sociological, Medical, Psychologicaland Pharmacological Studies ("The LaGuardiaReport"). The study was commissioned by MayorFiorello LaGuardia in 1938 in order to discover the truth aboutmarijuana, which had been hastily prohibited a year earlier. The study was completed in 1944,published by Jaques Cattell Press (Lancaster, PA), and releasedto the public in early 1945. "Its findings revealedthat marijuana's harmful effects had been greatlyexaggerated," explained NORML National Director RichardCowan. "The report's conclusions demonstrate that theWar Against Marijuana Consumers has been a fraud from itsbeginning." The massive research project wascarried out by a team of scientists from the New York Academy ofMedicine and the commissioners of the New York Departments of Correction,Health, and Hospitals. It was the most thorough, extensivemarijuana fact-finding mission since the Indian Hemp DrugsCommission released its monumental report in 1894. The LaGuardia Report wascomprised of a series of studies -- from sociological observationsto controlled, scientific studies involving the consumption ofmarijuana by subjects in a laboratory setting. Among thereport's conclusions: Mental Illness -- "Indulgence in marihuana does not appear to result in mental deterioration. ... Marihuana does not change the basic personality structure of the individual. It lessens inhibition and this brings out what is latent in his thoughts and emotions but it does not evoke responses which would otherwise be totally alien to him." Violence -- "There was no aggressive or violent behavior observed." Crime -- "Marihuana is not the determining factor in the commission of major crimes. Juvenile delinquency is not associated with the practice of smoking marihuana." Addiction -- "The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead to addiction in the medical sense of the word." Gateway to Hard Drugs -- "We have been unable to confirm ... that marihuana smoking is the first step in the use of such drugs as cocaine, morphine, and heroin. The instances are extremely rare where the habit of marihuana smoking is associated with addiction to these other narcotics." In sum, the report stressed,"The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects of marihuanasmoking in New York City is unfounded." The depth andthoroughness of the study make these conclusions relevant beyond1940s New York. The LaGuardia Report providedinvaluable descriptive data and dispelled many of the myths whichled to the prohibition of marijuana. Nevertheless, it wasessentially ignored and had virtually no effect on the burgeoningnational policy of prohibition. The January 12,1945, New YorkTimes article "Experts Discount Marijuana as Big FactorIn Crime but Drive on It Will Be Pressed" reassured afrightened public that marijuana would remain outlawed. Every large-scale study done over the last century has arrived atthe same conclusion; all have been ignored. Of course, prohibitionists haveplayed an active part in making sure that the reports areignored. Today they claim that marijuana is now so muchstronger than it was in the past that it is virtually a differentdrug, rendering all previous conclusions useless. Forexample, the December 26 U.S. News and World Report blameda rap album for promoting marijuana "20 times stronger thangrass of the past" ("Kids and Marijuana: The Glamour isBack," p. 12). In actuality, potency has notsubstantially increased over the past 20 years. (A reporton marijuana potency is available from NORML.) References E. Abel, Marihuana, the First Twelve Thousand Years, (New York: Plenum Press, 1980). L. Grinspoon, Marihuana Reconsidered (2nd edition reprint), (Oakland, CA: Quick American Archives, 1994). Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in The City of New York: Sociological, Medical, Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, (Lancaster, PA: Jaques Cattell Press, 1944). --END-- OVER 9 MILLIONMARIJUANA ARRESTS SINCE 1965 ... ANOTHER EVERY 2 MINUTES! WT01-B20-72IA087-000632-B008-133http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/124-401.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084825 text/html 8914HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:48:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:10:11 GMTContent-length: 8699 124.401 Prohibited acts / controlled substances 124.401 Prohibited acts---manufacturers---possessors---counterfeit substances---simulated controlled substances---penalties. 1. Except as authorized by this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to manufacture, deliver, or possess with the intent to manufacture or deliver, a controlled substance, a counterfeit substance, or a simulated controlled substance, or to act with, enter into a common scheme or design with, or conspire with one or more other persons to manufacture, deliver, or possess with the intent to manufacture or deliver a controlled substance, acounterfeit substance, or a simulated controlled substance. a. Violation of this subsection, with respect to the following controlled substances, counterfeit substances, or simulated controlled substances is a class "B" felony, and notwithstanding section 902.9, subsection 1, shall be punished by confinement for no more than fifty years and a fine of not more than one million dollars: (1) More than one kilogram of a mixture or substance containing adetectable amount of heroin. (2) More than five kilograms of a mixture or substance containing adetectable amount of any of the following: (a) Coca leaves, except coca leaves and extracts of coca leaves from which cocaine, ecgonine, and derivatives of ecgonine or their salts have been removed. (b) Cocaine, its salts, optical and geometric isomers, and salts ofisomers. (c) Ecgonine, its derivatives, their salts, isomers, and salts of isomers. (d) Any compound, mixture, or preparation which contains any quantity of any of the substances referred to in subparagraph subdivisions (a) through (c). (3) More than fifty grams of a mixture or substance described insubparagraph (2) which contains cocaine base. (4) More than one hundred grams of phencyclidine (PCP) or one kilogram or more of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of phencyclidine (PCP). (5) More than ten grams of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). (6) More than one thousand kilograms of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of marijuana. b. Violation of this subsection with respect to the following controlled substances, counterfeit substances, or simulated controlled substances is a class "B" felony, and in addition to the provisions of section 902.9, subsection 1, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five thousand dollars nor more than one hundred thousand dollars: (1) More than one hundred grams but not more than one kilogram of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of heroin. (2) More than five hundred grams but not more than five kilograms of any of the following: (a) Coca leaves, except coca leaves and extracts of coca leaves from which cocaine, ecgonine, and derivatives of ecgonine or their salts have been removed. (b) Cocaine, its salts, optical and geometric isomers, and salts ofisomers. (c) Ecgonine, its derivatives, their salts, isomers, and salts of isomers. (d) Any compound, mixture, or preparation which contains any quantity of any of the substances referred to in subparagraph subdivisions (a) through (c). (3) More than five grams but not more than fifty grams of a mixture or substance described in subparagraph (2) which contains cocaine base. (4) More than ten grams but not more than one hundred grams ofphencyclidine (PCP) or more than one hundred grams but not more than one kilogram of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of phencyclidine (PCP). (5) Not more than ten grams of a mixture or substance containing adetectable amount of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). (6) More than one hundred kilograms but not more than one thousandkilograms of marijuana. c. Violation of this subsection with respect to the following controlled substances, counterfeit substances, or simulated controlled substances is a class "C" felony, and in addition to the provisions of section 902.9, subsection 3, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than fifty thousand dollars: (1) One hundred grams or less of a mixture or substance containing adetectable amount of heroin. (2) Five hundred grams or less of any of the following: (a) Coca leaves, except coca leaves and extracts of coca leaves from which cocaine, ecgonine, and derivatives of ecgonine or their salts have been removed. (b) Cocaine, its salts, optical and geometric isomers, and salts ofisomers. (c) Ecgonine, its derivatives, their salts, isomers, and salts of isomers. (d) Any compound, mixture, or preparation which contains any quantity of any of the substances referred to in subparagraph subdivisions (a) through (c). (3) Five grams or less of a mixture or substance described in subparagraph (2) which contains cocaine base. (4) Ten grams or less of phencyclidine (PCP) or one hundred grams or less of a mixture or substance containing a detectable amount of phencyclidine (PCP). (5) More than fifty kilograms but not more than one hundred kilograms of marijuana. (6) Any other controlled substance, counterfeit substance, or simulated controlled substance classified in schedule I, II, or III. d. Violation of this subsection, with respect to any other controlled substances, counterfeit substances, or simulated controlled substances classified in schedule IV or V is an aggravated misdemeanor. However, violation of this subsection involving fifty kilograms or less of marijuana, is a class "D" felony, and in addition to the provisions of section 902.9, subsection 4, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than five thousand dollars. e. A person in the immediate possession or control of a firearm while participating in a violation of this subsection shall be sentenced to two times the term otherwise imposed by law, and no such judgment, sentence, or part thereof shall be deferred or suspended. f. A person in the immediate possession or control of an offensive weapon, as defined in section 724.1, while participating in a violation of this subsection, shall be sentenced to three times the term otherwise imposed by law, and no such judgment, sentence, or part thereof shall be deferred or suspended. 2. If the same person commits two or more acts which are in violation of subsection 1 and the acts occur in approximately the same location or time period so that the acts can be attributed to a single scheme, plan, or conspiracy, the acts may be considered a single violation and the weight of the controlled substances, counterfeit substances, or simulated controlled substances involved may be combined for purposes of charging the offender. 3. It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess a controlled substance unless such substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the course of the practitioner's professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by this chapter. Any person who violates this subsection is guilty of a serious misdemeanor. If the controlled substance is marijuana, the punishment shall be by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. All or any part of a sentence imposed pursuant to this section may be suspended and the personplaced upon probation upon such terms and conditions as the court may impose including the active participation by such person in a drug treatment, rehabilitation or education program approved by the court. Section History: Early form [C51,  2728; R60,  4374; C73,  4038; C97,  2593, 5003; S13,  2593, 2596-a; C24, 27, 31, 35,  3152, 3168, 3169; C39,  3169.02, 3169.21; C46, 50, 54, 58, 62,  204.2, 204.22; C66,  204.2, 204.20; C71,  204.2, 204.20, 204A.3, 204A.10; C73, 75, 77, 79, 81,  204.401; 82 Acts, ch 1147,  2] Section History: Recent form 84 Acts, ch 1013,  13, 14; 84 Acts, ch 1105,  2, 3; 89 Acts, ch 225,  11; 90 Acts, ch 1233,  7 ~IC93,  124.401 ~I94 Acts, ch 1107, 7 Internal References Referred to in  124.409, 124.410, 124.411, 124.413, 124.416, 155A.24, 232.22, 232.52, 321.209, 321.213, 723A.1, 811.1 WT01-B20-73IA087-000632-B008-156http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/453b.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084838 text/html 15241HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:48:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:10:03 GMTContent-length: 15025 Excise tax on unlawful dealing in certain substances Excise tax on unlawful dealing in certain substances 453B.1 Definitions. 453B.2 Administration---rules. 453B.3 Tax payment required for possession---payment due. 453B.4 Measurements. 453B.5 Defense or immunity. 453B.6 Pharmaceuticals. 453B.7 Tax imposed---rate of tax. 453B.8 Price of stamps, labels, or other indicia. 453B.9 Assessments are jeopardy assessments. 453B.10 Confidential nature of information. 453B.11 Examination of records by director---subpoenas. 453B.12 Civil and criminal penalties for violation of chapter---interest. 453B.13 Credit for previously paid taxes. 453B.14 Revision of tax---refunds. 453B.15 Availability of records and information. 453B.16 Notice of conviction. 453B.1 Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 1. "Controlled substance" means controlled substance as defined in section124.101. 2. "Counterfeit substance" means a counterfeit substance as defined insection 124.101. 3. "Dealer" means any person who ships, transports, or imports into this state or acquires, purchases, possesses, manufactures, or produces in this state any of the following: a. Seven or more grams of a taxable substance other than marijuana, but including a taxable substance that is a mixture of marijuana and other taxable substances. b. Forty-two and one-half grams or more of a substance consisting of or containing marijuana. c. Ten or more dosage units of a taxable substance which is not sold by weight. However, a person who lawfully ships, transports, or imports into this state or acquires, purchases, possesses, manufactures, or produces a taxable substance in this state is not considered a dealer. 4. "Department" means the department of revenue and finance. 5. "Director" means the director of revenue and finance. 6. "Dosage unit" means the unit of measurement in which a substance is dispensed to the ultimate user. Dosage unit includes, but is not limited to, one pill, one capsule, or one microdot. 7. "Marijuana" means marijuana as defined in section 124.101. 8. "Simulated controlled substance" means a simulated controlled substance as defined in section 124.101. 9. "Taxable substance" means a controlled substance, a counterfeit substance, a simulated controlled substance, or marijuana, or a mixture of materials that contains a controlled substance, counterfeit substance, simulated controlled substance, or marijuana. 453B.2 Administration---rules. The director shall administer this chapter. The director shall collect all taxes, interest, and civil penalties imposed under this chapter and deposit them in the general fund of the state. The director may adopt rules under chapter 17A that are necessary toenforce this chapter. The director shall adopt a uniform system ofproviding, affixing, and displaying official stamps, labels, or other official indicia for taxable substances. 453B.3 Tax payment required for possession---payment due. A dealer shall not possess, distribute, or offer to sell a taxablesubstance unless the tax imposed under this chapter has been paid asevidenced by a stamp, label, or other official indicia permanently affixed to the taxable substance. Taxes imposed on taxable substances by this chapter are due and payable immediately upon manufacture, production, acquisition, purchase, or possession by a dealer. If the indicia evidencing the payment of the tax imposed on taxablesubstances under this chapter have not been affixed, the dealer shall have the indicia permanently affixed on the taxable substance immediately after receiving the taxable substance. A stamp, label, or other official indicia shall be used only once and shall not be used after the date of expiration. 453B.4 Measurements. For purposes of measurements under this chapter, the weight of a taxable substance shall be measured by its weight in metric grams in the dealer's possession. If a taxable substance consists of a mixture containing both marijuana and another substance or combination of substances listed in the definition of taxable substance in section 453B.1, the taxable substance shall be taxed under section 453B.7, subsection 2. 453B.5 Defense or immunity. This chapter does not provide in any manner a defense or affirmativedefense to or immunity for a dealer from criminal prosecution pursuant to Iowa law. 453B.6 Pharmaceuticals. This chapter does not require persons lawfully in possession of a taxable substance to pay the tax required under this chapter or to purchase, acquire, or affix the stamps, labels, or other official indicia otherwise required by this chapter. 453B.7 Tax imposed---rate of tax. An excise tax is imposed on dealers at the following rates: 1. On each gram of marijuana, or each portion of a gram, five dollars. 2. On each gram or portion of a gram of any taxable substance sold by weight other than marijuana, two hundred fifty dollars. 3. On each ten dosage units of any taxable substance that is not sold by weight, or portion thereof, four hundred dollars. 453B.8 Price of stamps, labels, or other indicia. Stamps, labels, or other official indicia to be affixed to a taxablesubstance indicating the payment of the excise tax shall be obtained and purchased from the department. The dealer shall pay the entire excise tax listed in section 453B.7 at the time of purchase, except as provided in section 453B.13, and receive stamps, labels, or other official indicia for the amount paid. However, the minimum purchase price to be paid for any stamps, labels, or indicia shall be two hundred fifteen dollars. 453B.9 Assessments are jeopardy assessments. All assessments of taxes made pursuant to this chapter shall be considered jeopardy assessments or collections as provided in section 422.30. The director shall assess a tax, interest, and applicable penalties based on knowledge or information available to the director; serve the taxpayer by regular mail at the taxpayer's last known address or in person, a written notice of the amount of tax, interest, and penalty due, which notice may include a demand for immediate payment; and immediately proceed to collect the tax, interest, and penalty by any method prescribed in section 422.30.The period for examination, determination of amount of tax owed, andassessment is unlimited. Service of the notice by regular mail is complete upon mailing. A person shall not bring suit to enjoin the assessment or collection of any taxes, interest, or penalties imposed by this chapter. The tax, interest, and penalties assessed by the director are presumed to be valid and correctly determined and assessed. The burden is upon the taxpayer to show any incorrectness or invalidity of an assessment. The burden is upon the taxpayer to prove that the shipment, transportation, importation, acquisition, purchase, possession, manufacture, or production of a taxable substance was lawful if a taxpayer's status as a dealer is disputed. Any statement filed by the director with the clerk of the district court, or any other certificate by the director of the amount of tax, interest, and penalties determined or assessed is admissible in evidence and is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in the statement. 453B.10 Confidential nature of information. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the director or an employee of the department shall not reveal any information obtained from a dealer; nor shall information obtained from a dealer be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless the information is independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving taxes due under this chapter from the dealer against whom the tax was assessed. A person who violates this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. This section does not prohibit the director from publishing statistics that do not disclose the identity of the dealers. A stamp, label, or other official indicia denoting payment of the tax imposed under this chapter shall not be used against a taxpayer in a criminal proceeding, except that such information may be used against the taxpayer in connection with the administration or civil or criminal enforcement of the tax imposed under this chapter or any similar tax imposed by another state or local unit of government. 453B.11 Examination of records by director---subpoenas. For the purpose of determining whether or not the dealer should have paid taxes, determining the amount of tax that should have been paid, or collecting any taxes under this chapter, the director may examine, or cause to be examined, any books, papers, records, or memoranda that may be relevant to making such determinations, whether the books, papers, records, or memoranda are the property of or in the possession of the dealer or another person. The director may require the attendance of any person having knowledge or information that may be relevant, compel the production of books, papers, records, or memoranda by persons required to attend, take testimony on matters material to the determination, and administer oaths or affirmations. Upon demand of the director or an examiner or investigator, the court shall issue a subpoena for the attendance of a witness or the production of books, papers, records, or memoranda. The director may also issue subpoenas. Disobedience of subpoenas issued under this chapter is punishable by the district court of the county in which the subpoena is issued, or if the subpoena is issued by the director, by the district court of the county in which the party served with the subpoena is located, inthe same manner as a contempt of court. The director may petition the district court or a magistrate for anadministrative search warrant as authorized by section 808.14 to execute a distress warrant authorized by section 422.26. 453B.12 Civil and criminal penalties for violation of chapter---interest. A dealer who violates this chapter is subject to a penalty equal to the amount of the tax imposed by section 453B.7, in addition to the tax imposed by that section. The dealer shall pay interest on the tax and penalty at the rate in effect under section 421.7, counting each fraction of a month as an entire month, computed from the date of assessment through the date of payment. The penalty and interest shall be collected as part of the tax. In addition to the civil tax penalty and interest imposed by this section, a dealer distributing, offering to sell, or possessing taxable substances without affixing the appropriate stamps, labels, or other official indicia is guilty of a class "D" felony. A person who possesses, prints, engraves, makes, issues, sells, orcirculates a counterfeit taxable substance tax stamp, label, or other official indicia, or places or causes to be placed a counterfeit taxable substance tax stamp, label, or other official indicia on a taxable substance, is guilty of a class "D" felony. A person who uses, sells, offers for sale, or possesses for use or sale a previously used or expired taxable substance tax stamp, label, or other official indicia, or attaches or causes to be attached a previously used or expired taxable substance tax stamp, label, or other official indicia to a taxable substance, is guilty of a class "D" felony. Notwithstanding section 802.3, an indictment may be found or information filed upon any criminal offense specified in this chapter, in the proper court, within six years after the commission of the offense. 453B.13 Credit for previously paid taxes. If another state or local unit of government has previously assessed an excise tax on a taxable substance, the taxpayer shall pay the difference between the tax imposed under this chapter and the tax previously paid. If the tax previously paid to the other state or local unit of government was equal to or greater than the tax imposed under this chapter, no tax is due. The burden is on the taxpayer to show that an excise tax on the taxable substances has been paid to another state or local unit of government. 453B.14 Revision of tax---refunds. Sections 421.5, 422.26, 422.28, 422.29, 422.73, subsection 2, and 422.74 shall apply to this chapter, except that a refund claim filed later than thirty days from the expiration date of the stamps for which the refund is requested shall not be allowed by the director. 453B.15 Availability of records and information. The director may request from state, county, and local agencies,information and assistance deemed necessary to administer this chapter. State, county, and local agencies, officers, and employees shall cooperate with the director in identifying dealers and shall, on request, supply the department with available information and assistance which the director deems necessary to administer this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions of law making such information confidential. 453B.16 Notice of conviction. If a person enters a plea of guilty, or forfeits bail or collateraldeposited to secure the person's appearance in court, and the forfeiture is not vacated, or if a person is found guilty upon an indictment or information alleging a violation of this chapter, a copy of the minutes attached to the indictment returned by the grand jury, or to the county attorney's information, a copy of the judgment and sentence, and a copy of the opinion of the judge if one is filed, shall be sent by the clerk of the district court or the judge to the state department of transportation.WT01-B20-74IA087-000632-B008-180http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/321-209.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084857 text/html 2083HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:48:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:10:07 GMTContent-length: 1868 321.209 Mandatory revocation. 321.209 Mandatory revocation. The department shall upon twenty days' notice and without preliminary hearing revoke the license or operating privilege of an operator upon receiving a record of the operator's conviction for any of the following offenses, when such conviction has become final: 1. Manslaughter resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle. 2. A felony if during the commission of the felony a motor vehicle is used. 3. Failure to stop and render aid as required under the laws of this state in the event of a motor vehicle accident resulting in the death or personal injury of another. 4. Perjury or the making of a false affidavit or statement under oath to the department under this chapter or under any other law relating to the ownership or operation of motor vehicles. 5. Conviction, or forfeiture of bail not vacated, upon two charges of reckless driving. 6. Conviction of drag racing. 7. Eluding or attempting to elude a law enforcement vehicle as provided in section 321.279. 8. A controlled substance offense under section 124.401, 124.401A, 124.402, or 124.403; a controlled substance tax offense under chapter 453B; a drug or drug- related offense under section 126.3; or an offense under 21 U.S.C. ch. 13. Section History: Early form [C31, 35,  4960-d33, 5027-d1; C39,  5014.09; C46, 50, 54, 58, 62, 66, 71, 73, 75, 77, 79, 81,  321.209; 82 Acts, ch 1167,  2] Section History: Recent form 83 Acts, ch 125,  3; 86 Acts, ch 1220,  31; 90 Acts, ch 1230,  53; 93 Acts, ch 16,  4 Internal References Referred to in  321.212, 321.213, 321.215, 321.218, 321A.17 WT01-B20-75IA087-000632-B008-216http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/dressler.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084914 text/html 13696HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:49:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:09:52 GMTContent-length: 13480 Dressler v. Iowa Dept. of Transportation IN THE SUPREME COURT OF IOWANo. 383/94-1945Filed January 17, 1996 RICHARD A. DRESSLER,     Appellant,vs.IOWA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,STATE OF IOWA,     Appellee.     Appeal from the Iowa District Court for Polk County, Robert A. Hutchison, Judge.     Appeal from district count denial of petition for a writ of certiorari challenging constitutionality of agency action under Iowa Code section 321.2O9(8) (1995).  REVERSED AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.     William Jeffrey Crispin of Wilson & Adams, P.C., Des Moines, for appellant.     Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General, David A. Ferree, Special Assistant Attorney General, and Kerry Anderson, Assistant Attorney General, for appellee.     Considered by Harris, P.J., and Larson, Lavorato, Snell, and Andreasen, JJ. 2 LAVORATO, Justice.     Richard A. Dressler appeals from the district count's denial of his Petition for a writ of certiorari against the Iowa Department of Transportation (IDOT).  In his petition, Dressler challenges as unconstitutional 1993 Iowa Acts chapter 16, section 4, codified at Iowa Code section 321.209(8) (1995).  Section 321.209(8) authorizes the IDOT to revoke the driver's license of a person convicted of certain drug, drug tax, or drug-related offenses.     We reach only DressIer's contention that section 321.209(8) violates double jeopardy guarantees.  We conclude section 321.209(8) is constitutionally infirm under the federal Double Jeopardy Clause.  We reverse the district court's order denying Dressler's petition for a writ of certiorari.  We remand to allow the district court to enter an order granting the writ.     I.  Background Facts and Proceedings.     In March 1994 Dressler pleaded guilty to the possession of a controlled substance.  See Iowa Code  124.401(3).  About six weeks later, the IDOT notified Dressler in writing that his driving privileges were revoked for 180 days pursuant to Iowa Code section 321.209(8).  The notice also informed Dressler that he was not entitled to a preliminary hearing on the matter.     Dressler then filed a petition for a writ of certiorari with the district court.  In the petition he asked the court to find section 321.209(8) unconstitutional on the three grounds he urges here.  Dressler appeals from the court's order dismissing the writ.     II.  Scope of Review.     A writ of certiorari is proper under Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 306 when one "exercising judicial functions . . . is alleged to have . . . acted illegally."  Our review of certiorari actions is generally at law.  Grant v. Iowa Dist. Ct., 492 N.W.2d 683, 685 (Iowa 1992).  Because Dressler alleges a constitutional 3 violation, our review is de novo.  State v. Clarke, 475 N.W.2d 193, 194 (Iowa 1991).     III.  Applicable Law.     Iowa Code section 321.209(8) pertinently provides that           [t]he department shall upon twenty days' notice and      without preliminary hearing revoke the license or operating      privilege of an operator upon receiving a record of the      operator's conviction for any of the following offenses,      when such conviction has become final:          [Sections 1-7 deal with vehicle-related offenses.]          8.  A controlled substance offense under section      124.401, 124.401A, 124.402 or 124.403; a controlled      substance tax offense under chapter 453B; a drug or      drug-related offense under section 126.3; or an offense      under 21 U.S.C. ch. 13.     IV.  Double Jeopardy.     The Fifth Amendment to the federal constitution provides that no person shall be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb."  U.S. Const. amend. V.  The protections against double jeopardy are enforceable against the states through the Fourteenth Amendment to the federal constitution.  Benton v. Maryland, 395 U.S. 784, 794, 89 S.Ct. 2056, 2062, 23 L.Ed.2d 707, 716 (1969).     The Double Jeopardy Clause is violated when (1) a second prosecution for the same offense occurs after acquittal, (2) a second prosecution for the same offense occurs after conviction, and (3) multiple punishments occur for the same offense.  North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 717, 89 S.Ct. 2072, 2076, 23 L.Ed.2d 656, 664-65 (1969); State v. Taft, 506 N.W.2d 757, 760 (Iowa 1993).     Dressler's double jeopardy claim falls within the third situation: multiple punishments occurring for the same offense.  He contends the State impermissibly inflicted two punishments upon him for the same offense-possession of a controlled substance.  Dressler claims he was punished the first time when he was incarcerated and paid a $250 fine and count costs for possession under section 4 124.401(3).  He claims he was punished a second time when the IDOT notified him that, without the benefit of a hearing, his license was revoked for 180 days.     Dressler says that to escape double jeopardy concerns, a state wishing to inflict postconviction punishment upon a defendant must do so in a single proceeding.  He contends that was not the case here, because the license revocation followed Dressler's initial conviction and sentence under section 124.401(3).  This, he argues, constituted multiple prosecution and punishment for the same offense in separate proceedings,  constitutionally prohibited by federal double jeopardy guarantees.     To support his argument, Dressler relies heavily on two recent United States Supreme Court decisions: United States v. Halper, 490 U.S. 435, 109 S.Ct. 1892, 104 L.Ed.24 487 (1989), and Montana Department of Revenue v. Kurth Ranch, 511 U.S. ___, 114 S.Ct. 1937, 128 L.Ed.2d 767 (1994).  In Halper, the Court held that a civil penalty, imposed after a criminal penalty, may constitute a second punishment for double jeopardy purposes     when the sanction as applied in the individual case serves      the goals of punishment.          These goals are familiar.  We have recognized in      other contexts that punishment serves the twin aims of      retribution and deterrence.  Furthermore, "[r]etribution      and deterrence are not legitimate nonpunitive governmental      objectives."  From these premises, it follows that a civil      sanction that cannot fairly be said solely to serve a      remedial purpose, but rather can only be explained as also      serving either retributive or deterrent purposes, is      punishment, as we have come to understand the term.  We      therefore hold that under the Double Jeopardy Clause a      defendant who alreadv has been punished in a criminal      prosecution may not be subjected to an additional civil      sanction to the extent that the second sanction may not      fairly be characterized as remedial, but only as a deterrent      or retribution.Halper, 490 U.S. at 448-49, 109 S.Ct. at 1901-02, 104 L.Ed.2d at 501-02 (citations omitted).     In Kurth Ranch, the Court had before it a postconviction drug tax assessment.  Employing a different analysis from that articulated in Halper, the 5 Court held that the tax constituted a second punishment.  For that reason, the tax had to be imposed during the first prosecution or not at all.  The Court characterized the postconviction proceeding to collect a tax as "the functional equivalent of a successive criminal prosecution that placed the Kurths in jeopardy a second time 'for the same offence.'"  Kurth Ranch, 511 U.S. at ___, 114 S.Ct. at 1948, 128 L.Ed.2d at 782.  Simply put, as Dressler says, "a state wishing to inflict postconviction punishment on a defendant must do so in a single proceeding.  Otherwise, punishment following an initial conviction and sentencing is barred as double jeopardy."     The question boils down to whether the license revocation is punitive or remedial.     The State concedes Dressler was sanctioned in the criminal case before his license was revoked in a civil proceeding under section 321.209(8).  But the State argues the subsequent revocation of Dressler's license is not subsequent punishment for possession of a controlled substance under section 124.401(3).  The State strongly asserts that the underlying purpose of section 321.209(8) is remedial rather than punitive, designed solely for the safety of the public.  For that reason, the State concludes, no double jeopardy violation occurred.     We think the question whether the revocation was punitive rather than remedial is controlled by our recent decision in Hills v. Iowa Department of Transportation, 534 N.W.2d 640 (Iowa 1993).  In Hills, the defendant was arrested for operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated.  After a search incident to arrest, the defendant was also charged with possession of marijuana.  See Iowa Code  124.401(3).  Before the defendant's pretrial conference -- at which the defendant intended to plead guilty to the possession charge -- section 321.209(8) became effective.  As a consequence, the IDOT revoked the defendant's license 6 over her objection that to do so was an ex post facto application of section 321.209(8).     On judicial revIew of the IDOT's decision, the district court  reversed.  On appeal the IDOT argued that ex post facto protections did not apply to a revocation based on a controlled substance violation, because the revocation was a civil, rather than criminal, penalty.  See State v. Taggart, 186 Iowa 247, 254, 172 N.W. 299, 301 (1919) (ex post facto protections apply only to penal and criminal actions, not civil actions).  This is the same argument the State posits against Dressler's double jeopardy claim here.     In rejecting this argument in Hills, we said the answer turned on whether the legislative purpose underpinning the controlled substance revocation is promotion of highway safety.  In concluding there was no direct connection between possession of controlled substances, driving, and public safety, we said that     [p]ersons who illegally possess drugs are of course subject      to appropriate criminal punishment.  But many such persons      choose not to drive.  When they do not, they do not affect      highway safety.  Any connection between drugs, driving, and      public safety is at most indirect.  The amended statute      authorizing this license revocation was aimed essentially at      enhancing punishmen for controllcd substance possession.Hills, 534 N.W.2d at 642 (emphasis added).     Our conclusion in Hills that section 321.209(8) enhances punishment of a controlled substance possession dispenses with the State's assertion that this section is not a penal statute.  Because section 321.209(8) twice punishes Dressler for the same offense -- possession of a controlled substance -- in a separate proceeding, we conclude it unconstitutionally contravenes Dressler's double jeopardy guarantees.     V.  Disposition.     We conclude that section 321.209(8) violates double jeopardy principles by twice punishing Dressler for possession of a controlled substance in separate 7 proceedings.  We therefore reverse the district court's order denying Dressler's petition for a writ of certiorari.  We remand to allow the district court to enter an order granting the writ.     REVERSED AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.WT01-B20-76IA087-000632-B008-243http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/doubjeop.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084931 text/html 5285HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:49:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:09:56 GMTContent-length: 5070 New Iowa Double Jeopardy Ruling The Des Moines Register, Wednesday, February 7, 1996, page 1M  Court restores driving privileges  The ruling says the state may not automatically suspend licenses of convicted drug dealers.  By THOMAS A. FOGARTY Register Staff Writer       Hundreds of convicted drug dealers will have their driving privileges restored and the state of Iowa could lose more than $16 million annually in federal highway aid as a result of a little-noticed decision issued last month by the Iowa Supreme Court.      The court struck down a 1993 state law that calls for the automatic six-month suspension of the driver's license of anyone convicted of a drug-related criminal charge.  According to the court, the license suspension was an unconstitutional second punishment for a single criminal action.  Subject to Suspension      Shirley Andre, chief of the Department of Transportation motor vehicle division, said 8,483 people with drug convictions were subject to the suspension law before the court nullified it with its decision Jan. 17.      With the decision, Andre said, the department stopped imposing new suspensions and lifted those that were in effect.  Although the department has yet to systematically contact those serving their suspension that driving privileges have been restored, officials have informed drug offenders who have inquired about their driving statis.      Transportation officials have decided against expunging drug-related suspensions from the driving records of those who have already completed them, Andre said.      The Supreme Court ruled in a case brought by Richard Dressler of Des Moines, who in March 1994 was stopped by authorities near Huxley for a broken taillight.  Officers discovered a small quantity of marijuana in his possession.  Dressler pleaded guilty and paid the fine on the criminal charge.      He challenged the license suspension in court.  Ironically, disposition of the case took so long that Dressler served the full suspension, so the ruling has no practical effect on him.      "It's the first step in the right direction of common sense," said Jeff Crispin, the Des Moines lawyer who represented Dressler.  "There's no logical connection between these drug offenses and driving privileges."  Unrelated Charges      The court decision addresses only license suspension for drug offenses that are unrelated to driving, such as possession or sale of drugs.  It has no bearing on license suspensions for those convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol or other drugs.  In fact, the Iowa Supreme Court issued an opinion on the same day last month upholding precedures for suspending the licenses of drivers charged with driving under the influence.      Three years ago, Gov. Terry Branstad recommended to the Legislature passage of license suspensions in drug cases.  Branstad's support of such a policy as a get-tough measure only partially explains how the law came to be.      In addition, the federal government said failure by Iowa or any other state to pass such a measure would cost state governments 5 percent of their federal highway aid in 1994, and 10 percent in subsequent years.  At the time, transportion department lobbyists told lawmakers that the higher percentage represented about $16 million a year for Iowa.  The sum presumably would be higher now, Andre said.      The federal deadline for state action on the legislation has passed, so the Supreme Court's decision to nullify the Iowa law leaves the status of future federal highway aid questionable.  Andre said officials are preparing a letter to U.S. Transportation Secretary Federico Pena explaining the situation and seeking his guidance.      "To my knowledge, no other state has been fraced with this particular challenge," said Andre.      In addition to sorting things out with federal highway officials, Andre said her agency has been discussing with Branstad staff possible legislative responses to the court's decision.      Andre and David Hudson, Branstad's legislative lobbyist, say it's too early to know what course of action will be recommended this session to the Legislature.  The options include repealing the unconstitutional provision outright, or developing a substitute provision that would achieve the same goals in a constitutional way.      In 1993, the federal government permitted states that opposed the license suspension policy for drug offenders to preserve their full highway allotment by passing a legislative resolution stating their intention not to pass such a law.  Even if that option remains for Iowa officials - and it's not clear that it does - Andre said it's an unlikely course of action, given Branstad's support for the suspension policy.WT01-B20-77IA087-000632-B008-262http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/sf397.html 206.61.184.43 19970122084949 text/html 4853HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:49:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:10:19 GMTContent-length: 4638 SF 397 The original file contained strikes and underscores. This file replaces the strikes with italic print and the underscores with bold print. Partial Bill History Bill Introduced: S.J. 684 Committee Report Issued: S.J. 690 Complete Bill History Bill Text PAG LIN  1  1    Section 1.  Section 124.401, subsection 3, Code 1995, is  1  2 amended to read as follows:  1  3    3.  a.  It is unlawful for any person knowingly or  1  4 intentionally to possess a controlled substance unless such  1  5 substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid  1  6 prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the  1  7 course of the practitioner's professional practice, or except  1  8 as otherwise authorized by this chapter.  Any person who  1  9 violates this subsection is guilty of a serious an aggravated  1 10 misdemeanor for the first offense, and a class "D" felony for  1 11 the second and each subsequent offense if the second or  1 12 subsequent offense occurs within six years of the previous  1 13 offense.  If the controlled substance is marijuana, the  1 14 punishment shall be by imprisonment in the county jail for not  1 15 more than six months or by a fine of not more than one  1 16 thousand dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment.  All  1 17 or any part of a sentence imposed pursuant to this section may  1 18 be suspended and the person placed upon probation upon such  1 19 terms and conditions as the court may impose including the  1 20 active participation by such person in a drug treatment,  1 21 rehabilitation or education program approved by the court.  1 22    b.  Any person who possesses marijuana is guilty of a  1 23 serious misdemeanor for the first offense, and is guilty of an  1 24 aggravated misdemeanor for the second and each subsequent  1 25 offense if the second or subsequent offense occurs within six  1 26 years of the previous offense.  1 27    c.  A person eighteen or older is guilty of an aggravated  1 28 misdemeanor if the person knowingly or intentionally possesses  1 29 any controlled substance in violation of this section in the  1 30 presence of a minor.  1 31    Sec. 2.  EFFECTIVE DATE.  This Act shall not take effect  1 32 unless an appropriation is enacted or the state's share of the  1 33 cost is specified in accordance with section 25B.2, subsection  1 34 3.    1 35                           EXPLANATION  2  1    This bill provides that a person who unlawfully possesses a  2  2 controlled substance other than marijuana commits an  2  3 aggravated misdemeanor for the first offense and a class "D"  2  4 felony for each subsequent offense if the subsequent offense  2  5 is committed within six years of the previous offense.  The  2  6 bill eliminates the six-month jail term and $1,000 fine for  2  7 possession of marijuana and makes possession of marijuana a  2  8 serious misdemeanor for the first offense and an aggravated  2  9 misdemeanor for each subsequent offense if the subsequent  2 10 offense is committed within six years of the previous offense.  2 11 The bill also makes it an aggravated misdemeanor for an adult  2 12 to unlawfully possess a controlled substance in the presence  2 13 of a minor.  2 14    The bill may contain a state mandate under chapter 25B and  2 15 will not take effect unless an appropriation fully funding the  2 16 cost to political subdivisions of complying with the bill or  2 17 specifying the state's share of the cost of complying with the  2 18 bill is enacted.    2 19 LSB 1705SV 76  2 20 mk/sc/14 WT01-B20-78IA087-000632-B008-282http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/hf554.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085004 text/html 3204HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:49:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:10:37 GMTContent-length: 2989 HF 554 House File 554 Partial Bill History Bill Introduced: H.J. 1140 Passed House: H.J. 1596 Passed Senate: S.J. 1255 Signed by Governor: H.J. 1966 Complete Bill History Partial Bill Text PAG LIN 11  8    Sec. 29.  Section 453B.1, subsection 3, paragraph b, Code 11  9 1995, is amended to read as follows: 11 10    b.  Forty-two and one-half grams or more of processed 11 11 marijuana or of a substance consisting of or containing 11 12 marijuana. 11 13    Sec. 30.  Section 453B.1, subsection 3, Code 1995, is 11 14 amended by adding the following new paragraph after paragraph 11 15 b and relettering: 11 16    NEW PARAGRAPH.  c.  One or more unprocessed marijuana 11 17 plants. 11 18    Sec. 31.  Section 453B.1, Code 1995, is amended by adding 11 19 the following new subsections: 11 20    NEW SUBSECTION.  7A.  "Processed marijuana" means all 11 21 marijuana except unprocessed marijuana plants. 11 22    NEW SUBSECTION.  10.  "Unprocessed marijuana plant" means 11 23 any cannabis plant at any level of growth, whether wet, dry, 11 24 harvested, or growing. 11 25    Sec. 32.  Section 453B.7, Code 1995, is amended to read as 11 26 follows: 11 27    453B.7  TAX IMPOSED &endash; RATE OF TAX. 11 28    An excise tax is imposed on dealers at the following rates: 11 29    1.  On each gram of processed marijuana, or each portion of 11 30 a gram, five dollars. 11 31    2.  On each gram or portion of a gram of any taxable 11 32 substance sold by weight other than marijuana, two hundred 11 33 fifty dollars. 11 34    3.  On each unprocessed marijuana plant, seven hundred 11 35 fifty dollars. 12  1    3. 4.  On each ten dosage units of any taxable substance, 12  2 other than unprocessed marijuana plants, that is not sold by 12  3 weight, or portion thereof, four hundred dollars. WT01-B20-79IA087-000632-B009-23http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/sf2009.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085021 text/html 14817HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:50:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:10:24 GMTContent-length: 14601 SF 2009 The original file contained strikes and underscores. This file replaces the strikes with italic print and the underscores with bold print. Senate File 2009 Partial Bill History Bill Introduced: S.J. 11 Complete Bill History Bill Text PAG LIN  1  1    Section 1.  Section 901.10, Code 1995, is amended to read  1  2 as follows:  1  3    901.10  IMPOSITION OF MANDATORY MINIMUM SENTENCES.  1  4    1.  A court sentencing a person for an act prohibited under  1  5 section 124.406 or sections 124.401 and 124.413 may, at its  1  6 discretion, waive the mandatory minimum term of confinement if  1  7 the person was not using or in control of a firearm and did  1  8 not commit an assault as defined under section 708.1 while  1  9 participating in the prohibited act, if mitigating  1 10 circumstances exist, and if the mitigating circumstances are  1 11 stated specifically in the record.  However, the state may  1 12 appeal the discretionary decision on the grounds that the  1 13 stated mitigating circumstances do not warrant a reduction of  1 14 the sentence.  1 15    2.  A court sentencing a person for the person's first  1 16 conviction under section 124.406, 124.413, or 902.7 may, at  1 17 its discretion, sentence the person to a mandatory minimum  1 18 term which is less than the mandatory minimum term which is  1 19 provided by the statute if mitigating circumstances exist and  1 20 those circumstances are stated specifically in the record.  1 21 However, the state may appeal the discretionary decision on  1 22 the grounds that the stated mitigating circumstances do not  1 23 warrant a reduction of the sentence.  1 24    Sec. 2.  Section 902.11, unnumbered paragraph 1, Code 1995,  1 25 is amended to read as follows:  1 26    A person serving a sentence for conviction of a felony,  1 27 other than a forcible felony, who has a criminal record of one  1 28 or more prior convictions for a forcible felony or a crime of  1 29 a similar gravity in this or any other state, shall be denied  1 30 parole or work release unless the person has served at least  1 31 one-half of the maximum term of the defendant's sentence.  1 32 However, the mandatory sentence provided for by this section  1 33 does not apply if either of the following apply:  1 34    Sec. 3.  Section 902.11, subsection 1, Code 1995, is  1 35 amended to read as follows:  2  1    1.  The sentence being served is for a felony other than a  2  2 forcible felony and the sentences for the prior forcible  2  3 felonies expired at least five years before the date of  2  4 conviction for the present felony.  2  5    Sec. 4.  NEW SECTION.  902.12  MINIMUM SENTENCE &endash; ELIGI-  2  6 BILITY OF FORCIBLE FELONS FOR PAROLE OR WORK RELEASE.  2  7    1.  A person serving a sentence for a conviction of a  2  8 forcible felony who has a criminal record of one prior  2  9 conviction for a forcible felony or a crime of similar gravity  2 10 in this or any other state shall be denied parole or work  2 11 release unless the person has served at least eighty-five  2 12 percent of the maximum term of the person's sentence.  2 13    2.  A person serving a sentence for a conviction of a  2 14 forcible felony who has a criminal record of two or more prior  2 15 convictions for a forcible felony or a crime of similar  2 16 gravity in this or any other state shall serve one hundred  2 17 percent of the maximum term of the person's sentence and shall  2 18 not be released on parole or work release.  2 19    Sec. 5.  Section 903A.2, unnumbered paragraph 1, Code 1995,  2 20 is amended to read as follows:  2 21    Each Unless an inmate is sentenced pursuant to section  2 22 902.12, subsection 2, an inmate of an institution under the  2 23 Iowa department of corrections, is eligible for a reduction of  2 24 sentence of one day for each day of good conduct of the inmate  2 25 while committed to one of the department's institutions.  In  2 26 Unless an inmate is sentenced pursuant to section 902.12,  2 27 subsection 2, in addition to the sentence reduction of one day  2 28 for each day of good conduct, each inmate is eligible for an  2 29 additional reduction of sentence of up to five days a month if  2 30 the inmate participates satisfactorily in employment in the  2 31 institution, in Iowa state industries, in an inmate employment  2 32 program established by the director, in a treatment program  2 33 established by the director, or in an inmate educational  2 34 program approved by the director.  Inmates who are sentenced  2 35 pursuant to section 902.12, subsection 2, are eligible for a  3  1 reduction of sentence of up to one day per month for good  3  2 conduct while committed to one of the department's  3  3 institutions.  Reduction of sentence pursuant to this section  3  4 may be subject to forfeiture pursuant to section 903A.3.  3  5 Computation of good conduct time is subject to the following  3  6 conditions:  3  7    Sec. 6.  APPLICABILITY OF WAIVER TO CURRENT INMATES.  The  3  8 board of parole shall identify inmates currently serving  3  9 mandatory minimum sentences for an offense under section 1 of  3 10 this Act that would have been eligible for waiver of the  3 11 mandatory minimum term if the inmates had been sentenced on or  3 12 after the effective date of this Act.  For each inmate  3 13 identified, the board of parole shall review the inmate's  3 14 record and the circumstances surrounding the inmate's  3 15 conviction and make a determination as to whether the inmate's  3 16 mandatory minimum term should be waived.  If the parole board  3 17 determines that the inmate's mandatory minimum term of  3 18 confinement should be waived, the inmate shall be immediately  3 19 eligible for parole.  3 20    Sec. 7.  INTERIM STUDY COMMITTEE.  The legislative council  3 21 is requested to establish an interim committee to study  3 22 currently available sentencing and incarceration options.  The  3 23 study may include but shall not be limited to a review of  3 24 available jail, community corrections, and prison beds; the  3 25 potential impact of the use of split sentencing on jail,  3 26 community corrections, and prison bed space; security needs  3 27 and costs associated with the implementation of hard labor  3 28 requirements for persons incarcerated in corrections  3 29 institutions; and the nature and costs associated with other  3 30 sentencing options.  In addition to legislative members, the  3 31 membership of the interim committee shall include the  3 32 following public members:  3 33    1.  A representative from the board of parole.  3 34    2.  A representative from the division of criminal and  3 35 juvenile justice planning of the department of human rights.  4  1    3.  A representative from an association of sheriffs and  4  2 deputy sheriffs.  4  3    4.  A representative from the department of corrections.  4  4    5.  A representative from a county board of supervisors.  4  5    The committee shall submit findings and any recommendations  4  6 in a report to the general assembly by January 1, 1997.  4  7    Sec. 8.  RISK ASSESSMENT STUDY.  The department of  4  8 corrections, in consultation with the board of parole and the  4  9 division of criminal and juvenile justice planning of the  4 10 department of human rights, shall conduct a study of the  4 11 various risk assessment tools currently used in the Iowa  4 12 corrections system to determine the relative risk posed by a  4 13 criminal offender and the prospects for the offender's  4 14 rehabilitation, and make findings and recommendations  4 15 regarding the implementation and use of a risk assessment tool  4 16 during or as part of the presentence investigation process.  4 17 In conducting the study, the department shall also consult  4 18 with faculty members with expertise in risk assessment who are  4 19 from Iowa institutions of higher education which offer degree  4 20 programs in criminology.  The recommendations and any  4 21 corresponding findings shall be submitted in a report to the  4 22 general assembly by January 1, 1997.  4 23    Sec. 9.  SPLIT-SENTENCING PILOT PROJECT.  4 24    1.  The general assembly finds that the implementation of a  4 25 split-sentencing pilot project within this state could serve  4 26 as a test for a fair and flexible method of dispensing  4 27 criminal justice which provides for an incremental approach to  4 28 the imposition of aggravated misdemeanor and felony criminal  4 29 sentences and may help to reduce the current prison  4 30 overcrowding problems while protecting the public safety.  A  4 31 split-sentencing pilot project is therefore established in a  4 32 judicial district to be determined by the supreme court.  The  4 33 judicial district shall be selected based on the availability  4 34 of jail space within the judicial district, and whether the  4 35 judicial district in consultation with the county board or  5  1 boards of supervisors and the sheriff or sheriffs desires to  5  2 participate in the project.  Notwithstanding any other  5  3 contrary provision of law, subsection 2 of this section shall  5  4 apply within and only within the judicial district which is  5  5 selected to participate in this pilot project from the date of  5  6 the enactment of this Act through June 30, 1997.  5  7    2.  By record entry at the time of or after sentencing for  5  8 an aggravated misdemeanor or a felony, other than a class "A"  5  9 felony, the court may sentence the defendant to serve up to  5 10 ninety days of the sentence in the county jail and suspend the  5 11 balance of the term imposed.  If the person is ordered to  5 12 serve up to ninety days in jail, the costs of the person's  5 13 confinement shall be paid by the state at the rate negotiated  5 14 by the department of corrections with the judicial district  5 15 under section 904.908.  Payment shall be made by the  5 16 department of revenue and finance upon submission of a voucher  5 17 executed by the sheriff.  Persons serving time in a county  5 18 jail under this subsection shall be committed to the custody  5 19 of the director of the department of corrections and the  5 20 department shall be responsible for all prisoner medical  5 21 costs.    5 22                           EXPLANATION  5 23    This bill provides that the court, when sentencing a person  5 24 for certain drug offenses not involving a firearm or an  5 25 assault, may waive an applicable mandatory minimum sentence if  5 26 mitigating circumstances exist and are on record.  The waiver  5 27 is appealable by the state.  The waiver may also be made  5 28 retroactively applicable at the discretion of the parole  5 29 board.  5 30    The bill also provides that persons sentenced for a second  5 31 forcible felony are to serve 85 percent of their sentence  5 32 before they are eligible for parole or work release.  Persons  5 33 sentenced for a third or subsequent forcible felony, under the  5 34 bill, are to serve their entire sentence but are eligible for  5 35 sentence reductions of up to 12 days per year for good  6  1 behavior.  Persons confined in an institution under the  6  2 control of the department of corrections are currently  6  3 eligible for reductions of one day for each day of good  6  4 behavior and an additional five days a month for participation  6  5 in institutional employment, an employment program, or an  6  6 educational or treatment program.  6  7    The bill establishes a split-sentencing pilot project under  6  8 which a court in the judicial district selected for the pilot  6  9 project would be permitted to sentence a person convicted of a  6 10 crime which is classified as an aggravated misdemeanor through  6 11 a class "B" felony to up to 90 days in a county jail as part  6 12 of the person's sentence and suspend the remaining term of  6 13 confinement.  If a person is serving a sentence of confinement  6 14 in a county jail, the person is committed to the custody of  6 15 the director of the department of corrections and the costs of  6 16 confinement in the jail and medical care will be paid by the  6 17 state.  6 18    The bill requests that the legislative council establish an  6 19 interim committee to study currently available sentencing and  6 20 incarceration options.  The committee is to include  6 21 representatives of the board of parole, the division of  6 22 criminal and juvenile justice planning, the sheriffs  6 23 association, county boards of supervisors, and the department  6 24 of corrections.  6 25    The bill also directs the department of corrections to  6 26 study the risk assessment tools currently used by the Iowa  6 27 corrections system.  The department is to consult with persons  6 28 with expertise in criminology, the division of criminal and  6 29 juvenile justice planning, and the board of parole.    6 30 LSB 3053SS 76  6 31 mk/jw/5 WT01-B20-80IA087-000632-B009-40http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/sjr10.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085030 text/html 3835HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:50:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:10:16 GMTContent-length: 3620 SJR 10 Senate Joint Resolution 10 Partial Bill History Bill Introduced: S.J. 310 Complete Bill History Bill Text PAG LIN  1  1 A Joint Resolution supporting the use of marijuana for medical   1  2    purposes in the state of Iowa.   1  3    WHEREAS, significant scientific and medical studies have   1  4 demonstrated that marijuana is safe for use under medical   1  5 supervision and that the cannabis plant, in its natural form, has   1  6 important therapeutic benefits that are often of critical medical   1  7 importance to persons afflicted with a variety of life-   1  8 threatening and sense-threatening illnesses; and   1  9    WHEREAS, courts have recognized marijuana's medical value in   1 10 treatment and have ruled that marijuana can be a drug of   1 11 "necessity" in the treatment of glaucoma, cancer, AIDS, and   1 12 multiple sclerosis; and   1 13    WHEREAS, the people of the state of Iowa believe that well-   1 l4 trained medical professionals rather than remote federal   1 15 bureaucrats should be responsible for determining a patient's   1 16 medical care routine; and   1 17    WHEREAS, seriously ill Iowans and other Americans are   1 18 unnecessarily suffering because of federal policies which legally   1 19 prohibit marijuana's legitimate medical use; and   1 20    WHEREAS, Iowa Code section 124.206, subsection 7, paragraph   1 21 "a", enacted in 1979, allows the use of marijuana for medical   1 22 purposes in the state of Iowa, expressing the intent of the Iowa   1 23 General Assembly that marijuana should be available for   1 24 legitimate medical purposes; and   2  1    WHEREAS, these problems are not particular to the state of   2  2 Iowa, but generally affect the citizens of all states adversely;   2  3 NOW THEREFORE,   2  4 BE IT RESOLVED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF IOWA:   3  1    That the Iowa General Assembly memorializes the President  3  2 and the United States Congress to end federal prohibitions  3  3 against marijuana's legitimate medical use by creating a  3  4 rational system of prescriptive medical access to marijuana;  3  5 and  3  6    BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, That copies of this Resolution be  3  7 transmitted to the Honorable Bill Clinton, President of the  3  8 United States; the Honorable Albert Gore, Vice President of  3  9 the United States and President of the United States Senate;  3 10 the Honorable Newt Gingrich, Speaker of the United States  3 11 House of Representatives; the Honorable Robert Dole, Majority  3 12 Leader of the United States Senate; Donna Shalala, Secretary  3 13 of the United States Department of Health and Human Services;  3 14 Janet Reno, United States Attorney General; and the members of  3 15 Iowa's congressional delegation.    3 16                           EXPLANATION  3 17    This resolution recites the Iowa general assembly's support  3 18 for the removal of federal prohibitions relating to the  3 19 legalization of marijuana for certain medical purposes in the  3 20 state of Iowa.    3 21 LSB 1859SS 76  3 22 cl/sc/14 WT01-B20-81IA087-000632-B009-61http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LAWS/hf2436.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085041 text/html 3271HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:50:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:09:44 GMTContent-length: 3056 HF 2436 House File 2436 Partial Bill History Bill Introduced: H.J. 522 Committee Report Issued: S.J. 979 Passed House: H.J. 815 Complete Bill History Partial Bill Text PAG LIN  5  5    Sec. 12.  Section 901.5, Code 1995, is amended by adding  5  6 the following new subsections:  5  7    NEW SUBSECTION.  10.  In addition to any sentence imposed  5  8 pursuant to chapter 902 or 903, the court shall order the  5  9 state department of transportation to revoke the defendant's  5 10 driver's license or motor vehicle operating privilege for a  5 11 period of one hundred eighty days, or to delay the issuance of  5 12 a motor vehicle license for one hundred eighty days after the  5 13 person is first eligible if the defendant has not been issued  5 14 a motor vehicle license, and shall send a copy of the order in  5 15 addition to the notice of conviction required under section  5 16 124.412, 126.26, or 453B.16, to the state department of  5 17 transportation, if the defendant is being sentenced for any of  5 18 the following offenses:  5 19    a.  A controlled substance offense under section 124.401,  5 20 124.401A, 124.402, or 124.403.  5 21    b.  A drug or drug-related offense under section 126.3.  5 22    c.  A controlled substance tax offense under chapter 453B.  5 23    If the person's operating privileges are suspended or  5 24 revoked at the time of sentencing, the order shall provide  5 25 that the one hundred eighty-day revocation period shall not  5 26 begin until all other suspensions or revocations have  5 27 terminated.  Any order under this section shall also provide  5 28 that the department shall not issue a temporary restricted  5 29 license to the defendant during the revocation period, without  5 30 further order by the court. WT01-B20-82IA087-000632-B009-118http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/PETITIONS/jon-01.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085111 text/html 11444HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:51:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:12:59 GMTContent-length: 11228 Cannabis Research and International Law Cannabis Research and International Law, A Thesis.by Jon Gettman(This article was written to clarify some ideas expressed in earliercorrespondence with Mario Lap.)Summary:  International treaties requiring cannabis prohibition are basedon outdated scientific findings which lack modern day validity.  An effortis underway in the U.S. to utilize legal and administrative procedures tobring about an official review of this issue.  Advocates of ending cannabisprohibition world-wide are invited to consider ways in which the researchbehind this effort may aid efforts by other countries to call for a reviewof the relevant international treaties.        This article contains speculation about the impact of recentcannabis-related research on international treaties.  This article presentsa thesis, and in no way attempts to present these assertions asresearch-based analysis.  In fact I am presenting this speculation tointerested parties in hope that other people may be able to compile therelevant research to transform this speculation into a well-foundedargument grounded in specific attributes of international law and treaty.        The truth is, I don't know much about the international treatiesthat concern cannabis control and prohibition.  I know a lot about UnitedStates law, policy, and regulation, and what I know about the treatiesderives from that specific context.        The way U.S. law is constructed, specific scientific findings arerequired to classify a drug as prohibited.        Until 1989 - 1994 no one knew what the mechanism of action was thatproduced the characteristic effects of cannabis.  It has been assumedthroughout the 20th Century that cannabis affected the human brain in amanner somehow similar to opium and opiate derivatives, and in bothdomestic U.S. law and in International treaties this assumption has beenthe basis for similar controls on both cannabinoids and opiates.  In theU.S. this is manifest in the schedule I status of both cannabis and heroin.        Until this period, henceforth described as circa 1991, all law andpolicy about cannabis was based on a bet, on a wager that whenever sciencefigured out how it worked, it would prove cannabis worked like heroin.Circa 1991 the discoveries, in fact, occurred, and it is now clear thatthey bet on the wrong theory.  They bet on the wrong horse, and now theydon't want to talk about it and hope that nobody finds out.  They?Politicians, government officials, and legislators in democratic societiesaround the world who claim that prohibition is based on scientificfindings, not some form of repressive malice.        Obligations affecting the prohibition and regulation ofcannabinoids related to two international treaties are codified in the U.S.Controlled Substances Act, 21 USC Chapter 13.  These treaties are:  theSingle Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 and Convention on PsychotropicSubstances, 1971.        The mechanism of action by which cannabinoids affect the humanbrain were discovered circa 1991.  This mechanism of action categoricallyand definitively distinguishes cannabis from opiates, cocaine, andamphetamines.  The latter list of drugs affects the neurotransmitterdopamine, and cannabinoids to not.  See the following:        1)  Cannabis produces effects by way of a receptor system .Howlett, A.  "Pharmacology of Cannabinoid Receptors"  The Annual Review ofPharmacology and Toxicology, 1995. (In press when copy received fromauthor.)        2)  The receptor system allows a characterization of the dependenceliability of cannabis, and explains the fallacies of prior researchhypotheses.  Herkenham, M. (1992), "Cannabinoid Receptor Localization inBrain:  Relationship to Motor and Reward Systems,"  P.W. Kalivas andH.H.Samson (eds.), The Neurobiology of Drug and Alcohol Addiction, Annalsof the American Academy of Sciences.  654:19-32, 1992.        (Incidentally, this characterization proves that patients who usemarijuana therapeutically are not engaging in denial when they attest tomedical benefits, and therefore patient anecdotes have increased scientificvalidity.)        3)  The receptor system also allows for explanation of tolerance tocannabis, and provides evidence that tolerance and dependence to cannabisare mediated differently in the brain. Oviedo, A., Glowa, J, and Herkenham,M. (1993), "Chronic cannabinoid administration alters cannabinoid receptorbinding in rat brain: a quantitative autoradiographic study." BrainResearch, 616:293-302. 1993.        My thesis, then, is fairly straightforward.  How can treatiesregulating cannabis that were signed in 1961 and 1971 be based on any validscientific findings when the mechanism of action for cannabinoids wasn'tdiscovered until circa 1991?        U.S. law contains the following provision:        "Nothing in the amendments made by the Psychotropic Substances Actof 1978 or the regulations or orders promulgated thereunder shall beconstrued to preclude requests by the Secretary of Health and HumanServices or the Attorney General through the Secretary of State, pursuantto article 2 or other applicable provisions of the Convention, for reviewof scheduling decisions under such Convention, based on new or additionalinformation."  21 USC 811 (d)(5)        This provision refers to the U.S. legislation that was passed tobring the U.S. into compliance with the 1971 treaty.  However thisunderscores a fundamental aspect of the relationship between U.S. law andour international treaty obligations.  If there is a conflict between thetwo, U.S. law takes precedence and our government must take steps to changethe treaty, whether it is the Single Convention or the Psychotropic treaty.        There have been two significant legal actions to reschedulecannabis in the United States, by NORML, and by Carl Olsen.  I haveinitiated a third.  The process itself is relatively straightforward.  Apetition citing evidence is filed.  If the evidence provides sufficientlegal and/or scientific grounds for consideration, then the DrugEnforcement Administration must defer the petition to the Department ofHealth and Human Services for a scientific and medical evaluation.  Thefindings of this evaluation are binding on DEA, which is not allowed tomake such scientific and medical judgments in the absence of HHS findings.The scientific findings provided by HHS are then used to apply statute toobtain the appropriate level of regulation and control.  (The failure ofHHS to provide any findings on marijuana's accepted medical use in theUnited States was in part DEA's justification for refusing action onNORML's petition.)        In legal papers filed in 1982 the DEA acknowledged that this reviewprocess by HHS could produce evidence which would require the U.S.government to seek a change in the international scheduling of cannabis.        A 1977 ruling in NORML v. DEA by the U.S. Court of Appealsdetermined that because of international treaty obligations, cannabis mustbe placed in either schedule I or II of the U.S. Controlled Substances Act.However U.S., courts have not ruled on the validity of the treaties in acase where new evidence is submitted demonstrating the treaties are basedon invalid scientific assertions.        The petition I filed in July, 1995 seeks the removal of allcannabinoids from schedules I and II of the CSA because they do not possessthe high potential for abuse required for placement in those schedulesunder U.S. law (see 21 USC 811(c) and 21 USC 812(b)(1)).  The petitionseeks only seeks the removal of cannabinoids from those two schedules, andrequests that the government appropriately schedule cannabinoids based onthe medical and scientific findings of the Department of Health and HumanServices.  In the U.S., this entire process is subject to review by both anindependent administrative law judge and the appeals branch of thejudiciary.        The petition was accepted for filing by the Drug EnforcementAdministration on July 27, 1995.  Because the petition raises an issuealready decided by a U.S. court, it could (as Carl Olsen earlier andshrewdly observed) easily have been dismissed under the doctrine of resjudicata, meaning (but not correctly translated) this was already decided.However the petition raises a new issue, which is what happens if thetreaties are not based on valid science?        Ending prohibition, in a technical sense, has always beencomplicated by the treaties.  The U.S. government argues that the treatiesprevent them from ending prohibition.  And with apologies for the blatantarrogance of this next remark, the whole world knows that the treaties willnot be changed unless the U.S. government agrees.        In this specific case, it will be difficult for the U.S. Governmentto ignore the scientific validity of the cannabinoid receptor research. Thepetition for repeal is based on evidence from over 150 scientific journalarticles and government reports.  However the three articles cited aboveare not only representative, but are in fact written by scientists withreputations of the absolute highest caliber.  Dr. Miles Herkenham, keyauthor of two of the three studies cited above, is the chief of theneuroanatomy section of the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health(NIMH).        It is my argument within the United States that in light of theserevolutionary research findings we have obligations under both U.S. andinternational law to reassess the domestic and international legal statusof cannabis.        My thesis is based on components of U.S. law, and this is all Irequire for legal action within the United States.  It is my intention toget the US to address the issue of international scheduling in light of therecent scientific advances.  Perhaps the scientific findings supporting thepetition for repeal can support efforts by citizens of other countries tohave their governments seek the appropriate changes to internationaltreaties on cannabis.        International treaties regarding cannabis prohibition are based oninvalid scientific findings that have been completely rejected by modernday science.  How can any sovereign, democratic country justify adherenceto treaty provisions based on science which is so out of date?  Certainly,these treaties provisions must be changed.        How individuals around the world can bring this issue to theattention of their governments is a question that deserves, I suggest, wideconsideration.Author's note:  The complete text of the petition for repeal referred toabove will soon be available at the web site of the National Organizationfor the Reform of Marijuana Laws, http://www.norml.org/.WT01-B20-83IA087-000632-B009-152http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/PETITIONS/jon-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085126 text/html 21922HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:51:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:12:55 GMTContent-length: 21706 The End of Marijuana Prohibition The Scientific And Legal Basisfor the End of Marijuana Prohibitionby Jon Gettman        The Controlled Substances Act mandates that schedule I drugs have a"high potential for abuse."  A judicious reading of both the statute andthe legislative history finds that this abuse potential is the keycriterion for its scheduling under the CSA.(NORML v. DEA, 559 F.2d 735(1977))(21 USC  812 (b)(1))  However, it has long been recognized thatmarijuana does not satisfy this essential criterion.  Therefore thejustification for marijuana's continued placement in schedule I is apresumption rather than a finding.(See U.S. Cong. and Admin. News 1970 p.4578, p. 4579, p. 4629. See also 51 FR 22947 (1986))        As of April, 1995, the Drug Enforcement Administration was "unawareof any new scientific studies of marijuana that would lead [them] tore-evaluate its classification at this time."  According to a letter fromThomas Constantine, Administrator of DEA, if this author "has access toscientific data concerning marijuana which he wishes to bring to ourattention, we will be pleased to consider it, should he care to share thedocumentation with us."  Extensive documentation was provided toConstantine on July 10, 1995 as part of an administrative petitionsubjecting DEA's consideration of these issues to judicial review.        The CSA establishes an eight item list of scientific and medicalfactors that are to be considered in scheduling decisions. (21 USC 822 (c))These factors are defined further in the legislative history.(see U.S.Cong. and Admin. News 1970 p 4601 - 4603)        The first factor is the drug's relative or actual potential forabuse.  The contemporary paradigm for evaluating the abuse potential of adrug has been developed by the Committee on the Problems of DrugDependence.[7]  They have concluded that self-administration in animalstudies is the necessary characteristic of a drug with a significant,severe potential for abuse.[3, 7, 21, 32]  However, animals will not selfadminister marijuana.[1, 17, 32]        The second factor is evidence of the drug's pharmacologicaleffects.  In 1989 Leo Hollister remarked that: "Our studies of cannabinoidsover the past 22 years have touched upon virtually every aspect of theiractions.  They constitute the largest series of studies of the humanpharmacology of marijuana on record."[15]  Since then further research bythe likes of Donald Tashkin, Mario Perez-Reyes, Julian Azorlosa, forexample, have supplemented the classic work on the chemistry andpharmacology of marijuana by Agurell, Dewey, Hollister, Martin, Mechoulam,and Razdan.        The third factor considered in scheduling decisions is scientificknowledge about the substance.  In 1988, it became obvious that scientistshad been wrong in their theories about how marijuana acted on thebrain.[17, 18, 27]  Recent Evidence affirms that marijuana activates aunique receptor system in the brain.[16, 17, 18, 31]  In anothercurrent finding, it has been discovered that tolerance to marijuana is theresult of receptor down-regulation, rather than receptor desensitization aswas previously believed.[25, 29]  In addition, the theory that marijuana'slipophilic qualities produce a harmful effect has also beencontradicted.[22, 30]  The receptor has been cloned[23], an endogenousligand for the cannabinoid receptor has been discovered[9], and an orallyeffective cannabinoid antagonist has been created.[28]        The fourth factor is the history and current pattern of abuse,including "social, economic, and ecological characteristics of the segmentsof the population involved in such abuse."  Critical evaluations of theNational Household Survey, the Monitoring the Future Project, the DrugAbuse Warning Network and other federally sponsored reports provide morethan adequate data to evaluate this factor.  Key observations are thatmarijuana use and adolescent access persist despite increased enforcement.Moreover, the National Household Survey indicates that risk perceptionassociated with marijuana use decreases as education and age increase.[34]        The most interesting factor for advocates of harm reductionpolicies, though, is the fifth factor: scope duration and significance ofabuse.  According to the legislative history, "in reaching [her] decision,the Attorney General should consider the economics of regulation andenforcement attendant to [a scheduling decision].  In addition, [she]should be aware of the social significance and impact of such a decisionupon those people, especially the young, that would be affected by it."        This fifth factor allows the introduction of several criticalissues, such as the impact of schedule I status and enforcement policieshave on the private therapeutic use of marijuana[12] as well as theireffects on the cultivation of marijuana for medicinal or personal use[11].This factor also allows the introduction of cost/benefit analyses ofdecriminalization laws in various states[2], as well as the evaluations ofvarious state legislatures on the significance of marijuana abuse as it isreflected in the scheduling of the substance under state law.[24]        The sixth factor concerns the risk, if any, to public health.  "Ifa drug creates no danger to the public health, it would be inappropriate tocontrol the drug under this bill." A recent editorial in favor of harmreduction policies in the American Journal of Public Health calls fordevelopment of "a new system that is consistent with present scientificknowledge and able to incorporate new scientific findings."[8]  TheControlled Substances Act provides such a system, and reformers should tryand make the CSA work the way it was intended to before contemplating a newsystem.  This factor alone allows for the introduction of harm reductionpolicies into scheduling and national drug policy.        The reputed threat to public health presented by marijuana is aresult of the drug's perceive relation to the use of other dangerous drugs.The contemporary gateway theory, though, acknowledges that alcohol andcigarette use precede marijuana use, and that marijuana use does notpredict in any way use of more serious drugs.[6, 20, 33, 35, 36]Consequently, the policy ramification of the gateway theory is that thepublic health would benefit from successful policies that delay the age offirst use of any drugs.[20]  Why is marijuana singled out?        Norman Zinberg clarified the relationship of drug, set, and settingto the understanding and treatment of drug use and abuse in 1984.[37]  Anemerging public health model that advocates harm reduction, the study ofuse and abuse, and performance evaluation is evidence of gainingrecognition for the utility of Zinberg's ideas.[13, 34]  A meta-analysis ofcorrelations between school-aged use of alcohol, marijuana and tobaccoconducted by the Bowman Gray School of Medicine concluded that the primarycorrelates of school aged drug use were prior use and access.[13]        There is considerable social science data and theory to support therescheduling of marijuana under these last two factors representing theepidemiology and the significance of a drug's actual use in the population.        The animal models used to determine the abuse potential of a drugrepresent synergy between pharmacology and root behavioralism.[4]  Despitetheir excellent predictive validity, they do not present a biologicalmarker.  This lack of a biological clarification of marijuana's abusepotential has been the excuse to keep marijuana in schedule I.  Thediscovery of the cannabinoid receptor system annihilates that excuse.        The seventh factor is the substances physic or physical dependenceliability.  It has been long recognized that marijuana is not physicallyaddictive.[1, 14, 17]        Advances in neurobiology have provided a biological model forexplaining substance abuse.[19, 21, 33]  Drugs of abuse affect theproduction of dopamine, a neurotransmitter associated with response andreward and now held to explain the compulsive self-administration ofdrugs.[10, 19, 21, 33]        However, cannabinoid receptors are not located on dopamineproducing neurons.[17]  In vivo microdialysis has shown that unlike otherdrugs[10] THC, the active chemical in marijuana, does not affect striataldopamine levels.[55]  (Earlier research that had indicated a cannabinoideffect on dopamine was found to be strain-specific, and has not beenreplicated in other animal studies.[1, 17, 33])        Heroin (schedule I), cocaine (schedule II) and amphetamines(schedule III) all affect dopamine production.  Marijuana, cannabinoids,and THC do not.  Where shall we schedule marijuana under existingprovisions of controlled substances act?        The eighth factor concerns the relation of the substance to otherscheduled chemicals.  The discovery of the receptor system provides thescientific basis for considering cannabinoids as a family with a similarmechanism of action.  This is especially accurate with regards to thedrug's dependence potential.  Scientists have long accepted the validity ofassertions about marijuana based on research on its constituent parts, suchas THC, cannabinol, marijuana smoke, and experimental cannabinoids.        There is no basis for distinguishing between the marijuana and THCin a consideration of dependence potential.        As a result of this and other information, I believe thatmarijuana, cannabinoids, and THC should be removed from schedules I and II,and I have begun the administrative proceedings to consider this issue.        By law, petitions for rulemaking changes are sent to the DEA.(21CFR 1308.44)  The DEA then forwards the petition to the Department of Health and Human Services for a scientific and medical evaluation that is binding on DEA in regards to scheduling decisions.(21 USC  811 (b))  The Court of Appeals has ruled that petitions must be judged on merit.(NORML v. DEA, 559 F.2d 735 (1977))        The United States has an international obligation under varioustreaties to verify this information and take steps to change theinternational scheduling of marijuana.  Meanwhile, the subject of wheremarijuana should be scheduled pending treaty amendment is open for debate.        Twenty five years ago the government acknowledged marijuana did notdeserve schedule I status. Unfortunately, however, it decided to wait formore evidence before ending marijuana prohibition.  The scientific evidencehas been mounting ever since, and none of it legitimately supportsmarijuana's schedule I status.        Justice delayed is justice denied.  The time has come for an end tomarijuana prohibition, and to acknowledge that for the last 25 yearsmarijuana users have been denied equal protection under the laws of theUnited States and its Constitution.        (Jon Gettman is a former National Director of NORML, and iscurrently enrolled in a doctoral program in the Institute of Public Policyat George Mason University. His present research agenda concerns regionaldevelopment and the agricultural and industrial technologies required forhemp-related development.  The petition for repeal was the result of aresearch agenda concerning the policy implications of recent findings aboutthe cannabinoid receptor system.)Author's note:  The complete text of the petition for repeal will soon beavailable at the web site of the National Organization for the Reform ofMarijuana Laws, http://norml.myhouse.com/.References[1] Abood, M., Martin, B. (1992), "Neurobiology of Marijuana Abuse," Trendsin Pharmacological Sciences 13:201-206,.[2] Aldrich, M., Mikuriya, T. (1988),  Savings in California Marijuana LawEnforcement Costs Attributable to the Moscone Act of 1976 -- A Summary.Journal of Psychoactive Drugs.  Jan-Mar 1988 20(1):75-81.[3] Brady, J. (1988) "The Reinforcing Functions of Drugs and Assessment ofAbuse Liability."  In: Problems of Drug Dependence, 1987.  Proceedings ofthe 49th Annual Scientific Meeting, The Committee on Problems of DrugDependence, Inc.  Harris, L. (ed), National Institute on Drug AbuseResearch Monograph 81.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1988.pp. 440 - 456.[4] Brady, J.  What's a Radical Behaviorist Like You Doing in a nicePharmacology Club like CPDD?  In: Problems of Drug Dependence, 1992.Proceedings of the 54th Annual Scientific Meeting, The Committee onProblems of Drug Dependence, Inc.  Harris, L. (ed), National Institute onDrug Abuse Research Monograph 132.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print.Off., 1993.  pg. 19 -28.[5] Castaneda, E., Moss, D.E., et al. (1991) "THC Does Not Affect StriatalDopamine Release:  Microdialysis in Freely Moving Rats"  Pharmacology,Biochemistry & Behavior, Vol. 40, pp. 587-591.[6] Chen, K., Kandel, D. (1995) "The Natural History of Drug Use fromAdolescence to the Mid Thirties in a General Population Sample.  AmericanJournal of Public Health, January 1995. 85:41-47.[7] Cicero, T. (1992) Assessment of Dependence Liability of PsychotropicSubstances:  Nature of the Problem and the Role of the College on Problemson Drug Dependence.  Contractor Document for the Office of TechnologyAssessment. (Springfield, VA: National Technical Information Service.1992.) (NTIS Doc. #PB94-175643)[8] Des Jarlais, D. (1995)  "Editorial: Harm Reduction--A Framework forIncorporating Science into Drug Policy."  American Journal of PublicHealth.  January 1995, 85:1 pg. 10-12.[9] Devane, W., Dysarz, F., et al (1992)  Isolation and structure of abrain constituent that binds to the cannabinoid receptor.  Science 258:1946-1949.[10] Di Chiara, G. and Imperato, A. (1988), "Drugs abused by humanspreferentially increase synaptic dopamine concentrations in the mesolimbicsystem of freely moving rats."  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 85:5274.[11] Gettman, J. (1993) Cannabis Suppression and Marijuana Crop Value.Washington, D.C.:NORML.[12] Grinspoon, L. (1993) Marihuana, The Forbidden Medicine.  New Haven:Yale University Press.[13] Hansen, W. (1994), Drug abuse in Schools: Contributing Factors andPreventive Interventions. Springfield, VA: National Technical InformationService. (PB#94-175635)  1994.[14] Hollister, L.E. (1986), "Health Aspects of Cannabis", PharmacologicalReviews, 38:1, 1-20.[15] Hollister, L. (1989)  "Peregrinations Among Drugs of Dependence:Nathan B. Eddy Memorial Award Lecture."  In: Problems of Drug Dependence,1989.  Proceedings of the 49th Annual Scientific Meeting, The Committee onProblems of Drug Dependence, Inc.  Harris, L. (ed), National Institute onDrug Abuse Research Monograph 95.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print.Off., 1990.  pgs. 36-43.[16] Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B. et al.(1990), "Cannabinoid ReceptorLocalization in Brain,"  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,87:1932-1936.[17] Herkenham, M. (1992), "Cannabinoid Receptor Localization in Brain:Relationship to Motor and Reward Systems,"  P.W. Kalivas and H.H.Samson(eds), The Neurobiology of Drug and Alcohol Addiction, Annals of theAmerican Academy of Sciences.  654:19-32.[18] Howlett, A.C., Bidaut-Russell, et al (1990),  "The CannabinoidReceptor:  Biochemical, anatomical, and behavioral characterization."Trends in Neuroscience  13:10, 420-423.[19] Izenwasser, S., Kornetsky, C. (1992) "Brain-Stimulation Reward: AMethod For Assessing the Neurochemical Bases Of Drug-Induced Euphoria." InWatson, R.A.  (1992) Drugs of Abuse and Neurobiology.  Boca Raton: CRCPress.[20] Kandel, D.B., Yamaguchi, K., Chen, K. (1992), "Stages of Progressionin Drug Involvement from Adolescence to Adulthood:  Further Evidence forthe Gateway Theory."  J. Stud. Alcohol 53: 447-457, 1992.[21] Koob, G. (1995)  Animal Models of Drug Addiction.  In Bloom, F.,Kupler, D. (eds.) Psychopharmacology: The Fourth Generation of Progress.New York: Raven Press.  pgs. 759 - 772.[22] Lynn, A.B., and Herkenham, M. (1993), "Localization of CannabinoidReceptors and Nonsaturable High-Density Cannabinoid Binding Sites inPeripheral Tissues of the Rat:  Implications for Receptor-Mediated ImmuneModulation by Cannabinoids"  Journal of Pharmacology and ExperimentalTherapeutics, 268:3  1612-1623.[23] Matsuda, L., Lolait, S., et al (1990) Structure of a cannabinoidreceptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA.  Nature 346:561-564.[24] National Criminal Justice Association (1991) A Guide to StateControlled Substances Acts.  Washington, D.C.: National Institute ofJustice.  NIJ Ref No. 132321.[25] Oviedo, A., Glowa, J, and Herkenham, M.(1993), "Chronic cannabinoidadministration alters cannabinoid receptor binding in rat brain: aquantitative autoradiographic study." Brain Research, 616:293-302.[26] Pertwee, R. (1993)  The Evidence for the Existence of CannabinoidReceptors.  General Pharmacology. 29:4 pg 811-824.[27] Richardson, S., Mirasedeghi, S., et al (1990).  "Synthetic andBiological Studies of Potential Affinity Ligands for the CannabinoidReceptor Based on CP-55,244."  In: Problems of Drug Dependence, 1990.Proceedings of the 52th Annual Scientific Meeting, The Committee onProblems of Drug Dependence, Inc.  Harris, L. (ed), National Institute onDrug Abuse Research Monograph 105.  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print.Off., 1990. pgs. 140 - 146.[28] Rinaldi-Carmona, M., Barth, F., et al (1994). "SR141716A, a potent andselective antagonist of the brain cannabinoid receptor.  FEBS Letters 350(1994) pg 240 - 244.[29] Rodriguez De Foncesa, F., Gorriti, M., et al (1994) Downregulation ofRat Brain Cannabinoid Binding Sites After Chronic D9-TetrahydrocannabinolTreatment.  Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior.  47:33-40.[30] Thomas, B., Compton, D., Martin, N. (1990)  Characterization of theLipophilicity of Natural and Synthetic Analogs of D9-Tetrahydrocannabinoland Its Relationships to Pharmacological Potency. Journal of Pharmacologyand Experimental Therapeutics .  255:2 pgs. 624 - 630.[31] Thomas, B., Wie, X., Martin, B. (1992)  Characterization andAutoradiographic Localization of the Cannabinoid Binding Site in Rat BrainUsing [3H]11-OH-D9-THC-DMH.  Journal of Pharmacology and ExperimentalTherapeutics .  263:3 pgs. 1383 - 1390.[32] U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (1993), BiologicalComponents of Substance Abuse and Addiction, OTA-BP-BBS-117 (Washington,DC: US Government Printing Office, September 1993).[33] U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (1994) Technologies forUnderstanding and Preventing Substance Abuse and Addiction, OTA-EHR-597(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1994).[34] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Office ofApplied Studies. (1994)  Advance Report Number 5. Preliminary EstimatesFrom the Drug Abuse Warning Network.  Rockville, MD: SAMSHA.  March, 1994.[35] Yamaguchi, K., Kandel, D. (1984) "Patterns of Drug Use From Adolesenceto Young Adulthood: II. Sequences of Progression."  American Journal ofPublic Health 74:7, July, 1984.[36] Yamaguchi, K., Kandel, D. (1984) "Patterns of Drug Use FromAdolescence to Young Adulthood: III. Predictors of Progression."  AmericanJournal of Public Health 74:7, July, 1984.[37] Zinberg, N. (1984) Drug, Set, and Setting.  New Haven: Yale UniversityPress.WT01-B20-84IA087-000632-B009-171http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/PETITIONS/jon-03.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085135 text/html 11263HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:51:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:12:48 GMTContent-length: 11047 Marijuana: What the Experts Say Marijuana: What the Experts Say by Jon Gettman Cannabinoids are the active ingredients in marijuana, anddelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is the only psychoactive cannabinoid.Excerpts from frequently cited journal articles follow the brief statementsbelow. Because these excerpts are taken out of context, the reader isencouraged to read the original journal articles. The primary marker of a drug with a severe dependence liability iscompulsive self-administration by animals in a clinical setting. Animalswill not self-administer marijuana. Cannabinoids are non-toxic; lethal effects are non existent. The pharmacology of cannabinoids was well-characterized by the mid 1980's,and indicates that marijuana does not pose greater health risks thanalcohol, tobacco, and caffeine. The discovery of the neural mechanism, the cannabinoid receptor system,which accounts for the characteristic effects of marijuana began in 1989. Drugs with the highest potential for abuse have a direct effect on theneurotransmitter dopamine; marijuana does not. Tolerance to marijuana has also been explained. It results from a naturalprocess and not cell toxification. Research has proven that tolerance tomarijuana is not a characteristic of a dependence liability. Marijuana does not harm the immune system. The discovery of the neural cannabinoid receptor system provides evidenceof the physiological basis for the medical use of marijuana andcannabinoids. Before 1989, because no one knew how marijuana's effects were produced,scientists were allowed great breadth to speculate about the substance. Much of the harmful speculation about marijuana prior to the receptordiscovery has based in studies with severe methodological problems. Prior to 1989, many of these speculative hypotheses were presented to thepublic as likely facts which supported various public policies; but no onereally knew what they were talking about. Primary Marker of Drug Dependence: "[S]elf-administration of a drug to thepoint where the behavior becomes obsessive and detrimental to theindividual is the primary criterion which must be met to classify a drug asone with significant potential for dependence." Cicero, T. (1992)Assessment of Dependence Liability of Psychotropic Substances: Nature ofthe Problem and the Role of the College on Problems on Drug Dependence.Contractor Document for the Office of Technology Assessment. (Springfield,VA: National Technical Information Service. 1992.) (NTIS Doc.#PB94-175643) pg. 6. Primary Clinical Test of Dependence Liability: "If the abuse liability ofa substance as defined by the likelihood of it supporting drug-seeking anddrug-taking, is to be evaluated, an assessment of its reinforcing functionsby self-administration is clearly the method of choice." Brady, J.V. "TheReinforcing Functions of Drugs and Assessment of Abuse Liability." In:Problems of Drug Dependence, 1987. Proceedings of the 49th AnnualScientific Meeting, The Committee on Problems of Drug Dependence, Inc.Harris, L. (ed.), National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph 81.Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1988. pp. 440 - 456. pg. 452. Marijuana Does Not Meet the Primary Test for Dependence: "Whileself-administration of drugs has been taken as an indication ofpsychological dependence and/or abuse potential, few reports claim to haveestablished experimental models for self administration of Delta-9-THC . .. This observation suggests limited potential for development of . . .limited psychological dependence due to the weak reinforcing properties ofDelta-9-THC." Abood, M.E., and Martin, B.R. (1992), "Neurobiology ofMarijuana Abuse," Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 13:201-206. pg. 203. The Toxicity of Marijuana: "lethal effects of overdose by humans arenonexistent or rare" Dewey, W. Cannabinoid Pharmacology. PharmacologicalReviews. 1986 Vol. 38, No. 2. pp. 151 - 178. pg. 172. The Extent of Parmacological Research: "Our studies of cannabinoids overthe past 22 years have touched upon virtually every aspect of theiractions." Hollister, L. "Peregrinations Among Drugs of Dependence:Nathan B. Eddy Memorial Award Lecture." In: Problems of Drug Dependence,1989. Proceedings of the 49th Annual Scientific Meeting, The Committee onProblems of Drug Dependence, Inc. Harris, L. (ed.), National Institute onDrug Abuse Research Monograph 95. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print.Off., 1990. pg. 36-43. pg. 42. The Relative Abuse Potential of Marijuana: "Compared with other licitsocial drugs, such as alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine, marijuana does notpose greater risks." Hollister, L.E.(1986), "Health Aspects of Cannabis",Pharmacological Reviews, 38:1, 1-20. pg. 17. The Mechanism of Action for Cannabinoid Effects: " [Quantatativeradiography has established that a cannabinoid receptor system in thebrain] "is the same receptor [system] that mediates all of the behavioraland pharmacological effects of cannabinoids . . ." Herkenham, M., Lynn,A.B., et al., (1990) "Cannabinoid Receptor Localization in Brain,"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 87:1932-1936, 1990. pg.1935. Marijuana And Known Drugs of Abuse: "The effects of cannabinoids ondopamine circuits thought to be common mediators of reward are indirect anddifferent from those drugs such as cocaine and morphine which directlyaffect extracellular dopamine levels and produce craving and powerfuldrug-seeking behavior." Herkenham, M. (1992), "Cannabinoid ReceptorLocalization in Brain: Relationship to Motor and Reward Systems," P.W.Kalivas and H.H.Samson (eds), The Neurobiology of Drug and AlcoholAddiction, Annals of the American Academy of Sciences. 654:19-32, 1992.pg. 29 Note: Dopamine-based craving is believed to be neural mechanismresponsible for the phenomenon of denial, in which someone with a drugdependency has strong urges to deny their dependency, and engage in allsorts of fictions and escapades to maintain their supply and intake of adrug. The accounts of patients who have used marijuana medically are oftendismissed on suspicion that these anecdotal accounts are motivated more bydrug dependency than therapeutic benefits. The distinction noted above isevidence that this sort of denial is not an element in patient accounts ofthe therapeutic benefits of marijuana. Tolerance to Marijuana : "The magnitude of the present effect, like thestriking behavioral tolerance, may stem in part that, unlike otherpsychoactive agonist drugs, cannabinoids can be administered in very highdoses. It is ironic that the magnitude of both tolerance (completedisappearance of the inhibitory motor effect) and receptor down-regulation(78% loss . . .) is so large, whereas cannabinoid dependence and withdrawalphenomena are minimal. This supports the claim that tolerance anddependence are independently mediated in the brain." Oviedo, A., Glowa, J,and Herkenham, M. (1993), "Chronic cannabinoid administration alterscannabinoid receptor binding in rat brain: a quantitative autoradiographicstudy." Brain Research, 616:293-302. pg. 300. Marijuana and Immunosuppression: "In humans, immune suppression is subtleand in many cases insignificant. There is little evidence for cannabinoidimmunosuppression as a causative agent in disease." Lynn, A.B., andHerkenham, M. (1993) "Localization of Cannabinoid Receptors andNonsaturable High-Density Cannabinoid Binding Sites in Peripheral Tissuesof the Rat: Implications for Receptor-Mediated Immune Modulation byCannabinoids" Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 268:31612-1623. pg. 1620. The Cannabinoid Receptor System Discovery Explains Why Cannabinoids HaveMedical Value: "Dense binding in the basal ganglia and cerebellum suggestscannabinoid involvement in movement control . . . Anticonvulsant andantiemetic effects of cannabinoids have therapeutic value. Thelocalization of cannabinoid receptors in motor areas suggests additionaltherapeutic applications. Cannabinoids exacerbate hypokinesia in Parkinsondisease but are beneficial for some forms of dystonia, tremor, andspasticity." Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., et al., (1990) "CannabinoidReceptor Localization in Brain," Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences, 87:1932-1936, 1990. pg. 1936. Before 1989, Theories Substituted for Facts About Marijuana's Mechanism ofAction : "Because the cellular and biochemical mechanisms of action ofpsychoactive cannabinoids were not understood, neuroscientists were allowedgreat breadth to speculate upon the influence that these compounds mighthave on the neurons of the brain." Howlett, A.C., Bidaut-Russell, M,Devane, W., Melvin, L., Johnsons, M., & Herkenham, M., "The CannabinoidReceptor: Biochemical, anatomical, and behavioral characterization."Trends in Neuroscience 13:10, 420-423. 1990. pg. 420. Before 1989, Studies which Caused Some Scientists Alarm Were Based onFaulty Research: "Most of the biochemical studies employed concentrationsof Delta-9-THC that were in excess of physiologically meaningfulconcentrations that might be found in brain. In addition, the criterion ofstructure-activity relationship was not met -- that is, the potencies ofthe various cannabinoids in the in vitro assays did not correlate withtheir relative potencies in eliciting characteristic behavioral effects.Particularly damaging to the relevance of these in vitro studies was theabsence of enantioselectivity." Herkenham, M. (1992), "CannabinoidReceptor Localization in Brain: Relationship to Motor and Reward Systems,"P.W. Kalivas and H.H. Samson (eds.), The Neurobiology of Drug and AlcoholAddiction, Annals of the American Academy of Sciences. 654:19-32, 1992.pg. 19. Before 1989, All Sorts of Research on Cannabinoids Was Conducted Because NoOne Knew How they Worked on the Brain: "Until recently, very little wasknown about the cellular mechanisms through which cannabinoids act . ..Without evidence that cannabinoids act through a specific receptor coupledto a functional effector system, researchers were prone to study theeffects of cannabinoids on membrane properties, membrane-bound enzymes,eicosanoid production, metabolism, and other neurotransmitter systems invitro." Herkenham, M. (1992), "Cannabinoid Receptor Localization in Brain:Relationship to Motor and Reward Systems," P.W. Kalivas and H.H. Samson(eds.), The Neurobiology of Drug and Alcohol Addiction, Annals of theAmerican Academy of Sciences. 654:19-32, 1992. pg. 19.WT01-B20-85IA087-000632-B009-196http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/PETITIONS/jon-04.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085146 text/html 23284HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:51:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:12:42 GMTContent-length: 23068 Substance Abuse: The New Paradigm (1/2) Substance Abuse: The New Paradigmby Jon GettmanPart 1 of 2.Author:  U.S. Congress, Office of Technology AssessmentTitle: Biological Components of Substance Abuse and Addiction - Background PaperDate:  September, 1993Source:  Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office(OTA-BP-BBS-117), 68 pgs.  $4.25 + postage from GPO (202) 512-1800.        This OTA paper reviews medical research through 1992 regarding the effects of various drugs of abuse on the brain, and by way of excellent references, provides a guide to the scientific literature for the interested public.  The paper provides:        A discussion of the basic concepts of neuropharmacology, including the brain reward system, adaptive responses such as tolerance, dependence, and sensitization, and how the abuse liability of various drugs is evaluated and compared.        A discussion of the specific effects on the brain of cocaine, amphetamines, caffeine, nicotine, phencyclidine, alcohol, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, opiates, cannabis and Lysergic Acid Diethylamide.        A discussion of research on inherited traits that may increase the risk of drug abuse, primarily reviewing studies on alcoholism, with some mention of opiate-related research.Significance:        Research on several drugs of abuse has converged on a single point -- their impact on the release of the neurotransmitter dopamine and their subsequent influence on human behavior through the brain reward system dominated by that neurotransmitter.        The paper reports on the current attributes used for evaluating the abuse potential of drugs. OTA reports that no research indicates that cannabis (marijuana) shares these attributes. OTA fails to discuss the ramifications of such a finding.Excerpts:        "The capacity to produce reinforcing effects is essential to any drug with significant abuse potential, whereas tolerance and physical dependence most commonly occur but are not absolutely required to make such a determination . . . The predominant feature of all drugs with significant abuse potential properties is that they are self-administered . . . Animal models of self-administration provide a powerful tool that can give a good indication of the abuse liability of new or unknown drugs."  OTA 1993 pg. 5.        "While marijuana produces a feeling of euphoria in humans, in general, animals will not self-administer THC in controlled studies.  Also, cannabinoids generally do not lower the threshold needed to get animals to self-stimulate the brain reward system, as do other drugs of abuse."  OTA 1993 pg. 34.Discussion:        The executive summary explains that susceptibility to drug abuse is influenced by such factors as the biological response to a drug, a person's psychological makeup, and the drug's availability.Author:  U.S. Congress, Office of Technology AssessmentTitle:  Technologies for Understanding and Preventing Substance AbuseDate:  September, 1994Source Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, (OTA-EHR-597) 260 pgs.  $15.00 + postage from GPO (202) 512-1800.        Several committees of Congress asked the Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) to study the socioeconomic, psychological, physiological and genetic foundations for substance abuse and addiction.  OTA's report on the Biological Components of Substance Abuse and Addiction was published in 1993 (see above); this is the companion report that reviews social science research that has implications for prevention efforts.        This report provides an extensive discussion of available data and the limitations of the studies that produce it.  Like its predecessor, it is a comprehensive guide to current research and its varying interpretations.        This report does not address treatment or law enforcement issues        There are not root causes for drug abuse, but risk and protective factors that influence the possibility of abuse within different sub populations in different settings.  Research into Necessary Preconditions, Individual Factors, and Activity Settings is reviewed, and policy options for prevention funding are discussed in conclusion.        Appendices review the history of drug control policy in the U.S., existing federal prevention programs, and provide a list of original research papers contracted for this study and extensive references.Significance:        This paper re-presents the material from the 1993 OTA report.  With regard to marijuana, while more research strides were made between the publication of the two papers, even less is reported about the biological basis for cannabis use than in the 1993 paper.        Four models for considering prevention issues are reviewed, a Public Health Model, a Medical Model, a Criminal Justice Model, and the over-generalized approach of mass communications.        Leading indicators of drug use are criticized  for several limitations, including the government's credibility, over-looked populations, measuring use but not abuse, and little opportunity to conduct multi-variate analysis.        Teenage use of "legal" drugs precedes use of marijuana.        The statistical results of 242 studies have been analyzed to sort risk factors into 11 major categories (50 sub categories), and to establish strong, moderate, and weak relationships between risk factors and school age drug use.        Analysts are beginning to find the differences between drug use and abuse more interesting than the differences between legal and illegal drugs.        Commercially marketed prevention programs, such as DARE, require extensive evaluation studies.  To date, the few evaluation studies that have been done do not indicate success at prevention of drug abuse.Excerpts:On the Brain Reward System:        "Most drugs of abuse, either directly or indirectly, are presumed to affect the brain reward system.  Inducing activity in the brain reward system gives drugs of abuse positive reinforcing actions that support their continued use and abuse."  OTA 1994 pg. 45.        "The rewarding properties of stimulant drugs such as cocaine and amphetamines are due directly to the effects of the chemical dopamine. Opiates, on the other hand, indirectly stimulate dopamine by activating other chemical pathways, which in turn increases dopamine activity.  All of these drugs have reinforcing properties.  Phencyclidine (PCP) is also a strong reinforcer but its relationship, in any, to activity in the dopamine pathway has yet to be established.  Other drugs are either weak reinforcers or have not been shown to support self-administration in animal experiments.  Nicotine stimulates dopamine neurons; however, its effect is modest when compared with cocaine or amphetamine.  Likewise, caffeine is a weak reinforcer, but the precise mechanisms of its reinforcment are unclear.  Finally, cannabis and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) also produce positive effects that clearly support their use."  OTA 1994 pg. 47.On the Stepping Stone and Gateway Drug Theories:        "While study results vary somewhat, the sequence most often reported is that alcohol and cigarette use come first, followed by marijuana use and then by the use of other illicit substances."  OTA 1994 pg. 74.        "(T)he criminalization of marijuana may have caused some marijuana users to move on to other illicit substances through contact with the subculture of illicit users."  OTA 1994 pg. 74.        In one study, "delinquency and youthful sexual activity tended to precede the use of marijuana and hard liquor. . . The early use of so-called gateway drugs, such as beer and cigarettes, may contribute to later problem behaviors, while the later use of marijuana, hard liquor, and other illicit substances may be more the result of extended participation in problem behaviors"  OTA 1994 pg. 78.        "Because many individuals who use substances do not go on to substance abuse, and because one level does not guarantee use at a higher level, these stages are descriptive but not predictive."  OTA 1994 pg. 80.On National Surveys:        "Drug measures focus on use, rather than abuse or addiction.  The common measures of drug use employed by the Household and Seniors Surveys - lifetime, past year, and past month use-are insufficiently refined to distinguish between casual and dependent use."  OTA 1994 pg. 38.On learning from those who use drugs without abuse:        "What prevents some individuals from progressing from initial use to abuse to addiction? . . . Studying those individuals who do not progress from use to addiction may provide insights and lessons about how to prevent progression among those who do progress."  OTA 1994 pg. 75        "But what about those individuals who live in stressful and chaotic conditions - who are constantly exposed to many of these risk factors - yet who do not develop substance abuse problems?"  OTA 1994 pg. 115.On the Public Health Model for understanding abuse and addiction:        "The legality or illegality of a drug is an artificial barrier that is not as relevant as the health-related considerations stemming from all types of drug use.  Rather than using legal/illegal, the public health approach categorizes drugs by such characteristics as addictive potential and long-term health risks. . .Dealing with the drug problem primarily as a moral problem is considered inappropriate and counterproductive (as part of the public health model)." OTA, 1994 pg. 29.On Ethnographic studies of Marijuana Use:        "Differences in marijuana smoking may also be partially attributable to gender.  In a recent review, it was shown that men's marijuana smoking was tied more to the  availability of the drug, while women's smoking was affected to a greater degree by social influences, such as weekday versus weekend smoking, and the smoking of their male partners. Women have also been shown to increase their marijuana smoking during periods of anger and other unpleasant dispositions."  OTA 1994 pg. 90.        "Most of the ethnographic research on marijuana use has been conducted outside the United States.  Much of it was initiated in the 1960's and 1970's . . .In Jamaica, for example, anthropologists Vera Rubin and Lambros Comitas directed a research team of 45 . . .Their controversial findings were that none of the deleterious social or medical consequences believed by many to be associated with the drug in the United States could be found among Jamaican users."  OTA 1994 pg. 124.Discussion:        The findings OTA reports on marijuana are very exciting because of their possible impact on marijuana's legal status under federal law, however that is just one application of the technologies of this report, and but one measure of this report's significance.        This is the most valuable report on substance abuse in the United States since the second report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse in 1973.        The title is very important, and very revealing:  "Technologies for Understanding and Preventing Substance Abuse and Addiction."  Ideas, theories, programs, policies, and though unmentioned, laws as well, are all technologies.  They are all subject to evaluation, or assessment, by conventional standards.  The drug war has reached a critical, and perhaps terminal stage where it has been going on long enough for empiricism to take over from theory.         This report represents the end of the "Just Say No!" monopoly on prevention efforts, one of the driving forces behind marijuana prohibition. Effectiveness is replacing strength as the standard of evaluation.        OTA recognizes a prevention program market that receives one fourth of the funds given to local jurisdictions under the Drug Free Schools and Communities Act.  Three programs "have captured a sizable share" of the market, DARE, Quest: Skills for Living; and Here's Looking at You 2000. Only DARE has been evaluated sufficiently for conclusions to be drawn about the program.        DARE is one of the better funded prevention programs and is delivered to 5 million students at a cost of $10 each.  Of the studies reviewed by OTA on DARE's effectiveness, "the average reductions in substance use were very small.  Use among control schools and DARE schools was roughly equal." (OTA, 1994 pg. 150-151)  While the program has important strengths, school-based prevention technologies "have not been refined and tested enough to demonstrate their effectiveness."        OTA commissioned a study involving 9930 statistical analyses from 242 separate studies reporting relationships between substance use by school age youths and its postulated causes, and OTA only summarizes the findings of this study in this report.  Tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana accounted for 82% of the completed analyses.        Only four variables were held to have strong relationships to school-age drug use.  "1)  prior and concurrent use of substances, 2) substance use by peers and friends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substance use, and 4) offers to use substances."  (OTA 194 pg. 147)  Of the 15 variables with moderate relationships to substance use, 7 were social variables involving resistance skills, peer pressure, and beliefs about consequences.        These findings need to be examined in more detail, but they should be of immense help in evaluating the theoretical basis for many prevention programs which lack performance data for evaluation.        The significance for policy discussions is that these findings suggest that availability itself is probably the greatest contributing factor to school-age drug use.        The role of tobacco and alcohol marketing, and the role of head shops is discussed in the context of the availability of drugs as a necessary precondition for abuse.        Distinctions are made between use, abuse, and addiction.  OTA is straightforward that substances differ in their abuse liability, and the line between use and abuse varies.  The goals of prevention programs vary between attempting to prevent initial use, delay initial use, or reduce or control continued use.  While there is a progression to the use of various drugs, OTA reports that these stages are descriptive, not predictive. There is considerable evidence that expectations play an influential role in drug use and abuse.        Ethnographic studies and anthropology have begun to make important contributions to understanding substance abuse.  Four social contexts are recognized: a drug focused subculture, drug use as part of a larger lifestyle or identity, normal, recreational use among specific partners or peers, and use in social isolation.  (Interestingly, medical marijuana use is provided as an example of drug use in social isolation.  Sad, true in too many cases, and unnecessary.)        However, "most of the ethnographic research has concentrated on drug-focuses subcultures or on crime-related subcultures.  There are too few studies on other populations . . . (for example) no significant ethnographic studies of student drug use in almost two decades.  The drug problem has been defined in the public mind and among some funding sources as a problem of poor minority communities. . . Drug use and drug users are defined as the "other," different from the rest of society.  Ethnographers have paid relatively little attention to the relationship between culturally approved drug use (e.g., caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, psychoactive prescription drugs) and illicit drug use."  (OTA 1994 pg. 128-129)        The elements of notable prevention programs include:  promoting social and life skills, strengthening families, promoting healthy peer interaction, indirect and participatory approaches to substance use, and alternative activities.        A considerable amount of material covered by OTA is not reviewed here.  This includes a review of all major drug use indicators and considerable discussion of the demographic differences in drug use by people of different genders and races.  Relationships between individual risk factors and aggressiveness, delinquency, physical and sexual abuse, and mental disorders are also discussed.        Technologies are problem solving tools that have benefits and limitations.  This article has touched on a few of the technologies that are most relevant to marijuana law reform:  the brain reward system, the gateway drug sequence, the public health model, the isolation of primary causes of school-age drug use, the use of ethnographic studies, the elements of successful prevention programs and learning about drug abuse from drug use.  These are all tools that provide new ways to address, solve, and explain old problems.        Advocates of marijuana law reform must become familiar with the latest findings in these and other areas, otherwise arguments for reform will become increasingly irrelevant as the context of public policy discussions evolves. Interview with Professor Raphael Mechoulam, Codiscoverer of THCThe International Journal of the Addictions, 21(4&5), 579-587, 1986.        The interview was conducted by Stanley Einstein in Jerusalem on January 14, 1985.        Mechoulam provides a brief history of research preceding his isolation of THC with Yehiel Gaoni in 1964, and discusses some of the possible therapeutic applications that can be derived from cannabinoids.        "Probably the major barrier has been the unwillingness, or fear, by companies to develop drugs that are based on cannabis.  They are afraid, as I said before, of notoriety.  They were afraid that they would get into a jam of sorts.  So for the first ten years after our discoveries, essentially no work has been done whatsoever on the pharmaceutical properties of cannabis.  Even afterwards the work that was done, was done very, very timidly and very slowly.  Even when work done at a scientific level it was stopped at the corporate- administrative level . . . Most industries and governments do not know how to make use of scientists and scientific ideas."  pg. 587. Renee C. Wert & Michael RoulinThe Chronic Cerebral Effects of Cannabis UseI  Methodological Issues and Neurological FindingsII Psychological Findings and ConclusionsThe International Journal of the Addictions, 21(6), 605-642, 1986.        (I) "On the basis of available research, it was concluded that there is no evidence that marijuana produces gross structural cerebral changes and little evidence that it leads to functional impairment, although subtle impairment cannot be ruled out." pg. 605.        (II) "Evidence from both American and cross-cultural studies suggests that marijuana probably does not produce chronic cerebral impairment, although subtle impairment cannot be ruled out." pg. 629.        This paper summarizes what research had determined about marijuana's effects on the brain by the early 1980's.        This paper also marks a transition in the focus of research from brain damage to brain function. Leo E. HollisterHealth Aspects of CannabisPharmacological Reports, 38(1), 1-20. 1986.        This article reviews a) the acute and chronic effects of cannabis in humans b) the possible adverse effects of cannabis on health and c) the therapeutic uses of cannabis.  This article is cited frequently and is considered one of the most authoritative analyses of cannabis-oriented research to date.  Subsequent research has tended to support Hollister's conclusions, particularly in regard to tolerance and dependence.        "Tolerance is not a problem when doses are small, or infrequent, or where the pattern of use of the drug is not prolonged.  Tolerance only becomes a major factor with high, sustained, and prolonged use of the drug . . . Large doses of THC are required over long time periods for tolerance to develop.  As most social use of the drug does not meet these requirements, neither tolerance nor dependence has been a major issue in its social use."  pg. 9. William A. Devane, Francis A. Dysarz III, M. Ross Johnson, Lawrence S. Melvin, and Allyn C. HowlettDetermination and Characterization of a Cannabinoid Receptor in Rat BrainMolecular Pharmacology, 34:605-613.  1988.        Prior to this study, "one reason for our lack of insight concerning the actions of cannabinoid drugs in the (Central Nervous System) is that a clearly defined cellular mechanism(s) for this class of drugs has remained elusive."  pg. 605.        It had long been suspected that the effects of cannabis were mediated by receptors in the brain, but until this study the technology to determine and characterize these receptors did not exist.  Prior research had established criteria for a pharmacologically distinct cannabinoid receptor; this study met those criteria by using autoradiographic binding of a potent isomer of THC to tissues from a rat brain. Miles Herkenham, Allison B. Lynn, Mark D. Little, M. Ross Johnson, Lawrence S. Melvin, Brian R. De Costa, and Kenner C. Rice.Cannabinoid Receptor Localization in BrainProceedings of the National Academy of Science USA, 87:1932-1936. 1990.        Herkenham's research team applied the technology developed by Howlett's team to locating cannabinoid receptors in guinea pig, rat, dog, monkey and human brains.        Receptors are most dense in the basal ganglia, hippocampus, and cerebellum, and are sparse in the lower brainstem areas controlling heart and lung functions.  "High densities of receptors in the forebrain and cerebellum implicate roles for cannabinoids in cognition and movement." (pg. 1932.)        Addressing recent interest in dopamine release in the brain, Herkenham notes that:  "The presence of cannabinoid receptors in the ventromedial striatum suggests an association with dopamine circuits thought to mediate reward.  However, reinforcing properties of cannabinoids have been difficult to demonstrate in animals.  Moreover, cannabinoid receptors in the basal ganglia are not localized on dopamine neurons."  pg. 1936. WT01-B20-86IA087-000632-B009-246http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quadcity.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085214 text/html 321HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:52:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:21 GMTContent-length: 107 WT01-B20-87IA087-000632-B009-270http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad1.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085232 text/html 5777HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:52:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:16:03 GMTContent-length: 5562 Melee erupts at hemp event Quad-City Times Sunday, May 19, 1996, Page 1A. Fax 319-383-2433 Tel 319-383-2200 Melee erupts at hemp event Police use spray to control crowd on Credit Island By Seth Hettena and Doug Schorpp QUAD-CITY TIMES Police sealed off Davenport'sCredit Island Park and made more than 30 arrests Saturday after amelee broke out between officers and participants at amarijuana-themed festival there. A Davenport police officer, ChadLangager, 36, was hositalized and expected to undergo surgery fora serious knee injury. One festival-goer who allegedly had beensmoking marijuana came away with a broken nose. The Hempfest - which is intended,organizers have said, to promote the benefits of the hemp plantfrom which marijuana is made - was only 90 minutes old when thedisturbance began. The crowd intervened after police moved inabout 1:30 p.m. to arrest four people sharing a marijuanacigarette, authorities said. "There's no free day I'maware of where we're not supposed to enforce laws,"Davenport Police Chief Steve Lynn said. "We tried to dealwith it as effectively as we could." Police set up a command center atCredit Island Park before the festival began. More than 50officers, including Metropolitan Enforcement Group officers andsheriff's deputies, were on the scene. Lynn said several people incitedthe assemblage and called it "a crowd of near-riotproportion." During the fracas, police reportsstate that: officers were pushed, punched and spat upon; oneparticipant allegedly tried to wrench an officer's nightstickfrom his grasp while others grabbed microphones in the parkpavilion and urged the crowd to resist police. Police used a substance calledCapstun similar to Pepper Defense Spray to disperse the 300 to400 Hempfest participants who had come from around the Midwest. Witnesses said several childrenwere affected by the burning, choking mixture. Tamara Kirkland,17, of Moline, said her 4-year-old niece had to be carried offafter she was sprayed. Lynn said the accidental sprayingof some children was unavoidable because of the circumstances. Twelve participants, including theHempfest organizer, Bob Moldenhauer, 43, of Rock Island, werearrested. Moldenhauer was being held in the Scott County Jail on$1,040 bond late Saturday, facing charges of possession of acontrolled substance, trespassing, interference and possession ofdrug paraphernalia. Police reports state thatMoldenhauer was told to leave the scene. He initially complied,but then returned and tried to hand officers leaflets. When he refused subsequent ordersto leave he was taken into custody and had to be taken to theground before he could be restrained, according to the reports. Other people arrested were beingheld on various charges, including possession of marijuana,inciting a riot and assaulting a police officer. More than 20people, many of them in their teens, were issued citations, butwere not held in custody. The use of the Capstun sprayoutraged some crowd members such as Josh Abney, 19, of EastMoline. "They sprayed me, and I threw my Mountain Dew bottleat them," he said. "They made it a riot." Tanya Wheeler, 19, of Moline, saidshe felt the police provoked the fracas. "The mace wasn'taimed at people smoking," she said. "They were walkingaround spraying everybody. I had it in my mouth, and it burnsyour throat." Other witnesses also said thearrests were made with excessive force. Lynn said the event never shouldhave been held in the park in the first place. Instead ofacquiring a permit, Hempfest organizers applied for the use of apark shelter which only requires notifying the city's parks andrecreation department. "They trashed LeClaire Parkthree years ago, and the city said they were not supposed to comeback," he said. "But they circumvented the license thistime." After the Hempfest was held inSeptember 1993 at Prospect Park in Moline, neighbors complainedto city officials, saying it was nothing more than a "drugparty." Image file: Policedisperse the crowd on Davenport's Credit Island after adisturbance brought an early end to the spring Hempfest evenSaturday afternoon. More than 30 people, including the eventorganizer, were arrested. WT01-B20-88IA087-000632-B010-8http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad2.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085247 text/html 7025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:52:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:48 GMTContent-length: 6810 Hemp Fest turns violent The Dispatch The Dispatch and Rock Island Argus Sunday, May 19, 1996, Page A1. Hemp Fest turns violent 33 arrested at Credit Island event By Jonathan Turner and Steven Jagler Staff writers DAVENPORT -- What started outto be a day of peace and love quickly descended into violence andarrests, as this year's spring Hemp Fest at Credit Island Parkwas closed early Saturday afternoon by police. Thirty-three people were arrestedon charges ranging from possession of controlled substances toassault, and one Davenport police officer was seriously injured. Police and festival participantsalike described the incident as a "riot" situation. The 36-year-old police officer, a16-year veteran of the department, suffered a leg injury thatrequleed surgery at a local hospital. Because he is an undercoverofficer, his name was not released by police. Police reported no other injuries. Saturday's festival began at noon.Shortly before 1 p.m., police began making arrests. 'Our intent was not to close the park down, but just to monitor the situation ....' Officer Dave Kanaack, Davenport Police That's when some of thefestival-goers violently resisted arrest and started"throwing bottles and rocks," said Officer DaveKanaack, one of about 20 officers at the scene. "Our intentwas not to close the park down, but juat to monitor the situationwith regard to Iowa laws." Since possession and recreationaluse of hemp, from which marijuana is derived, is illegal, OfficerKanaack said, "We're not just going to look the otherway." Obviously, some of thefestival-goers held a different viewpoint. "It's not right. We should beable to do what we want," said Joe Smith of Rock Island, whocame to the festival just before the violence broke out."Everybody was just having a good time until this started. "It just broke out out of theblue," he said after police closed the island at 1:33 p.m. Mr. Smith said many in the crowddefended those who were being arrested. "Everybody stood up foreverybody else," he said, estimating the crowd to be about1,000. Other crowd estimates were much lower. Mr. Smith said police officersused Mace to control and subdue the festival-goers. Officer Kanaack said "therewas an accident with a police officer" who was trying tocontrol one individual and "some residual spray got in thedirection of the crowd. Unfortunately, a lot of people wereinvolved in this." Hubert Evans of Davenport, wholeft the park just before the riot broke out, called the policedepartment later Saturday to complain about their treattuent ofthe public. "I don't appreciate thembeing so reckless with people's lives, walking aroundintimidating people," he said of police behavior beforearrests were made. "They were creating a military threat ina peaceful situation. It was deliberately provocative." "It used to be so differentat the different locations. They were so much more lenient,"said Sharon Valle of Bettendoff. "Occasionally, cops wouldstop by and look intimidating. But it would be verypeaceful." At least three men still werebeing held in the Scott County Jail Saturday night. According toa jail spokesman, the men, whose ages and addresses were notavailable, were: Joseph Loughead, charged with rioting andinterference with official acts; Christopher Rice, charged withassault with injury to a Police officer, rioting and Interferencewith official acts; and Michael Winterlin, charged with assaultwith injury to a police officer, interference with official actsand disorderly conduct. Hemp Pest organizer RobertMoldenhauer of Rock Island was arrested and charged with unlawfulassembly, failure to disperse and possession. He could not bereached Saturday for comment. A Davenport officer Saturday nightsaid the department may be perceived to be harsher than othersbecause "we've always pretty much had zero tolercance on anykind of drug activity." He said that reflects Chief SteveLynn's position. Saturday's melee wes not the firsttime tensions have risen between police and attendants of HempFest in the Quad-Cities. Police made "several"arrests in May 1995 during a festival at Loud Thunder ForestPreserve near Andalusia. Charges ranged from possession ofcannabis, minors in possession of alcohol and contributing to thedelinquency of minors all misdemeanors. Rock Island County SheriffDepartment Capt. Richard Fisher said at the time that the LoudThunder event "was a complete disaster." In September 1993, Moline policereceived complaints of illegal drug use, fighting, open profanityand yards being used as bathrooms during a hemp fest in ProspectPark. After that event, Moline PoliceChief Steve Etheridge said officers declined to make arrests inProspect Park, fearing the actions "would start ariot." Image file: A policeofficer searches the trunk of a car headed to Hemp Fest on CreditIsland Saturday as one of the car's occupants watches. WT01-B20-89IA087-000632-B010-34http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad3.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085300 text/html 6153HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:52:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:44 GMTContent-length: 5938 Hemp Fest may move to private land Rock Island Argus May 21, 1996 Hemp Fest may move to private land By John Kanthak Staff writer DAVENPORT -- Hemp Festorganizer Bob Moldenhauer said Monday he may move next year'sevent to private property after the mass arrests at Saturday'sfestival -- arrests he says were intended solely to silence him. This is a vendetta against me --it's not about the Hemp Fest anymore," he said. "Whathappened Saturday afternoon was a well-orchestrated effort,pre-planned by the Davenport Police Department." Not true, police Lt. DaveStruckman said Monday. Officers made arrests and closed CreditIsland Park only because some participants blatantly werebreaking laws and inciting riot, he said. A melee began after police triedto arrest four people allegedly smoking a marijuana cigarette,according to reports. Others in the crowd began throwing bottlesand rocks at police and using loudspeakers to encourage people toresist arrest, police said. Mr. Moldenhauer said police arrestedhim and the others to keep him and others from talking to thecrowd about Libertarian philosophies and decriminalization ofmarijuana. "They wanted to silence me,to keep me from telling people that government does not reallyexist," he said. "It's just a private corporation thattakes our money, and that's it." Nobody silenced Mr. Moldenhauer,Lt. Struckman said. "We gave him a forum,"he said. "He had an hour and a half to exercise his right tofree speech. He could talk about anti-government, pro-marijuanaor whatever. But we had told these folks that we would not sitback and let them violate the law." Some fest-goers openly weresmoking marijuana, even though police were nearby and hadsupplied an "amnesty barrel" in which the public coulddump their marijuana as they entered, Lt. Struckman said. "Our officers would haveloved to have been there and not had to do a damned thing,"he said, "but it was too blatant to overlook." Police estimate 300 to 400 peopleattended the event. Thirty-three were arrested on charges rangingfrom possession of controlled substances to assault. During themelee, a 36-year-old Davenport police officer had his leg brokenwhen Christopher Rice, 28, of Rock Island allegedly fought beingarrested, according to police reports. Michael Winterlin, 21, ofBettendorf was charged with assault on a police officer,disorderly conduct and interference with official acts after heallegedly taunted police, chanted obscenities against the police,spit in the face of one officer and punched another in the chest,according to police reports. "That's inciting ariot," Lt. Struckman said. Officers employed a chemical sprayto subdue the crowd, but Mr. Moldenhauer said reports of its usewere exaggerated. "I only saw one (officer)Pusing it, and I was standing right downwind from him," hesaid. "If he'd bee using a lot of it, I'd have known. It wasjust an intimidation tactic." Jennifer Cooper of Moline saidpolice handled festival-goers too roughly. "People who weren't movingfast enough got kicked around and roughed up," she said."One guy was still getting kicked after he was cuffed and onthe ground." Lt. Struckman said the policedepartment has received no complaints about officer's deportmentduring Saturday's arrests. Fest organizers rented a city parkshelter under an individual's name instead of trying to get apermit for the fest from the city, according to Scott CountySheriff Mike Bladel, whose deputies assisted city police at thepark. "We weren't told we needed apermit," Mr. Moldenhauer said. "The city wanted thingsto occur just as they did. I think next year we might move thefest to private property. Then the police won't have any excusesfor this kind of thing." That wouldn't stop police frommaking drug arrests, Lt. Struckman said. "Even on private property,there are things called 'laws,'" he said. "It may beprivate property, but if you open the event to the generalpublic, it becomes sort of public domain. Police could still bethere under-cover." In Mr. Moldenhauer's view,marijuana use is not prohibited by law in Iowa. "Under Iowa law, a person isdefined as a legal entity," he said. "But according toBlack's legal dictionary, a legal entity is not a natural person.So you can have all the pot you want because you're not aperson." Image file: 'Theywant to silence me, to keep me from telling people that thegovernment does not really exist.' Bob Moldenhauer WT01-B20-90IA087-000632-B010-66http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad4.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085330 text/html 6332HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:53:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:40 GMTContent-length: 6117 Hemp Fest vows to return Quad-City Times May 21, 1996, Page 1A Organizer: 'I ain't gonna let 'em stop Hemp Fest' But he says it will move By Jeff Ewolt QUAD-CITY TIMES Despite the disturbance that landed him in jail and led to 30 other arrests, the Rock Island man who organized last weekend's Hemp Fest at Credit Island Park says he has no plans to discontinue the semiannual event and will move it to private property next time. "I ain't gonna let 'em stop Hemp Past," Robert Moldenhauer said Monday. Moldenhauer, 41, faces numerous charges, including criminal trespassing and marijuana possession, in the wake of the melee that broke out when police and fest-goers clashed Saturday afternoon. The event, promoted last week with fliers that included a hand-drawn map directing participants to Davenport's Credit Island, attracted as many as 400 people from across the Midwest. Davenport police said. Moldenhauer does not dispute police reports that list him as the event's organizer. He said he reserved a park shelter by paying $20, and then paid a $150 damage deposit at the request of the city of Davenport's legal department. During the past six years, he has arranged numerous other Hemp Fests in the Quad-Cities, he said. Some of the twice-a-year events have resulted in disturbances not unlike the one Saturday. But instead of bouncing around from one city park to another and being "hassled" by police, Moldenhauer says he intends to move future Hemp Fests to private property. If police try to intervene, they will be trespassing, he warned. "And we'll deal with trespassers the way trespassers should be dealt with," he said, declining to elaborate. He denied that the purpose of Saturday's event was to promote illegal drug use, even though the fliers intercepted last week by police suggested otherwise. The leaflets advised participants to "remember to bring a bud," a reference to marijuana cigarettes. Moldenhauer argues the fests are designed only to promote the benefits of hemp -- the plant from which marijuana is derived and to educate people about the government. He said police quashed Saturday's fest, not because of its hemp theme, but because they wanted to censor his views. "They intended to shut it down primarily to silence me," he said. "The government doesn't like to hear what I have to say because it exposes them as extortionists." Police, who had a command center set up across the street from the park, said they were there only to monitor the situation and enforce the law. They moved in after observing four people share a marijuana cigarette. The problems began when the crowd lashed out against the arresting officers. Some fest-goers formed a circle around officers, yelled obscenities and threw bottles at them. One officer suffered a broken leg while trying to restrain one of the participants. The 36-year-old officer was recovering Monday at a Davenport hospital after he underwent surgery Saturday afternoon. ARRESTS Here is a list of people who face the most serious charges filed inthe wake of the hemp Fest disturbance: * Ian G. Delevere, 19, of 1505 28th St., Rock Island. Criminal trespass,possession of alcohol under the legal age; accused of failing to leaveafter the park was closed, * Andrew Kindhart, 20, of 16406 Route 84 North, East Moline. Unlawfulassembly and failure to disperse, accused of throwing bottles at policeand refusing to leave. * Joseph Laughead, 27, of 124 North St., Muscatine, Iowa. Incitinga riot, interference; accused of using a microphone to tell crowd thatpolice should not be allowed to make arrests. * Robert Moldenhauer, 43, of 2800 8 1/2 Ave., Rock Island. Criminaltrespass, interference, marijuana possession and pos- session of drug paraphernalia;accused of returning to the park after being told to leave and trying topass out leaflets to police. * Anthony Polito, 18, of 1413 5th Ave., Moline. Disorderly conduct,marijuana pos- session and possession of drug paraphernalia; accused ofthrowing a bottle at police. * Christopher Rice, 28, of 1614 15th St., Rock Island. Assault withinjury to a police officer, inciting a riot and aggravated interference;accused of using the microphone to tell the crowd to take a stand againstpolice, punching an officer in the chest, trying to hit another officer,whose leg was broken in the scuffle. * James Webb, 21, of 550 Island Ave., East Moline. Assaulting a policeofficer and serious interference; accused of interfering with arrests andresisting arrest when officers tried to restrain him. * Michael D. Winterlin, 21, of 3665 Sunny Hill Drive, Bettendorf. Assaultinga police officer, disorderly conduct and interference with official acts;accused of yelling obscenities while waving fists, spitting in an officer'sface, punching an officer in the chest and trying to take away his nightstick.WT01-B20-91IA087-000632-B010-97http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad5.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085344 text/html 2549HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:53:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:37 GMTContent-length: 2334 Rally Report by Chris Rice                                 Quad Cities Hemp Coalition                                Post Office Box 3592                                Rock Island, Illinois 61201                                June 26, 1996 Rally Report by Chris Rice Saturday, May 16th, 1996 couldn't have been a more beautiful day for the Quad Cities Hemp Coalition's twelth semiannual Hempfest being held on Credit Island on the Mississippi River in Davenpot, Iowa. It soon became apparent that this fest wasn't going to be as groovy as the others. A heavy police presence greeted Hempsters, and police "Amnesty Barrels" decorated the entrance to the island. Only an hour into the event, which started at High Noon, the police moved into the center of the crowd and attempted to search a woman's purse who had been seen smoking some kind of "hand rolled cigarette." Members of the crowd informed the woman, who was not under arrest at the time, that she did not have to consent to a search. The officer tugged on the purse while pursuading the woman to give it up. Suddenly, police decended on the crowd from their temporary island command post, slamming fest participants to the ground and spraying capstun on the crowd indiscriminately. Thirty-three were arrested and hundreds were cleared from the island. A police officer's leg was broken when another officer fell on him. Chris Rice, a fest organizer, was charged with breaking the officer's leg even though he was faced down on the ground and handcuffed at the time. Local news broadcasts showed a woman looking for her baby being sprayed in the face repeatedly with capstun. Davenport police chief Steve Lynn (business phone # 319-326-7778) was present for the entire event. A demonstration in response to this event is planned for Saturday, July 27th, 1996 at the Scott County Courthouse, 416 West 4th Street, Davenport, Iowa. The police are saying that Hempfest is closed down for good and we need to show them otherwise. Call Chris Rice (309) 794-9107 for info.WT01-B20-92IA087-000632-B010-121http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad6.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085356 text/html 2374HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:53:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:32 GMTContent-length: 2159 HEMPSTERS HEMPSTERS There will be a demonstration against the war on drugs and for the legalization of Hemp: SATURDAY, JULY 27th, 1996 3:00 P.M. TO 8:00 P.M. AT THE SCOTT COUNTY COURTHOUSE 416 WEST 4th STREET, DAVENPORT, IOWA We will be joined by the UNITING SPIRITS a group of like minded individuals marching across America for PEACE, FREEDOM, and an end to the THE DRUG WAR! Their march ends at THE FESTIVAL OF LIFE being held during the Democratic Convention in Chicago. THE FESTIVAL OF LIFE is happening August 24th at noon to August 29th and is the same festival that happened in Chicago at the Democratic Convention of 1968. This time instead of protesting the war in Vietnam they will be protesting the WAR OH DRUGS! Join the UNITING SPIRITS march or try to make it to the FESTIVAL OF LIFE. Contact:  UNITING SPIRITS  (913) 752-5888          FESTIVAL OF LIFE (312) 296-2442 There will also be a demonstration at the Henry County Courthouse: Monday, July 29th; in Cambridge, Illinois; from 3:00 P.M. to 8:00 P.M. Henry County is one big DRUG WAR atrocity and needs our help! Drive by either event if you are afraid and decide if you want to stop. There is strength in numbers! These events are demonstrations so bring signs. We do not encourage anyone to break laws at these events. There will he plenty of time to celebrate when we end this WAR! Bring photos and a short biography, including charge and sentence, of friends and family imprisoned by the WAR ON DRUGS to hang on the courthouse. Davenport is also host to a Jazz Fest July 25th - 29th in honor of Bix Biderbecke, a reefer smoker! Watch HEMP-TV:  Mondays at 10:00 P.M.                Cox Cable, Channel 4WT01-B20-93IA087-000632-B010-149http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad7.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085412 text/html 3563HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:54:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:29 GMTContent-length: 3348 A CALL TO ACTION! A CALL TO ACTION! On Saturday, May 18th, 1996 there was a Hempfest held on Credit Island in Davenport, Iowa. The police decided they were going to shut down Hempfest and showed up in full force. They stepped up to the front of the crowd and attempted to grab a woman's purse. When members of the crowd told the woman that she doesn't have to consent to a search, the police officers responded by slamming festival participants to the ground and spraying the crowd with capstun indiscriminately. The police are saying they have shut down Hempfest for good. They think that we will stop fighting for our rights! Well that's not going to happen. Now is when we pull together and make an axample of Davenport, Iowa. We are going to come back stronger than ever! The only way that the police and Davenport are going to stop us from having this type of gathering is to stop arresting people for Cannabis; free our friends and family doing years in prison for Cannabis; and allow us to grow a personal amount to consume in our own homes and on other private property with the consent of the owner. Stop sending armed masked men in black to break down our doors, invade our homes, throw us to the floor, and drag us away in the middle of the night to live for years in chains. Then, and only then, will we stop demanding an end to this atrocity! We are tired of being used as an excuse for politicians to tamper with the rights guaranteed to us in the Constitution. We love America and we want her to live up to her promise. It's a free country: Like it; Leave it; or change it. We intend to change it back to the free land our founding fathers intended. If you can't stand freedom, maybe you should leave! It is often said, "They will change the law someday." Ask yourself, "Who are they?" It's obvious that the powers that be don't have concern for us. "They" is us, "We the People". It is up to us to force a change as peaceably as possible. NOW! It was a surprise to almost everyone when alcohol prohibition ended in 1933, and everyone was surprised when the Berlin Wall fell overnight. Now we are up against the wall and it's time we start pushing. We have the strength of numbers and the conviction of prior convictions. We are sorry if the police and courts set robbers, rapists, and murderers loose in order to prosecute us, but they have been doing just that for years! The purpose of this action is to end this miscarriage of justice. There are currently people doing life in prison without parole on cannabis charges. We are their only hope for freedom and they are counting on us. Will you let them down, or will you wish you had done something when your turn comes? If you don't do anything about this then you are also responsible because you allow it to happen. Join with us and victory is ours! Live in fear and you might be next!WT01-B20-94IA087-000632-B010-176http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad8.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085423 text/html 2174HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:54:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:26 GMTContent-length: 1959 STOP THE WAR! STOP THE WAR! 1 in 4 black males between the age of 18 and 30 are in prison. The leading cause of this imprisonment is the WAR ON DRUGS! Violence has gripped many poor black communities. This violence is a direct result of the WAR ON DRUGS! When so many pecple are pushed out of the legal system and courts cannot be depended on for justice, violence seems to be the only alternative. The police have used the WAR ON DRUGS as an excuse to stop and search black males anytime they wish. The WAR ON DRUGS has done more harm to the black community than any other. There are many divisions separating the black and white community but this is an issue which we can unite on. Black, white, and hispanic united to stop this war ravaging our communities. Join us! We all want our brothers and sisters, friends and family back! We advocate the legalization of Marijuana for it's peace inducing qualities and other industrial uses. We do not advocate the use of addictive or hard drugs, but we feel that arrest and imprisonment are not proper solutions. We are coming together for a demonstration against the WAR ON DRUGS: SATURDAY, JULY 27th, 1996 3:00 P.M. TO 8:00 P.M. AT THE SCOTT COUNTY COURTHOUSE 416 WEST 4th STREET DAVENPORT, IOWA Please make signs to show support. Bring photos and a short biography, including charge and sentence, of friends and family imprisoned by the WAR ON DRUGS for hanging on the courthouse.WT01-B20-95IA087-000632-B010-206http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad9.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085448 text/html 3084HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:54:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:23 GMTContent-length: 2869 WHAT CAN I DO TO HELP BRING AN END TO THE DRUG WAR? WHAT CAN I DO TO HELP BRING AN END TO THE DRUG WAR? Spend a little money copying flyers for demonstrations and events. Distribute them to friends, at the bar, at public events, concerts, 4th of July celebrations, and to the passer by on the street. Do not support businesses or buy products from companies that support the WAR ON DRUGS. Call then and tell them why you will no longer buy their products even though you like them. Go to the County Clerk's office tomorrow end register to vote. Vote pro hemp and against the DRUG WAR. Write your elected officials and tell them what issues and positions will effect your vote in the next election. Tune your radio to AM 1420 between 2:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M., Monday through Friday. Tell talk radio host Jim Fisher how you feel about the WAR ON DRUGS. If you are told that they don't want to talk about the WAR ON DRUGS today, it is easy to turn any other subject into a DRUG WAR subject. To get on the air call (319) 344-7040. Pay for a billboard or a newspaper ad with a picture of friends and family imprisoned by the WAR OH DRUGS. Include their name, age. charge. term, address, and a short biography describing how imprisonment has harmed them and their dependents. People need to know that there are real people doing real time. We need to put a face to a number. Attend demonstrations against the WAR ON DRUGS. Attendance at demonstrations does not mean you are a drug user. What it does is show the media that there are thousands of people that believe that there has to be a better alternative than a DRUG WAR that focuses on arrest and imprisonment. If you are in a band, write a song or two about this situation. Pass out flyers at shows and use your pulpit to announce upcoming events. Call (309) 794-9107 for information about a local compilation we would like to record to benefit this cause. We will remember your efforts when we purchase recordings. If a police officer wants to search your vehicle or person, just say "NO!" When they say "If you have nothing to hide, why can't I search?", tell them "It is my 4th Amendment right to be free from unreasonable search". Stick to it. You don't know if someone dropped a seed in your back seat. Tell them to "go ahead and get the dogs" if threatened with them. Let them waste their time. You don't get any extra credit for helping them send you up. Think about whether you really want to smoke with someone who doesn't care if you could go to jail for doing it. Expect people to back up their beliefs with actions.WT01-B20-96IA087-000632-B010-231http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad11.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085504 text/html 2322HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:54:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:53 GMTContent-length: 2107 PRESS RELEASE Quad City Hemp Coalition Post Office Box 3592 Rock Island, IL 61201 Chris Rice 1614 15th St. Rock Island, IL 61201 (309) 794-9107 July 16, 1996 Press Release: The Quad City Hemp Coalition announces that I will be holding a press conference Monday July 22, 1996 10:00 A.M. on the South lawn of the Scott County Court House, 416 West 4th St., Davenport, IA. The purpose of this conference is to update the press on events that occured at the Hemp Festival held at Credit Island, Davenport, IA on May 18th 1996, where I was accused of breaking a police officer's leg and police maced, then beat those in attendance. The charge against me of breaking the officer's leg has been dropped, thereby negating the excuses used the police to mace and beat people. In addition, I will announce a demonstration against the war on drugs, to be held Saturday July 27, 1996. We will be joined by the UNITING SPIRITS, a group of like minded individuals marching across America for PEACE, FREEDOM, and an end to THE DRUG WAR! Their march ends at THE FESTIVAL OF LIFE, being held during the Democratic National Convention in Chicago. For more information, feel free to contact me at my home, phone (309) 794-9107. Sincerely, Chris Rice enlosures: Flyers written by Chris Rice HEMPSTERS (June 26, 1996) A CALL TO ACTION! (June 26, 1996) STOP THE WAR! (June 26, 1996) WHAT CAN I DO TO HELP? (June 26, 1996)WT01-B20-97IA087-000632-B010-256http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/QCHC/quad12.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085512 text/html 3775HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:55:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:15:51 GMTContent-length: 3560 RALLY REPORT by James Getman RALLY REPORT by James Getman Hempsters demonstrate against the war on drugs. Davenport, IA July 27, 1996. The streets of downtown Davenport were infiltrated by a platoon of freedom fighters wearing tee-shirts that read "Bix smokes," armed with 10,000 flyers that describe the world renown jazz musician Bix Beiderbecke as a marijuana user. Thousands of survivors from the Bix 7 Mile foot race and attendants of the Bix jazz music fest were eagerly snapping up the hand bills. Meanwhile a few blocks away, a hundred hempsters demonstrated on the lawn of the Scott County Court House. A press conference hosted by Chris Rice, Quad City Hemp Coalition organizer, explains the demonstration's purpose is: to denounce the police macing and beating of hempsters at the May 18th QCHC rally at Davenport's Credit Island; as part of the Uniting Spirits march to the Democratic National Convention in Chicago to protest the war on drugs; and to educate the public of the role marijuana played in the jazz music community. Speakers included QCHC Chris Rice, libertarian candidate Robin Miller, and Zenger Editor Jackson Clubb. Chris Rice told the crowd how police at Credit Island started the riot when they wrenched a purse from a woman's hands dispite her protest against search without consent. Rice continued with how he was beat while being arrested for interferance with the search and how police claim that he broke a police officer's leg during his arrest. Chris further told of his up coming trial and said, "The cops don't have a leg to stand on." Read about Credit Island rally on the net at http://www.commonlink.com/~olsen/NORML/QCHC/qchc.html. Libertarian candidate from illinios for US Senate, Robin Miller talked about the Libertarian Party platform entitled First Step Towards Freedom; included within he said, "Pardon everyone convicted of nonviolent drug offences ... to empty federal prisons of the marijuana smokers and others who are of no threat to society." Miller pledged, "The Constitution is our contract with America." Jackson Clubb encouraged people to go to Chicago and participate in the Uniting Spirits march to the Democratic National Convention. Clubb said that he was run out of town in the 1970's for organizing rallies and selling tee-shirts that read "Quad Shitties" depicting a cop beating a hippy. Others told how Henry County Illinios is one big drug war atrocity, where victims are intimidated by police into consent to search and are railroaded through court to jail. A woman discribed how she served 12 terrible weeks in the Henry Co. jail for one joint. Mr. Rice told of the excitement of cross country travelers when they see fields of wild marijuana; only to end up in jail for picking ditchweed that gives you a headache. No law enforcement was visible at the rally, except for two friendly Sheriff Dept. deputies who passed through on bicycles. The demonstration concluded with 100 protesters carrying signs chantting, "Hay Hay HO HO, we don't want your drug war, Bix smoked reefer," and "We smoke pot and we like it alot." Local press report "Hemp Fest Peaceful."WT01-B20-98IA087-000632-B010-307http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LETTERS/grassley.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085540 text/html 4718HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:55:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:14:09 GMTContent-length: 4503 Grassley, Charles, U.S. Senator - March 22, 1996 March 22, 1996 Dale H. Gieringer, Ph.D Coordinator, California NORML 3514 Dwight Way Berkeley, California 94704 Dear Dr. Gieringer: Thank you for taking the time to contact me with your opinions. Asyour Senator, it's important for me to hear from you. I appreciate your comments regarding proposals to legalize certain illicit drugs as an attempt to address the problems of drug abuse and drug-related crime in America. However, I firmly believe drug use is wrong and harmful and that it must stop. This includes marijuana, a drug proven to be both harmful to the user and a major gateway drug for other, more dangerous substances. Eighty-five percent of people who use harder drugs such as cocaine or crack admit to first having used marijuana. The effects of marijuana use are well documented. Using marijuanaproduces a dreamy state of consciousness in which ideas seem disconnected, uncontrollable, and free-flowing. Time, color, and spatial perceptions may be distorted and enhanced. Communicative and motor abilities are decreased during the use of these drugs. Difficulty in depth perception and altered sense of timing, both of which are particularly hazardous, are also known effects of using marijuana. Marijuana is addictive, causes difficulty with persistent memory and cognitive functions, causes personality changes, creates abnormalities in the lungs, creates abnormalities in the unborn, has residual effects on fetuses exposed in utero, and suppresses the immune system. The argument that the dangers of marijuana are overstated were more plausible in the 1960s and 1970s, when less was known about the full effects of this and many other drugs. Today, supporting the idea of smoking marijuana for medicinal purposes is similar to supporting tobacco for weight or anxiety control. There are better, safer, and more effective alternatives that are readily available whose side effects and interactive dangers are known. Claims that drug users only effect themselves and pose no threat to society are also misguided. People who use drugs do so to alter their perceptions of reality. When someone is high, they cannot be as alert to dangers that are always around us, dangers such as a boiling pot on the stove, a burning candle, or even something as simple as an open window. Drug using workers are 3 to 4 times as likely to have on-the-job accidents, 4 to 6 times more likely to have off-the-job accidents, 2 to 3 times more likely to file medical claims, 5 times more likely to file workman's compensation, and 25 percent to 35 percent less productive on the job. To claim that drug use affects only the user is to deny the reality that whatever we do effects those around us. The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) survey numbers on hospital admissions for drug related emergencies further confirms the alarming problems created by drug use. At least 500,000 Americans ended up in hospital emergency rooms in 1994 because of drug-related episodes, 40,100 of these episodes were directly related to marijuana. Marijuana is likely to be mentioned in combination with other substances, particularly alcohol and cocaine. In 1994, alcohol and cocaine were mentioned during 48 percent of marijuana-related episodes. Please look at the statement that I made on the floor of the Senate that further addresses the idea of drug legalization. Drugs are illegal because they are dangerous, they are not dangerous because they are illegal. We need to work to keep our drug laws strong and effective. Once again, thank you for communicating your views to me. Although we may disagree at times, I nonetheless appreciate and encourage your communication with me. Knowing your concerns helps me to do the best job I can as your U.S. Senator. Sincerely, Charles E. Grassley United States Senator 721 Federal Building 210 Walnut Street Des Moines, Iowa 50309-2140 (515) 284-4890 chuck_grassley@grassley.senate.govWT01-B20-99IA087-000632-B010-331http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LETTERS/bonner01.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085550 text/html 4452HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:55:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:14:21 GMTContent-length: 4237 Bentley, Russell (September 12, 1996) R. Bentley #41731 c/o Victoria Co. Jail 101 N. Glass St. Victoria, TX 77901 September 12, 1996 Carl, I just wanted to write you a letter and let you know how it's going with me. As I'm sure you've heard, I was busted on February 13 by U.S. Customs & DEA SWAT teams at my house in Minneapolis. I was originally charged with conspiracy for over 1,000 kilos of pot, money laundering and 5 counts of possession with intent to distribute. Everyone on my indictment became informers except me. Even when told I faced 20 years of federal time, I refused to even meet with narcs, or say anything at all about my activities. In June I pled guilty to one count of possession of 500 pounds in February 1992. In August I was sentenced to 63 months in the Bureau of Prisons. The state of Texas is currently revoking my probation on an 80 pound possession charge, also from 1992, that may or may not result in more time. I am presently on my way (hopefully) to a federal corrections institute in Minnesota. Some people have insinuated that my arrest, like similar arrests of people like Arlin Troutt and Dennis Peron, have discredited the Grassroots Party and the Hemp Movement. This is absurd. The only "crime" I have ever been convicted of is possession of marijuana - the breaking of an unjust and unreasonable law. The same goes for Arlin and Dennis. Any you. I am angry and disgusted by certain elements who are trying to defame people like us who have put their lives on the line to further a righteous cause. I am not saying that everyone should break the marijuana laws, but I am sickened by self-righteous hypocrites who condemn those of us who have been arrested and given up years of our lives for nothing more than possession of a plant that is a gift from God. There are three equally important aspects of the cannabis legalization issue: industrial, medical and HUMAN RIGHTS. Human rights encompasses personal and religious use. I have always said that the Hemp Movement will only be successful when all three aspects are accorded equal importance. There are between 100,000 and a quarter million Americans in prison today for marijuana alone. Their cause is EVERY BIT as legitimate and vital as that of medical users or "industrial use" advocates. For one group of Hemp Activists to look down their noses at another is ridiculous and counter-productive. It should be remembered that the purpose and intent of the laws against marijuana is the total eradication and extinction of the cannabis plant. Were it not for "outlaws" who have kept the cannabis species alive over the last 60 years, the industrial and medical use advocates may well not have had a plant to be talking about. Ghandi said, "We have a moral obligation to disobey unrighteous laws." Thoreau said, "In a land where any are imprisoned unjustly, the only place for a truly just man is in prison." I agree with them both. I did not become an activist after my arrest - I've been at it for over seven years, and I've worked as hard and given as much as anyone in this movement has. Now I am giving 5 years of my life in federal prison. Marijuana prisoners ask for no special accolades or recognition - we know ourselves the worth of our sacrifice and dedication, for we are the ones who must pay its price. But we do not deserve the condemnation and recrimination of anyone who claims to fight for Truth and Justice. The Hemp Movement is stuggling to change a law that will change the world. We need all the help we can get, and we must work together. You keep doing your job, and we'll keep doin' ours. Until We Win, Russell "Bongo" Bentley P.S. I don't know how much time you have for reading, but I HIGHLY RECOMMEND LIVING IN TRUTH by VACLAC HAVEL. Read it, you'll be glad you did.WT01-B20-100IA087-000632-B010-360http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LETTERS/jack-01.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085608 text/html 3131HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:55:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:14:03 GMTContent-length: 2916 Johnson, Jack (July 24, 1996) Jack D. Johnson, POW USDOJ POW #04660-030 Post Office Box 4000 Springfield, MO 65801 July 24, 1996 Mr. Mark Greer cc: Carl Olsen IA NORML Box 651 Porterville, CA 93258 Dear Mark: A few weeks ago you requested permission to provide a letter I'd written to Iowa Senator Grassley to various newspapers & other federal legislators. I'd provided it to Carl Olsen (IA NORML) who forwarded it & placed it on the Internet, dispersing it at my request. You are encouraged to make that letter available to anyone who needs to be educated about Cannabis in an honest manner as opposed to the pervasive govt misinformation. * * * * * * * * I've noted a recent federal push to control "pseudoephedrine" anti-histamines & cold pills in an effort to further enforce prohibition of "meth"amphetamine clandestine production. It should be pointed out to these "pop-law" lawmakers that use of these remedies are a simple expedient to the outlaw lab production techniques, and that "meth" will still be made using bituminous (soft) coal, bleach, battery (sulfuric) acid, and salt, the latter two combining to make hydrochloric gas. In the early 1900s this was a widely known process to make "chicken crank" so the hen would lay more eggs, grow faster, etc., along with helping the farmers of the era do more work! "Chicken crank" was used in a variety of snake-oil concoctions "energizers" and was an ingredient in some soft drinks, namely 7-Up & Coca Cola. It can also be produced from coal oil. If Congress moves to control cold remedies, underground labs in this country will use commonly available materials to continue operation. It seems the politicians are unaware that the 'Invisible Hand' of market demand is what fuels the market and no hysterical "pop-law" will slow it down, much less stop production. It should be understood I do not advocate "meth." Nor do I advocate any war on Americans by Americans. It is my belief that the (Lifestyle Police's) "DRUG WAR" is no more than VERY SICK POLITICS. It's only product is misery imposed on the underprivileged and contempt for govt & authority as opposed to respect. No govt has ever gained it's citizens' respect by means of prohibition and oppression. You have my permission to use this letter's contents in any way you deem appropriate. Correspondents & supporters are desired. Sincerely, Jack D. Johnson, POWWT01-B20-101IA087-000632-B010-391http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LETTERS/atley-01.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085623 text/html 4496HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:56:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:14:32 GMTContent-length: 4281 Atley, Lewis (July 30, 1996) Lewis Atley 1074758-A Iowa Men's Reformatory Post Office Box B Anamosa, Iowa 52205-0010 July 30, 1996 Dear Carl, Thanks for the Summer 1996 NORML newsletter. As your article on page 11 points out, the forfeiture - double jeopardy issue, which I was counting on, is now dead. Never, in one term, has any U.S. Supreme Court so damaged the Constitution. Besides the forfeiture - double jeopardy issue, they ruled that forfeitures from innocent owners is okay; that police can use pretext stops to search for drugs; limited federal judges' ability to make sure prisons provide legal access to inmates; and approved limiting habeas corpus in death penalty cases. Now President Clinton is using the Olympic bombing to slip in roaming phone taps! Who says 1984 isn't around? On my appeal, we now expect the Iowa Supreme Court to rule on the legality of mushrooms. On one level, there is no mention in the statute of any mushroom. A look at the whole of Iowa's Controlled Substances Act would lead a reasonable person to the conclusion that mushrooms are legal. They define "drug," in part, as "substances, other than food, intended to affect the structure or any function of the human body..." Most people would consider a mushroom "food." The definition of "manufacture" says, in part, "by extraction from substances of natural origin" and all I had was the "substance of natural origin" - mushrooms. I was in no way "extracting" the psilocybin. What the Iowa Supreme Court has to look at, though, is not whether it is fair to put me in prison for 20 years for having mushrooms not even listed as illegal. What they really better consider is the precedent they will set in my case. If they say a plant that naturally contains a listed substance is to be treated exactly like the extracted, or chemically synthesized, form, where does that leave the state of law? Nicotine is illegal (Iowa Code  205.5) to possess or sell. Every person with a pack of cigarettes would be in danger of prosecution. Coffee, beans or brew, that contain caffeine would be subject to "drug" controls. Home owners would be "manufacturing lysergic acid" if they grow morning glories. Garden shops that sell San Pedro cactus, a common item, would be open to "sale of mescaline" charges. The list goes on and on. While the Iowa Supreme Court may not care to be fair in my case because it's legally correct to rule I broke no laws, they may think twice if they realize how they rule will affect tobacco and coffee. NORML should take heed that an adverse ruling in my case opens the door for prosecutorial slight-of-hand and using my case to change a misdemeanor marijuana charge into a felony THC charge. If the Iowa Supreme Court holds that mushrooms that naturally contain psilocybin are illegal, even if not specifically prohibited, because they happen to contain, naturally, psilocybin - where does that leave the Declaration of Independence and Constitution? After all, they are documents that happen to "contain" an illegal substance since they are printed on paper containing hemp. But then with the way the U.S. Supreme Court and our government is using the trumped up excuse of the "War on Drugs" to undermine these documents, they have already done much towards declaring them as "prohibited substances"! We expect a ruling in my case in December or January. As I said, now that the forfeiture - double jeopardy issue is dead, they will, now, have to rule on the mushroom legality issue. Will the Iowa Supreme Court declare that much of life on this planet is illegal - which ruling against me will, in essence, do - because 1000s of living organisms naturally contain a controlled substance? Or will they leave us safe to enjoy our poppy seed rolls, morning glory flowers and other items not specifically outlawed? Tune in this winter... Namaste, SkipWT01-B20-102IA087-000632-B011-10http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LETTERS/atley-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085640 text/html 2924HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:56:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:14:27 GMTContent-length: 2709 Atley, Lewis (August 23, 1996) August 23, 1996 Lewis J. Atley #1074758-A Iowa Men's Reformatory P.O. Box B Anamosa, Iowa 52205 Dear Carl: Well, I went ahead and wrote my Religious Freedom/Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993/1st, 5th, 8th, 9th and 14th Amendments brief. (Whew!!) Anyway, I doubt if I'd go through it again if I had all the stuff from your marijuana attack ... and, I'm sure it was more than you would want to send anyway. So, unless it was real easy for you, you can forget that request. But I have another one. Since I am planning for the new trial,which I hope will not be necessary, but "just in case" I want to be ready ... and have a couple of requests. One, the FIJA people wrote me and said you were the one to contact in Iowa. They mention in the newletter on information they have in their "Activists' Supply Shop" that tells how to inform the jury at the trial. Do you have that literature? I couldn't tell from the list which it was, and couldn't afford it if I could have. If you have this could you send me a copy? (THE INFO FOR ATTORNEYS ON HOW TO SLIP IT IN IN OPENING/CLOSING ARGUMENT) Two, If my case does go to trial next year (Feb, March or April) would you be able, perhaps, to get a couple of persons to hand out the "True or False" FIJA leaflets? I think that would help a lot as I will be making a good case to the jury on mushrooms safety, religious use, and the silliness of the law that prosecutes someone for something not even listed as illegal and sends them to prison for 20 years. (THE TRIAL WOULD PROBABLY BE IN SCOTT COUNTY - FOR LEAFLETING) Three, Do you know any doctors, professors, biologists or psychiatric doctors that would write an Affidavit, and possibly testify at trial, on the safety and ????? of psilocybin and of mushrooms? If so, could you send me their addresses so I could contact them and get affidavits for my motion and inquire if they would also be willing to testify if a new trial becomes necessary? Thank you for your support so far. I hope you can help me out on the above three requests. Best regards, Skip P.S. I will be representing myself at any new trial. No sell-out court-appointed lawyers again! I am a paralegal and am studying on how to prepare & present my case at trial.WT01-B20-103IA087-000632-B011-41http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/NORML/LETTERS/atley-03.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085658 text/html 5293HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:56:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:14:25 GMTContent-length: 5078 Atley, Lewis (August 30, 1996) August 30, 1996 Dear Carl, I've changed my mind, again. Sorry. I would like a copy of your original DEA Petition for an exemption and the appeal stuff. The reason is that, regardless of the outcome of my case, I think my Sacred Mushroom Church has a real chance for an exemption - since Psilocybe mushrooms are situated much more similarly to peyote than marijuana. Besides, I have used them as a religious sacrament for 22 years and it's about time I was able to do so legally. We plan to incorporate our church also. Having your original Petition, etc., would guide me in the process I need to follow. I think my argument has a much better chance than marijuana, as, from the Spanish Inquisition on, peyote and mushrooms have been used and persecuted/prosecuted together. I think the religious use history, medical safety (Psilocybin is THE SAFEST HALLUCINOGEN, 10 TIMES SAFER THAN MESCALINE; AND MUCH LESS TOXIC, EVEN, THAN THC), and "pervasiveness" of actual use in the U.S. is so close to that of peyote that we'd really be in good shape under the RFRA of 1993. so, if it isn't too much of a problem, I would like the copies you said you'd make. This doesn't cancel the other items my last letter raised on the FIJA stuff. If a new trial is necessary, I will want to raise, not only the religious freedom issue, but want the jury to be "fully informed." I have Jonathan Ott (PHARMACOTHEON, AGE OF ENTHEOGENS, HALLUCINOGENIC PLANTS OF NORTH AMERICA, and other books) lined up to come from Mexico as on Expert Witness. Also, Dr. John Beresford, retired Psychiatrist who did psilocybin experiments in the '60s, and now heads The Committee on Unjust Sentencing and The Albert Hoffmann Museum will be an Expert Witness. I'm hoping for others, perhaps even Dr. Hoffmann, although his age, 93, might preclude his being able to come. (He's close to both Dr. Beresford & Jonathan Ott) I'm proceeding as if the new trial will be necessary. Better to be prepared. And I am getting ready to do a first class trial - and represent myself. The motions are done, with supporting briefs, and I'm studying on trial presentation, objections, cross examinations, etc. I'm preparing a trial notebook a'la F. Lee Bailey. And with the cops & prosecutors destroying all 4,860 Mason jars of cultures, (knowing & ADMITTING I said I was growing many types of mushrooms), 2 weeks after I got in their jail, but before I could ask for preservation and independent testing - then lying on the stand about a "court order" to destroy the jars when it was the prosecutor who told the cops to destroy them - well, Mark Furman will look like a saint when I get through with the Quad City MEG officers who lied and the prosecutor who let them! No Iowa choo-choo train trial this time, my friend. Oh, I'd take a stand-by counsel to help - but I am going pro se. Jury voir dire will be extensive this time. Discovery motions, jury questionnaire motion & 75 sample questionnaire, etc., etc., are all typed and ready to go. They probably will decide not to even retry me at first glance of all the motions. And each one is proper - not "frivolous" or like most "jail-house" lawyers do. But then I am a trained paralegal. I should have represented myself the first time - but, in county jail, there was no way to prepare. Here in Anamosa ... I've got afternoons and all day Thursdays and Fridays and have been using the time in the law library and on the typewriters. It has been my only activity. Then, in my cell, I study for trial presentation - the one area of law I wasn't trained in at paralegal school. Lists of questions for "cross," for me "Experts," exhibits, order of proof, etc., will all be in the trial notebook - ready to go. And, I've got the luxury of the first trial's transcripts to prepare with. All they have to present I've got time to prepare to counter. Well, I rattled on for more than you probably wanted to read. Thanks for all the help. Let me know about the FIJA stuff when you send the "EXEMPTION" stuff. I can't tell you how big a help you've been. Hope we get to meet someday - I'm sure we will .... Namaste, SkipWT01-B20-104IA087-000632-B011-261http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/WAR/ERIC/eric1.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085856 text/html 28337HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:58:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:39:51 GMTContent-length: 28121 Date: Thu, 11 May 1995 08:51:00 -0700From: Eric Sterling (ESTERLING@IGC.APC.ORG)To: drctalk-l@netcom.comSubject: Re: Atlanta Mayor's Drug Education                      OPENING A DISCUSSION ABOUT                    EFFECTIVE ANTI-DRUG STRATEGIES                             May 15, 1995                          by Eric E. Sterling           President, The Criminal Justice Policy Foundation  There is a movement, gathered here in Atlanta, Georgia, that argues that the means to fight the drug problem cannot be discussed.  This movement is based on a false fundamentalism:  society's fight against drugs can be carried out either by means of prohibition (namely the status quo) or it must surrender to what it calls legalization.  The arguments of those who advocate legalization are too dangerous even to be heard.  Thus the Atlanta Resolution's first point is to reject all proposals to legalize illicit drugs.  This is simplistic thinking at its worst.  Ninety-five percent of The Atlanta Resolution is plain common sense, but that is not what the Atlanta conference has gathered to discuss.   The conference agenda describes the catastrophe that would result from legalization, but no person who advocates any version of legalization has been invited to present their view or to answer questions.  The conference characterizations of drug legalization are as fair and as realistic as using Star Wars movies to describe the outcome of the NASA manned space flight program.  Implicit in the conference agenda is that our current strategy is simply dandy.  But the American people don t think our current strategy is dandy at all.  A nationwide survey in February 1995 by Peter Hart Research Associates for Drug Strategies, Inc. found that 50% of the American people gave the Federal government a grade of F or D for dealing with the problems of drug use and addiction, and 59% gave those grades for the problem of drug-related crime.  Only 10% would give the Federal government a grade of A or B for dealing with drug use, and only 11% for drug-related crime.  Only 6% of Americans thought that drug abuse was less of a problem today than 5 years ago.  A strategy must set forth goals and means.  The 1995 National Drug Control Strategy (the Strategy) promulgated by President Clinton sets forth clear and worthwhile goals that are a distinct improvement from previous strategies (Table 1-1).  The means proposed, however, are largely the same ones -- prohibition, and its enforcement -- which have failed.  The National Drug Control Strategy is, in a sense, schizophrenic -- it reads as though it were drafted by a committee of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.  It reflects an internal conflict between realistic goals and priorities, and the exaggeration characteristic of politicized discussions of the drug problem.  The Strategy writes about various drug problems oblivious to the causes of the problems and reasonable methods to correct those problems.  Prohibition has failed to reduce crime or addiction.  There is no prohibition-based strategy that will substantially address those problems.  A drug-free society is unrealistic.  Our strategy of punishing drug addicts is akin to expelling from school students with learning disabilities.  To claim to be taking the profits out of $50 billion of a year's drug trafficking through the yearly forfeiture of $1 billion in property is absurd.  Even sales taxes would be more effective in taking the profits out.  Certainly much more extensive taxation is required but it is only possible when prohibition is repealed.  We must change our strategy, but we must do so cautiously.  A regulatory, management approach to the myriad drug problems is called for.  It should be tailored to specific issues and adopted incrementally.  There will be addicts and crime no matter what we do.  An example of regulatory complexity is the regulation of alcohol, one legal drug.  There are probably 10,000 different alcohol laws reflecting multiple goals from revenue collection to reducing consumption.  For this one drug, the regulation of the sale, advertising, taxation, and places of distribution and consumption vary in every jurisdiction depending whether it is beer, wine or whiskey.  Alcohol regulation has evolved since 1933.  In some ways it has improved, and in others it has gotten worse.  Developing a comprehensive regulatory scheme for dozens of classes of drugs can t be accomplished overnight.  There is much necessary market and regulatory research.       National Drug Control Strategy -- A Strategy Founded on                        Deceptions and Failures  A strategy for action should identify the most important problems and recognize the limits of what the strategy can effect -- it must be honest.  The first problem identified in the White House's National Drug Control Strategy -- February 1995:  The crime-drug cycle continues.  Second, More teenagers are smoking pot.  The third problem is described as:  Less of them [America's teenagers] think cocaine use is dangerous.  What does the Strategy say about the crime-drug cycle?  It simply sets forth the number and percentage of drug-related murders for the past eight years which ranged between 751 (3.9%) in 1986 and 1403  (7.4%) in 1989, down to 1287 (5.2%) in 1993, and states that there has been a marked increase youth homicide reported by Dr. Alfred Blumstein.  The Strategy provides no analysis of the problem.  It fails to explain the crime- drug cycle and how to break it.  Mostly, the crime-drug cycle exists because drugs are prohibited.  Prohibition inevitably requires violence.  All businesses are subject to conflict among market- participants.  Such conflict is resolved nonviolently for legal businesses by means of the courts or other nonviolent dispute resolution programs.  Prohibited businesses are forced to resolve conflict illegally -- either through violence or through adjudication by organized crime figures who rely upon violence for enforcement.  Prohibition markets are especially attractive robbery targets because of the inevitably high volumes of cash and over-priced contraband.  Unlike legitimate businesses that can take checks or credit cards, illegal drug markets take only cash.  Legitimate business can hire licensed security guards.  Prohibition businesses only hire for protection those who demonstrate they are prepared to kill.  Legalizers share the nation's goal of ending the crime-drug cycle.  Second, certainly teenage marijuana use is a problem.  But more teenagers start a lifetime of addiction to cigarettes every year than use marijuana one time, and the smoking prevalence is increasing.  More teenagers got drunk in the past two weeks than used marijuana once in the past year, and the alcohol consumption prevalence is up.  The Strategy presents strong evidence that teenage use of liquor is a more serious problem in violence and suicide than teenage marijuana use. Teen drunkenness is also a major factor in teen pregnancy, sexually transmitted disease, school failure, and crime.  Dr. Lloyd Johnston pointed out over a decade ago that teen tobacco use is one of the best predictors of teen hard drug use, but aside from a couple of paragraphs in the 150-page Strategy, alcohol and tobacco are ignored.  Teen smoking and drunkenness are not political hot-buttons.  There is no multi- billion Federal, State and local tax-funded establishment to address those problems.  The sponsors of the Partnership for a Drug Free America earn millions of dollars annually from the promotion of tobacco and alcohol.  And the tobacco and alcohol industries are among the biggest of corporate contributors to political campaign committees of both political parties.  They fight every effort to increase the taxes on alcohol and tobacco and to limit the advertising of these drugs.  Public health and safety is not on their agenda.  Our political leadership is craven in failing to challenge these industries.  Most legalizers share the nation's goal of reducing teenage drug, alcohol and tobacco use.  Typically, the Strategy is given to exaggeration.  Saying fewer teenagers think cocaine is dangerous, the Strategy implies that children are largely misled about the dangers of drugs.  In fact, 89.3% of last year's high school seniors believed that they would be at great risk if they took cocaine regularly.  Or the Strategy says, "Drug using adults from every social strata are clogging court dockets, crowding emergency rooms..."  Clogged court dockets, a top national emergency...or some trial lawyers nightmare?  The serious problems are often nowhere near as widespread as implied by the Strategy.  In 1991, there were 93.5 million emergency room visits according to the 1993 Statistical Abstract, and less than 500,000 of them were drug-related, hardly crowding emergency rooms.  Emergency room episodes involving drugs have tripled since 1985 -- when the war on drugs was kicked into high gear under President Reagan.  This data is actually more evidence that our prohibition-based strategy is failing to protect the public.  Outside the realm of exaggeration, hype and political posturing, in the real world of 1995, the three most pressing problems from drugs in America are the violence in the drug trade, the spread of AIDS, and the immense and growing power of the criminal underworld.  This has been the case for at least a decade:  *  Drug trade violence was identified as the cause of 40% of the homicides in New York City in the late-1980s.  More importantly, the drug trade is responsible for the proliferation of guns among American youth.  Since 1985 the white juvenile homicide rate grew by 80%, and the black juvenile homicide rate more than doubled, growing 120%.  According to Dr. Alfred Blumstein, this is directly linked to the prohibition-created crack cocaine trade.  *  In 1993, AIDS became the biggest killer of Americans between the ages of 25 and 44.  In 1992, there were 24,000 new AIDS cases where the infection involved the injection of drugs.  By 1992, roughly 40% of all new AIDS cases involved injection of drugs.  On average, each AIDS case costs the taxpayers $100,000.  Unless checked, dirty needle - related AIDS will soon cost $24 billion per year.  *  Large, international criminal organizations -- funded with drug profits -- are steadily growing more powerful.  They are subverting democratic governments on every continent around the world.  In the 1990 election, the drug cartels assassinated four candidates for President in Colombia.  Last year, the leading candidate for President of Mexico was assassinated in a crime linked to political protection of the drug traffickers.  These criminal organizations have acquired enormous economic power rivaling that of the largest corporations on the Fortune 500.  Only one drug trafficking cartel, based in Medellin, Colombia, has been put of out business, but dozens of others around the world are growing, and increasingly collaborating.  The Strategy claims success because the number of casual users of cocaine has gone down.  However, the consumption of cocaine in the U.S. has actually remained stable since 1985. The profits from supplying that cocaine (as well as heroin and marijuana) is the greatest transfer of wealth to criminals in the history of the world.  Americans have been given a Strategy that denies the reality of prohibition economics, that ignores the law of supply and demand, and that is blind to the relation between cause and effect.  What is needed is a more effective national drug strategy that is no longer bound by the counterproductive paradigm of prohibition.  This paper outlines a strategy to fight violence and reduce AIDS that could be more effective.  It is based not on polls, but on what is humane and realistic.  It is based on what can be accomplished, not on political slogans such as attaining a drug-free America.    1.  Remember that drug laws and drug policy should help people,                               not hurt them  People who have drug problems should not be demonized, they need help.  People with drug problems are usually in some kind of physical or psychological pain.  Addicts should not be treated like lepers in the Old Testament who were stoned by their neighbors or banished.  People who don t have drug problems, and who aren't hurting anyone, should be left alone.  Everyone who wants to quit using drugs should be able to get appropriate treatment.  Addicted single parents need residential treatment that won t break up families.  Pregnant addicts need treatment, not imprisonment -- but most treatment programs won t accept pregnant addicts.  HIV positive addicts should be the top priority for treatment, yet many programs won t take HIV positive people.  All drug addicted prisoners should get treatment, but no one should be prosecuted or imprisoned simply to get treatment.  Relief of physical pain is one of the oldest medical traditions and a basic human value.  Our policy should be compassionate toward those who are in pain from disease or from its treatment.  Marijuana has well documented medical uses.  Even the Chief Administrative Law Judge at the Drug Enforcement Administration, Francis L. Young, after hearing evidence gathered from around the nation over a four-month period, agreed that marijuana has medical uses.  Those Americans who can benefit from using marijuana medically should get it legally from their doctors.  This is a perfectly respectable position, and it was endorsed by the National Association of Attorneys General on June 25, 1983.  Heroin relieves pain for some people who obtain no relief from other drugs -- those people should get heroin legally.  In the late 1980s, without weakening the severe penalties for the unauthorized use of heroin, the conservative Canadian government joined the United Kingdom in legalizing heroin for medical use only.  The medical uses of marijuana and heroin do not mean these drugs are good.  Nor does it mean these drugs are better than other drugs.  Simply, these drugs are useful for some people.  The people who can benefit from these drugs should not be denied them.  Some persons, justifiably concerned about the abuse of these drugs by drug addicts and by children, oppose even the very carefully controlled medical use of these drugs because medical use of marijuana or medical use of heroin supposedly sends the wrong message.  First, drug abusers aren't listening for this message.  Cocaine, Valium , Dilaudid , and most controlled substances have uses in medicine, but many addicts who abuse those drugs don t care, even if they are actually aware of such uses.  Drug abusers don t rationalize their drug use as medical.  Secondly, there isn't a single positive value we want our children to learn that is not being undermined by a host of wrong messages.  For every virtue -- honesty, thrift, industry, studiousness, cleanliness, chastity, charity, responsibility, civic-mindedness, moderation, non-violence, or sobriety and abstinence from drugs -- movies, television, advertising and popular music are sending messages that directly conflict with positive values.  Every teenager everyday has to deal with, and we hope disregard, seductive messages that conflict with virtue.  Exaggerating the dangers to children of the wrong message when it comes to subtleties of medical practice is unwarranted and irrational.  It is the job of drug abuse prevention programs to teach children the important differences between drugs prescribed by doctors and street drugs.  People who are dying or going blind should not be forced to endure more suffering because drug abuse prevention programs might sometimes be ineffective in helping children draw the necessary distinctions between the legitimate and the inappropriate uses of drugs.  The Controlled Substances Act makes cocaine, THC, methadone and other synthetic opiates perfectly legal -- when their use is prescribed for by a physician in the proper circumstances.  Debating how systems of control can be improved does not undermine the drug abuse prevention effort.  To say that the American public should not openly debate other forms of drug legalization because children might get the wrong message, is like saying the public should not debate gun control, militia groups or the Second Amendment because children might get the wrong message.  It is fundamental to the health of democratic governments that public policies be debated.   2.  Adopt a public health approach toward all drugs and drug users  This requires a comprehensive approach toward all drugs, not simply  now illegal drugs.  What we should be concerned about is the drug abuse problem -- not just the illegal drug problem.  Illegal drug use does not exist in legal or >social isolation.  Treatment professionals recognize cross-addiction and polydrug abuse.  Prevention professionals recognize a gateway relationship between legal drugs and use of illegal drugs.  Tighten the regulations surrounding alcohol and tobacco -- for adults and for children -- and this will help reduce the use and abuse of other drugs as well.  In order to delay the onset of teen alcohol and tobacco use, which delays the onset of other drug use, we must reduce the promotion and availability of tobacco and alcohol to children.  To respond to our drug problem we must expand honest anti-drug education.  Honest comprehensive prevention programs work.  Cigarettes kill more than 400,000 Americans in a year and are as addictive as heroin or cocaine, according to the U.S. Surgeon General.  Yet forty-four million addicted cigarette smokers have quit in the past thirty years.  This is the result of a tremendous, successful public health campaign.  This campaign succeeded without jailing or urine-testing cigarette smokers, without prosecuting tobacco sellers, without prohibition, and in spite of the annual expenditure of billions of dollars to promote tobacco-use.  Most policy makers reject the idea of prohibiting cigarettes because it would be a disaster of corruption and crime, and wholly inconsistent with American values.  Cigarettes, alcohol, or marijuana can be gateways toward use of harder drugs.  Therefore prevention programs need to focus on all drugs.  We must continue to evaluate drug abuse prevention programs.  Mathea Falco in The Making of a Drug-Free America (1992) pointed out that most programs have not been evaluated.  Research Triangle Institute reviewed 18 studies in September 1994 and found D.A.R.E., America's most common drug abuse prevention program, was substantially less effective in reducing drug use among the children who took the program than certain other approaches.  If we are serious about prevention, we must be willing to abandon programs that don t work well, even if they are politically popular.  Quality medical care and drug abuse treatment must be easily available for those who need it.  Heroin addicts, crack addicts, the mentally ill, the homeless, the uninsured, and everyone at risk of catching or spreading contagious disease are the highest treatment priority.  This will help halt the transmission of disease, and reduce the use of illegal drugs as pain killers for untreated disease.  To stop the spread of blood borne disease among injecting drug addicts, clean needles should be exchanged for used ones.  This is the recommendation of the National Commission on HIV and AIDS, and top government scientists who have studied the issue.  Distribution of hypodermic syringes is a crime in eleven states which should be repealed.  Until 1965 (Griswold v. Connecticut), distribution of condoms to any person was a crime in some states.  Thirty-years ago sale of condoms in supermarkets and convenience stores was unthinkable.  Now, for the widely accepted public health purpose of fighting sexually transmitted disease, condoms are widely distributed to the sexually active as one component of a public health program.  When we think about drugs and disease in less judgmental terms, public health distribution of hypodermic syringes to drug injectors will no longer be shocking.  Under appropriate controls and supervision, drugs must be made available to addicts to reduce harms.  Smoking tobacco is the most dangerous means for ingesting nicotine.  If Nicorette gum were cheaper and more freely available many more smokers and snuff dippers would be likely to quit.  Cigarettes, after all, are only crude, disposable nicotine ingestion devices -- of the most dangerous kind.  Nicotine is addicting but is not as dangerous as the tars, particulates and gases in cigarette smoke.  Heroin is addicting but is not as dangerous as HIV, hepatitis, and the adulterants added by criminals who distribute street drugs.  Heroin addicts who can t or won t quit should not be banished to the underworld, nor put at risk of death from criminally contaminated drug supplies.  They ought to be able to get clean, affordable opiates under medical and pharmaceutical supervision if it will prevent them from spreading disease or committing crimes.  Incidentally, Dr. Alfred Blumstein, former president of the American Society of Criminology, whose work on the crime-drug cycle is cited in the Strategy, endorses this approach to certifiable addicts.  (Of course, the use of heroin by addicts must not violate the principle of user accountability discussed below.)  In considering why some people use and abuse drugs, we must address the causes and contributing factors.  One major cause is family violence and sexual abuse.  Another co-factor with drug abuse is teenage pregnancy.  Public health and family-strengthening programs to address those problems are key parts of an anti-drug strategy.  To further prevent addiction and overdoses, patients and doctors need to know more about prescription drugs and their risks and interactions.   3.  Insist Upon Drug and Alcohol User Accountability and                         Responsibility  People who hurt or endanger others must be held responsible for their actions.  Drug or alcohol use is not an excuse for criminal or negligent conduct.  Protection of public safety (e.g. safety on the streets, of travelers, medical patients, etc.):  In critical safety situations we should require performance tests to detect actual impairment by drugs (legal and illegal), alcohol, exhaustion, etc.  Following any kind of accident, it is perfectly appropriate to immediately test the blood of pilots, engineers, drivers, surgeons, etc. for evidence of use of alcohol and drugs -- legal and illegal.  This would be appropriate not only for airplane, rail, maritime or motor vehicle accidents, but also for medical accidents such as administering medications improperly or making mistakes in surgery.  Past use of intoxicants identified by urine or hair tests is irrelevant to public safety and drug user accountability.  We must encourage increased professional responsibility and peer supervision of professions like medicine, airline piloting, etc. to police against on-the-job recklessness such as alcohol or drug use.  Suspected misconduct that threatens public safety must be investigated and prosecuted where criminal recklessness has occurred.  Criminal conduct:  Drug or alcohol use is not an excuse for criminal conduct such as robbery, theft, forgery, etc.  All drug addicted offenders and prisoners should get treatment.  But in the absence of actual harm or substantial risk of endangering others, Americans should not be prosecuted or imprisoned as a means to get treatment.  Convicted predatory criminals such as robbers, rapists, assaulters, and burglars should be drug and alcohol-abstinent while on probation and parole.  This requires frequent and extensive surprise drug and alcohol testing, and a system of consistent sanctions for violations.  Drug and alcohol user licenses:  Drug and alcohol use are privileges, and should be subject to licenses which can be revoked for misuse.  Some states adopted alcohol use licenses after national prohibition was repealed.  Persons who use drugs or alcohol might be required to get special liability insurance coverage.  It should not be presumed that persons over 21 are responsible alcohol or drug users.  4.  Insist upon vendor accountability and responsibility  Just like users, vendors of drugs and alcohol need to be held responsible for their actions.  Violence, corruption, product adulteration, tax evasion, and antitrust violations by drug, alcohol and tobacco sellers are crimes and should be investigated and punished.  Adulteration and mislabeling of drugs and alcohol should also be subject to product liability civil law remedies.  Vendors must comply with reasonable regulations and inspections, pay taxes, and resolve marketplace conflicts through the law, not violence.  These provisions are much more easily investigated and enforced in a regulated environment than under prohibition.  Convicted criminals can t be licensed to legally sell alcohol now -- they shouldn't be allowed to sell other drugs after the repeal of prohibition.  The prohibition against sales to minors of tobacco, alcohol and other drugs must be enforced.  Sales to those who have been denied or deprived of their privilege to use alcohol or drugs should be prohibited.  Like alcohol dram-shop laws, over-the-counter sales of drugs to those who are already intoxicated should not be permitted.  Promotion of alcohol, tobacco and drug use should be severely limited.  Advertising that either targets kids or is placed in media in which kids have legitimate interest in (e.g. professional and amateur athletics, popular music, motion pictures, etc.) should be disallowed.  5.  Maximize the reach of law and respect for the law  Drug and alcohol buyers should be discouraged from patronizing criminals.  For example, growing one's own marijuana is today a felony, and growers risk the forfeiture of their homes or land.  Every marijuana user today (between 9 and 20 million persons) either becomes a felon or has to patronize criminals.  Shouldn't home cultivation for personal use be encouraged, even under prohibition?  We should be reducing the commercial opportunities of criminals, not expanding them.  Even under prohibition, decriminalizing home marijuana cultivation would sharply reduce the tens of billions of dollars in annual profits now funding organized crime.  Almost no police officers or revenue agents are killed or injured enforcing the liquor laws.  Marijuana, the most widely consumed illegal drug, should be taxed and sold to adults with warning messages -- but with prohibition of the promotion we suffer from with tobacco and alcohol.  Very few law enforcement officers will be killed or injured enforcing a managed, regulated drug trade. WT01-B20-105IA087-000632-B011-290http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/WAR/ERIC/eric2.html 206.61.184.43 19970122085907 text/html 26423HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:58:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:39:44 GMTContent-length: 26207   6.  Set appropriate priorities and achievable social goals   Remember that there are no magic solutions to the problems of crime,violence and drug abuse.  The principal immediate goal should be toreduce the harms from drug and alcohol use and commerce to a minimum.We must realistically acknowledge that we are not aiming for theelimination of these problems, but a dramatic reduction in theirseverity.Reduce the spread of HIV and AIDS, hepatitis and other diseases.  Make clean needle/used needle exchange programs available to allpopulations of injecting drug users.  Use such programs to introduceinjecting drug users to health care, drug abuse treatment, and safer sexpractices.  Public health workers with clean needles need to go intoshooting galleries.  Glass crack pipes that break and cut the lips arespreading HIV as well.  They need to be replaced in crack houses.Condoms need to be distributed in crack houses and to prostitutes whoare working the streets and crack houses.  Treatment for STDs that causesores such as syphilis, herpes and gonorrhea needs to be made availableto further reduce the risk of HIV transmission.  Perhaps prostitutesshould be licensed and subject to daily and weekly examinations bypublic health doctors.Refocus Domestic Law Enforcement.  All crimes of violence need to be investigated and prosecuted.Prosecute crime by traffickers and users, with the highest prioritybeing violent crime (including domestic violence) and burglary.  Streetcrime is generally the responsibility of state and local law enforcementagencies.  Special squads need to be established and given plentifulresources to investigate crimes of violence such as street robbery, carjacking, and house invasion with the same intensity of focus that is nowgiven to homicide or rape.  We can afford such anti-violence measureswhen we stop spending so disproportionately to support the prohibitionstrategy.  Crime Prevention:  Community-oriented policing is an effective way tomake streets safer and prevent crime by involving the community in thepolicing effort.  An example is when a local patrol officer gives toneighbors his or her beeper number to call when a crime is beingcommitted, not simply an anonymous 911 operator.  Police shouldencourage community groups to expand neighborhood watch and citizenpatrol efforts.  James Q. Wilson in Broken Windows pointed out how the rules of thestreet can affect the crime rate.  For example, drunks can sit on astoop, but to prevent the climate of disorder that exists when drunkssprawl on the sidewalk, the police enforce an informal rule that drunkscannot lie down.  In a similar manner, state and local law enforcementand prosecutors should concentrate on directing drug traffickingindoors, off the street and out of residential neighborhoods, commercialdistricts during business hours, playgrounds, parks and schools.Drug-free school zones can be accomplished by sustained enforcement inand around the schools and by heightened sentencing for sales that takeplace at schools as a matter of prosecutorial policy. However, mandatoryminimum sentences are ineffective and unjust.  Enforcement operationsthat lure traffickers to school-zones to create longer sentences havebeen properly characterized by judges as sentencing entrapment  and are unjust and dishonest.  Corrections:  Corrections policy needs to be reformed.  Repeat,serious violent offenders need to be incarcerated.  Record keeping mustbe accurate to assure that repeat offenders are identified and notreleased by mistake.  Records and fingerprint files need to be fullyautomated.  Prisons should not be used for simple drug possessors andusers, or for non-violent drug offenders.  Unfortunately, over 20% ofthe Federal prison population is now non-violent, first-time drugoffenders.  These offenders should have their sentences commuted tocommunity supervision.  Market-place violence:  When drug buyers don t pay the sellerspromptly and in full for the drugs they purchase, there is no legalrecourse.  When drug sellers sell drugs of less than represented purity,there is no legal recourse.  When one drug seller leaves his employer togo into business for himself, taking the boss s customers with him,there is no legal recourse.  Today these examples of normal commercialproblems result in violence because of the prohibition strategy.  Drugmarket-related violence will be ended only by legal regulation.  Drug user violence:  Drug use cannot be an excuse for acts of violence(see the user accountability principle above).  Those who commit acts ofviolence forfeit the privilege of using drugs legally.  Those who commitcrimes under the influence of drugs or to buy drugs must be placed indrug treatment in connection with the appropriate punishment.  Some drug user violence is committed in the course of obtaining moneyto buy drugs.  Drug addicts often have a great need for money becausethey have developed a tolerance and because the drugs are expensive as aresult of prohibition.  (Indeed, before the wholesale failure of ourdrug strategy in the 1980s DEA measured its success by the increasedprice of illegal drugs.) Some of this crime will be eliminated whenaddicts have a legal source of drugs.  (Of course many robbers who usedrugs are simply robbers and must be targeted and treated as robbers).  Except for alcohol and PCP very little drug user violence is a resultof the mental effects from the ingestion of the drugs.  A great many drug users are not committing robbery, burglary or othercrimes.  Some want drug treatment, but many drug users do not.  As wehave witnessed in public health campaigns addressing tobacco, alcohol,and physical fitness, well-designed education and social controls arevery effective over time in changing the self-destructive behaviors ofmany persons.  Anti-crime efforts generally:  Leaving behind the prohibition-basedstereotypes of young men as dope dealers and bad guys will improvepolice-community relations in a critical segment of the population.Replacement of open-air drug markets with carefully- regulated clinicsand other access systems will help make streets safer and allowresidents to feel safe walking in their communities, leading to moreretail businesses that provide more jobs.  Capital will not go to drugdealers, but will stay in the community.Strengthen International Law Enforcement.  The U.S. Justice and Treasury Departments should concentrate on thehighest-level and international traffickers, arms dealers and moneylaunderers whose violence and corruption is undermining governments andthe global financial system.  These are complex cases requiring thereassignment of law enforcement agents and prosecutors away from minorlevel offenders.  Right now, the majority of the productivity of U.S.law enforcement is the imprisonment of street-level dealers, bodyguards,mules and couriers (55.2%), and only a very small fraction arehigh-level dealers (11.2%) or international scope traffickers (23.7%).  The current prohibition strategy has boosted revenues of organizedcrime all over the world, increasing their ability to buy weapons, bribegovernment officials, take over news media outlets, and corruptlegitimate business.  The criminals will profit from the opportunitiescreated by the prohibition-based Strategy much faster than the Strategywill bring them to justice or confiscate their revenues.Raise revenue from important economic sectors; reduce the financialpower of criminals and drug, alcohol and tobacco organizations.  Another goal is to obtain revenue from the commerce in drugs andalcohol to cover the social costs as much as possible.  Federal alcoholtaxation now raises some $11 billion per year.  Alcohol and tobaccotaxes should be substantially higher, but at rates that do notsubstantially increase the problem of cigarette bootlegging.  Excisetaxes, occupational taxes, and user fees on marijuana alone could raise$10-20 billion yearly for state and Federal governments.  Such taxesshould initially be set at low levels to draw buyers from the criminalmarkets, which will help eliminate such markets, but enforcement willcertainly be required.  After the black market infrastructure hasdecayed, taxes should be steadily raised to discourage use. Expand prevention programs and efforts targeted at youth.  Experimentation with drugs, alcohol, tobacco and inhalants hasincreased in recent years.  Families, communities and schools need toidentify and concentrate prevention efforts on the kids who are at highrisk for becoming seriously involved in drug use.  What is needed is notsimply an anti-drug program, but a comprehensive effort that: (1)provides counseling around the problems from which drugs are often anescape;  (2) provides stimulating curricula in schools;  (3) providespeer group activities that are constructive and safe;  (4) providesopportunities for athletics, recreation, and socializing across the widevariety of interests that kids have;  (5) effectively intervenes incases of domestic violence;  (6) effectively promotes and supports teenpregnancy prevention; and (7) promotes non-violent dispute resolution. Offer economic alternatives and build effective schools.  The opportunities of drug trafficking offer enormously tempting routesto reach the American dream of prosperity.  Ending prohibition willclose off much of the huge underground economy.  Training in thelegitimate tools of entrepreneurship must be offered to our children,and economic opportunities need to be created to provide realalternatives to crime for the young.  In addition to an education thatprepares our youth for the workplace of the 21st century, youth mustlearn that for them opportunity truly exists.   Ending drug prohibition is the key to sharply reducing the violenceand crime that make business investment in inner cities such aninfrequent reality.  The elimination of prohibition-related crime willdraw manufacturing, research and development, retail, and housing intocommunities with readily available labor that are already equipped withthe infrastructure of rental buildings, public utilities, andtransportation.   7.  Be honest and self-critical  In September 1994, the Research Triangle Institute (a highly-respectedresearch institution hired by the National Institute of Justice to studyhigh school drug abuse prevention programs) reported that D.A.R.E.  --the largest drug abuse prevention program in the country -- wasineffective in reducing drug use among teenagers.  The JusticeDepartment chose not to publish the study, and D.A.R.E.  Americaattempted to intimidate the American Journal of Public Health when itseditors decided to publish these important conclusions.  If policymakerswere really concerned that a large percentage of teenagers were trulybecoming much less fearful of cocaine use, they would to take action toprotect children from the inadequacies of drug prevention programs thatreceive over $400 million in Federal funds annually.   8.  Respect other peoples, other nations and other cultures  It is pathetic for America to blame other countries for our drugproblems.  Government corruption is a global epidemic that is spread bydrug prohibition, and tragically such corruption exists in many placesin the United States.  America s failed domestic drug policies aggravatethe corruption problems in many other societies.   Careful economic research has shown that there is no crop eradicationstrategy and no military operation overseas that can substantiallyreduce the availability of drugs in the U.S.  The notion that it is moreefficient or more economical to stop drugs at the source has beenconclusively shown to be false.  To deploy military or paramilitaryforces against peasants who grow coca or opium not only wastes money, itpolitically strengthens anti- Western, anti-government politicalinsurgencies.  To incarcerate mules who are at the bottom of thedistribution organizations is a waste of very expensive prison space.   Indians in Peru and Bolivia chew coca leaf, and professionals drinkcoca tea -- these are harmless practices.  Those practices are thebusiness of those societies, not ours.  It is silly that coca users inPeru and Bolivia are international outlaws in violation of the SingleConvention on Narcotics.  Under regulation and genuine control, cocagrowing will be less profitable than it is now.   U.S. anti-narcotics policy now includes a variety of economicdevelopment schemes for the Andes.  Andean economic development must besustainable; it will never succeed dependent on gimmicks, subsidies, orprice supports.  As long as prohibition remains in place, legitimateeconomic development can never be an effective anti- narcotics strategybecause the legitimate economy can never be more profitable thanprohibition-induced drug trafficking or cultivation.   In our own country, peyote (which contains the entheogenic alkaloidmescaline) is the sacrament of the Native American Church.  The use ofpeyote by members of the church has been protected under Federal law(but not state law) since 1965.  There is no evidence of a peyote abuseproblem, but Indians and non-Indians are prosecuted for their possessionof peyote.  With the passage of the American Indian Religious FreedomAct Amendments of 1994, Native Americans will no longer be subject tocriminal prosecution and religious persecution by various states forpossession or use of peyote for bona fide traditional ceremonialpurposes in connection with the practice of a traditional Indianreligion.  Spiritual peyote use is no more drug use than sacramentalwine consumed at Communion is drug use, and thus religious peyote usemust be protected.  The Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirmsthat all people are free to be religious seekers.  Peyote use bynon-Indians is not a social or public health problem.  All Americansshould be free to use peyote in a religious manner, without regard totheir race or parentage.   9.  Recognize that drugs are a major commodity in international trade  Drugs have been a part of international trade since coffee, tea andspices were introduced to Europe centuries ago.  This trade has neverbeen stopped by banning it, and it can t be.  Take control of thisenormous trade away from criminals and corrupt customs officials byregulating it and taxing it.   What the world community needs from the U.S. is a substantiallyintensified fight against the enormous power of prohibition-based drugtrafficking cartels.  The legitimate elements in Colombia and Mexico,for example, are continually being subverted by prohibition-financedcorruption.  The U.S. should deploy its largely incorrupt Justice andTreasury Departments against the highest level drug traffickers, andafter prohibition is ended, continue the fight against other criminalsubversion of legitimate governments and the global economy.   Simultaneously, the U.S. should renounce increasing cigarette exportsas a principal objective of U.S. trade policy.  It is not criminal,simply despicable, to push an addictive and dangerous drug on others. Americans, pushing tobacco in Asia, are as contemptible as the Britishwhen they forced China to accept Indian opium in the 19th century.   10.  Be creative and flexible to meet our goals  Through regulation, encourage means of drug administration that areless harmful and easier to control -- physically, socially, culturally,and legally.  Be restrictive of more harmful means, or means that areharder to control.  For example, try to limit smoking of drugs --nicotine, cocaine, heroin, marijuana -- which gives intense rushes butwhich is much more harmful and harder to control than other forms ofingestion.  Smoking can be discouraged.  Oral ingestion is less intense,less habit-forming, and less harmful, and perhaps can be encouraged asan alternative when appropriate.   11.  Turn down the volume on drug messages    Drugs should neither be promoted, nor hysterically attacked.  Preventdrug advertising from being aimed at youth, for example, via SpudsMacKenzie (the dog promoting Budweiser) or Camel cigarette s JoeCamel/Smooth Character, or in youth- oriented media.   Keep anti-drug messages in front of children but keep them reasonableand truthful.  The This is your brain, This is your brain on drugs, Anyquestions?  TV spot featuring a skillet and frying eggs is an example ofa ludicrous anti-drug message.  Its dishonesty and exaggeration invitedcontempt.  Some young people asked friends to get stoned by saying, Want to fry an egg?  To bombard children with the message that the mostimportant thing in world is that you shouldn t do drugs inevitably is anenticement.   TV PSAs that show realistic scenarios affirming kids who decline drugsoffered by friends are important.  Anti-drug messages should beinterspersed with appropriate messages regarding safer-sex and pregnancyprevention practices, staying in school, non- violence, etc.  TV PSAsshould be part of community-wide, integrated anti-drug programs such asProject STAR, developed with NIDA assistance.                                Conclusion  Whatever we do about drugs, sadly there will continue to be drug useand drug abuse.  By thinking about drug use as a moral crusade, andmaintaining prohibition and zero tolerance, we exempt the drug trade from any regulation andcontrol.  Prohibition maximizes the violence and disease associated withdrugs.  Prohibition keeps drugs inordinately profitable and continuouslytempts people -- all over the world -- to sell them for easy money. This proposed anti-prohibition strategy is not for legalizing drugs for legalization s sake -- ending prohibition is simply the recognitionthat legal markets are more easily controlled, regulated, andeffectively policed, more humane toward those who are ensnared in themiseries of drugs, and ultimately cost-effective.   Those who propose that the fight against drug abuse can only takeplace if there is an enforced consensus and no debate or discussion ofthe issues are ignorant of history.  The existence of facts is notdetermined by a vote.  Those who believe that only prohibition canreduce drug use ignore the 44 million Americans who have quit smokingcigarettes.   Those who favor prohibition who refuse to talk with those whocriticize prohibition demonstrate to the world that they lack confidencein their position.  If those who promote the current strategy wereconfident that it was effective, they would welcome debate, not fear thecriticism implicit in the advocacy of legalization.   James Burke, the Chairman of the Partnership for a Drug Free America,is concerned that allowing discussion of legalization demotivates theanti-drug warriors.  That is probably true, but that is not the fault ofthe legalizers, it is the fault of the drug war strategy, for theStrategy is failing and the few successes are insignificant.  If thosein the trenches fighting the drug war believed they were successful,they would not be demotivated by anything said by the relative handful of legalizers.  Ifthey are demoralized probably it is because, in their hearts, they knowthey are not succeeding.  If the chairmen of Ford, Chrysler or GeneralMotors said that Toyota and BMW should not be allowed to advertise, orSaabs and Hondas should not be reviewed in Car and Driver because itdemotivated their workers, it would appear they were afraid of themarketplace and we would consider them unfit to lead their corporations.   The American people give the Federal government failing grades in thefight against drugs and they know that our current strategy is notworking.  But they are tired of being afraid of being robbed or burgledor shot at, and seeing kids on drugs, and they want changes and positiveresults.   When Americans are asked if they favor legalization, they dissentstrongly.  What models of legalization have they had the opportunity toconsider? They don t want crack sold in the Safeway or heroin sold likepopcorn.  For good reason they don t want drugs (and alcohol andtobacco) sold to their kids.   But is the only drug policy choice one between the current, failedapproach of prohibition or the pure, unregulated free-market thatactually exists almost nowhere in the American economy?  Is the world ofdrug policy somehow uniquely only black or white? The reality is thatthere is a middle ground of regulation and control, consistent withtraditional American values and capitalism, that offers us hope ofhelping more people, reducing crime and violence, preventing disease,and protecting individual privacy.   The Atlanta Resolution says that legalization is a simplisticsolution, and thus should be rejected.  In reality, legalization is muchless simplistic than prohibition, zero tolerance or just say no.  Toreject all proposals, even the sophisticated ones, without reading themand critiquing them, is evidence of fear, not confidence in thecorrectness of the Strategy of prohibition.   To remotivate America to fight drugs requires an effective,sophisticated, non- prohibition strategy that is free of the hypocrisy,exaggeration, viciousness, divisiveness and partisanship that hascharacterized the war on drugs.   What America could use is a good dose of fair and honest discussionabout drug policy.  If we won t talk calmly with each other about one ofour nation s most serious problems, then truly, our democracy is likelyto fail and fade away.                                                                                                  ERIC E. STERLING                                        Eric E. Sterling is the President of The Criminal Justice Policy  Foundation.  His analysis of criminal justice issues is regularly  sought by top Federal officials and the national news media.  He  frequently lectures at colleges and universities, and to professional  societies.        Mr. Sterling served as Counsel to the U.S. House of Representatives  Committee on the Judiciary from 1979 until 1989.  On the staff of the  Subcommittee on Crime, (Rep. William J. Hughes (D-NJ), Chairman), he  was responsible for many issues including drug enforcement, gun   control, money laundering, organized crime, pornography, terrorism,  corrections, and military assistance to law enforcement. He was a  principal aide in developing the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of  1984, the Anti-Drug Abuse Acts of 1986 and 1988.        Since 1981 he has worked closely with the nation s police to blunt  attacks on the 1968 Gun Control Act, and to more effectively control  armor piercing ammunition, plastic firearms, machine guns, assault   weapons, and explosives.        Mr. Sterling was an adjunct lecturer at The American University,  School of Justice.  He is admitted to the Supreme Court of the United   States and the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.  He is a member of the  American Bar Association, the American Society of Criminology, and the  American Public Health Association.  Mr. Sterling has been honored by  the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, and the U.S. Postal  Inspection Service for his assistance to their law enforcement   missions.                   THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE POLICY FOUNDATION                                       A criminal justice system that is honest, fair and effective is  one of America s most important institutions.  The character of our  national life depends upon our safety and our liberty which depend   upon the integrity and effectiveness of our justice system.  It was  an awareness of the grave threats to the American criminal justice  system that inspired Boston-businessman and philanthropist Robert C.  Linnell to establish The Criminal Justice Policy Foundation in 1988.  The foundation is a non-profit educational tax-exempt charity under  section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.        The Criminal Justice Policy Foundation promotes innovative  solutions to problems facing the criminal justice system. The   foundation assists policy makers, criminal justice professionals,  and the public to prevent crime and improve the quality of justice  by disseminating information through education programs,  publications, and the news media.  The foundation also provides  advice regarding legal organization, outreach, research, media  relations, legislation, and coalition building.  The foundation  provides speakers to all types of organizations.        The foundation is collaborating with other foundations, the  National Council on Crime and Delinquency, and the Office of Juvenile  Justice and Delinquency Prevention, U.S. Department on Justice, in  sponsoring a National Forum on Youth Violence, May 31 - June 2, 1995.        The foundation supports the educational work of the National Drug  Strategy Network (NDSN).  The Network distributes a comprehensive  monthly newsletter, NewsBriefs and meets periodically in Washington,  D.C.                                                    For more information, contact:             The Criminal Justice Policy Foundation                   1899 L Street, NW, Suite 500                    Washington, DC 20036-3804                        phone: 202-835-9075.   esterling@igc.apc.orgYOUR COMMENTS ARE WELCOME.                                 WT01-B20-106IA087-000627-B025-60http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/grassley2.html 206.61.184.43 19970122054538 text/html 20366HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:45:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:53:41 GMTContent-length: 20150 Congressional Record - Senator Grassley - January 23, 1996 Congressional Record PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE 104th CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION Vol. 142 WASHINGTON, TUESDAY, JANUARY 23, 1996 No. 8 Senate (Legislative day of Monday, January 22, 1996) DRUG LEGALIZATION * Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, yesterday the New York Times ran a piece noting that the lead story in the next issue of the National Review is going to call for the legalization of drugs. The rationale for this argument is that the war on drugs has failed and that the only solution is to declare defeat and turn the asylum over to the inmates. I am not sure just what information the folks at the National Review are using, but the facts are flawed and the argument is dumb and irresponsible. Mr. Buckley, the author of the piece, is safe in making such arguments because he personally does not plan to use drugs. No one of his immediate acquintance is likely to start using dangerous drugs. So the consequences of his advocacy will not be felt personally. Instead, the burden of his ideas will be borne by countless families whose kids -- the most at-risk population -- will fall victim to the consequences of drug abuse. The costs will also be borne by the public purse, as we have to treat the walking wounded. Although there is no public support for the idea of legalization, and none in the Congress, some of our culture elite -- left and right -- keep raising the idea as if it had some intellectual merit. Nothing could be farther from the truth. I am therefore submitting for the RECORD a longer statement on the common mistakes made in the legalization argument that I hope will help in closing this latest chapter in foolishness. The statement follows: STATEMENT BY CHARLES E. GRASSLEY: DRUG LEGALIZATIONI have been increasingly concerned about the tendency in some quarters topromote the legalization of drugs in this country. If there is any idea thatis essentially without merit and without public support, it is that thiscountry should entertain seriously the notion that dangerous drugs should belegalized and made widely available. Drug legalization is truly aninvitation to the Mad Hatter's Tea Party. Unfortunately, many in the media and in our cultural elite, who have adisproportionate access to public communication and opinion outlets, haveonce again started to advocate some form of legalization. While thisadvocacy is not likely to lead to a major change in public policy, it canand does have an adverse influence on thinking about the dangers of drug. Itsends a mixed message about the dangers of use that is particularly harmfulwhen it touches our young people. As Bill Bennett and Joe Califano noted recently, drugs are illegal becausethey are dangerous, they are not dangerous because they are illegal.Legalization advocates, however, deploy a variety of arguments on behalf oftheir position that ignore this essential fact. They all too often resort toscare tactics, misrepresent reality, or skip over inconvenient facts. Ithink that it is important to set the record straight. There are a number of misconceptions about our efforts to deal with the drugproblem. It is important to understand these and the common arguments usedto promote them in order to arrive at a reasoned and reasonableunderstanding of what the drug problem is about. One of the first points tonote is that our last drug epidemic--during the 1960s, 1970s, and early1980s--was the result of arguments made by some that drugs were really not aproblem and that everyone would feel better, live better, and prosper fromthe self-administration of dangerous drugs. The claim, made with considerable fervor, was that drugs were liberating andthat only a repressive society would prevent people from achieving theirtrue potential. By the late 1980s, we finally came to realize just what acruel hoax, a big lie, these claims were. We are still trying to cope withan addict population from that ear, a period that has left us with a legacyof lives blasted by drug use, a cost that is borne by families and thepublic purse. We cannot afford to ignore this lesson, to repeat a disasterbased on the enthusiasms of a few. Mistake #1: Prohibition doesn't, can't work. Efforts to keep people from using drugs, like alcohol prohibition, only encourages the idea of forbidden fruit, increases crime, and will always fail. The argument that prohibition doesn't work relies on a collective amnesiaabout this country's experience with alcohol prohibition between 1920 and1934. In the first place, Prohibition did not make the use of alcoholillegal, only its manufacture and sale over a certain strength. It was, ineffect, a control regime legalizing personal use. This effort came at theend of a very long historyin this country of trying to reduce the consumption of alcohol fromdangerous heights. The modern parallel is with the efforts to reduce tobaccouse. Second, Prohibition did not lead to a major increase in violent crime, as isoften claimed. The major increase, particularly in violent crime in thiscountry, came between 1900 and 1910, well before the prohibition movement.Violent crime remained fairly stable or declined during Prohibition. Whileit is true that crime rates decreased after Prohibition this was not theresult of ending Prohibition. Nor did Prohibition create organized crime.Major organized crime groups existed well before alcohol prohibition andthey prospered after it ended. Third, major health problems, such as cirrhosis of the liver andalcohol-related psychoses, declined sharply during Prohibition. Alcoholconsumption, even though it was not illegal, also declined sharply. Itincreased in the years following the repeal of Prohibition, as did theassociated health problems. Fourth, it is important to remember also that alcohol, unlike dangerousdrugs, had wide social acceptance and a long history of use. Alcohol canalso be used by most people without creating impairment, either temporary orlong term. Marijuana, cocaine, and heroin have no such long history ofpopular public use or acceptance, and their use is solely for the purpose ofintoxication. In fact, the public has opposed these substances once theylearned how dangerous and destructive they were. This is also truehistorically in this country and internationally. No society today has alegalization regime for dangerous drugs. In addition, it is clear that control efforts, when reinforced by seriouslaw enforcement, prevention, and education programs do deter use, especiallyamong young people. Our own recent experience illustrates how effective wecan be. After decades of increasing use in this country, we reversed thetrend of drug use when, beginning in the mid-1980s, we decided to just sayno and to get serious about doing something. Overall drug use, apart fromaddicts, declined by more than 50 percent; cocaine use by 70 percent.Unfortunately, more recently, as we have moved away from these seriousprograms we have seen a return to use in the most at-riskpopulation--teenagers. [Page: S328] Mistake #2: Legalization will mean less crime because the profit motive is removed and we will lock fewer people up when we make our drug laws morehumane First, most prisoners in state and Federal prisons are not there for drugoffenses as their first or major offense. Most offenders are in jail forviolent or repeat offenses. Of these, despite the wildy exaggerated numbersoften cited, only 10 percent of Federal prisoners and 17 percent of stateinmates committed their crimes to obtain drugs. Indeed, research shows thatmost career criminals came to drug use after starting their criminalactivities, not before. Legalization will not greatly reduce the crime rate,especially for violent crimes. Indeed, in so far as the pharmacologicaleffects of drugs, particularly cocaine and other stimulants, exacerbateviolent tendencies, legalization will produce far greater violent crimerates as the number of 'legal' addicts soars. Second, the vast majority of prisoners serving time from drug offenses arenot there for use but fortrafficking--individuals whose actions destroy lives and menaceneighborhoods. Third, legalization will not end black markets for drugs, unless we areprepared to legalize drug use for all ages down to the age of 6 or 7. Onlythe most radical legalization advocates want to see kids using drugs. But toleave any population out of a legalization regime means leaving a blackmarket. Crime will not simply disappear nor will the organizations that arecurrently trafficking in illegal drugs. Mistake #3: Legalization will mean a healthier climate in which controlleddrug use will provide quality control and monitored use This argument misses or misrepresents the issue. The issue is not whether wemake drugs, which are inherently dangerous to use, more pure, but whether wepermit their use at all. Britain led the way in trying to treat dangerousdrug use as a therapeutic problem, regulating addicts through doctors' care.This was not an open drug policy for anyone to use drugs but a policy justfor addicts. The result was a disaster. It did not prevent the spread ofdrug abuse. It only made doctors complicit in the act of promoting anaddiction for which they had no cure. In effect, it reversed the normaldoctor-patient relationship, putting doctors in the position of making theirpatients worse off. As a result, in Britain, addiction soared, addicts gotworse not better, and the black market flourished. Similar experiences havevisited similar efforts in other countries. Now, it seems that Switzerlandis experimenting with a variation of this approach. The results are likelyto be a similar disaster, making the government and the medical communitycomplicit in spreading addiction. It is also important to keep in mind, that dangerous drugs are notsynonymous with other controlled pharmaceuticals. The latter are controlledbut they also have a therapeutic purpose. Dangerous drugs have no medicalpurpose. They are addictive and destructive. To argue that these drugsshould be self-administered with the only control being over their qualityis to argue for a massive increase in the addict population, adding an evengreater burden to an over-taxed health-care system. In effect, thelegalization argument requires society to endorse a self-destructivebehavior and then requires society to provide perpetual care to the victimsat public expense. Mistake #4: Deterrence does not work When you talk to former addicts or those who have given up use, one of themost important reasons they give for their decision to quit or seektreatment was the threat of criminal prosecution, the difficulty ofacquiring drugs, and the cost. When drugs are perceived as expensive,dangerous and wrongful to use, difficult to get, and involve a risk ofcriminal prosecution, potential users forego use, and many current usersquit. This remains true even though most enforcement efforts focus not onusers but on violent offenders and drug traffickers. No program to prohibit drug use can be universally effective. Although wehave long-standing laws against child abuse or murder or theft, these havenot prevented any of these acts completely. No one doubts their importance,however, or the role they play in discouraging yet more of these actionsthan if they were not prohibited. Mistake #5: Legalizing drugs will remove the `Forbidden Fruit' appeal ofdrugs, which leads most new users, especially the young, into use If this is a valid argument, then anything that society prohibits for thegeneral good would succumb to the same argument. Forbidding child abuseencourages child abuse. Prohibiting murder encourages it. This is the logicof the argument. In fact, the reverse in the case. We educate people'sunderstanding of what is rightful or wrongful to do by the laws that wedeclare and enforce. Even during Prohibition, when use was legal, the simplemessage sent by society that use was bad caused significant drops in use.Whenever we have enforced our drug laws and backed these up with educationand prevention programs endorsed by our civic and cultural leaders, we haveseen use decline and young people forego use. When we ignore this simplereality we see kids returning to drug use. Unless one contemplates making cocaine and heroin routinely available to12-18 year olds, something even few legalizers argue, then legalization willnot remove the so-called `Forbidden Fruit' appeal. It will only add the ideathat society condones use while continuing to prohibit access to the mostat-risk population. Just the absence of a clear message on drug use in thelast few years has seen teens returning to use in disturbing numbers. Alegalization message would have devastating results. Mistake #6: Drug use is a purely personal choice. It is a victimless crime. The state has no right to keep people from using drugs The idea that an individual who uses drugs does so in some vacuum thataffects no one else is another one of those fictions that obscures thefacts. In the first place, drug users don't stay home. They go to work andplay with the rest of us. They use the highways, they drive the school busesand trains, they fly the planes. They also encourage others to use, thusspreading the problem. People under the influence of dangerous drugs are more prone to workplaceaccidents, are more likely to have highway accidents, are more prone to useviolence in public and family disputes, and are at greater risk for healthcare than are non-users. Addicts are far more likely to lose control overtheir own lives, and are more in need of public intervention. A considerablepercentage, perhaps as many as 60 percent, of the homeless are drug andalcohol addicts. Some 2 percent of live births in this country--over 100,000 babies--are bornaddicted with life-long disabilities because their mothers used.Conservative estimates of the yearly social costs of drug addiction atcurrent levels run around $70 billion. These costs are borne by families andthe public purse. The number of users and consequently the number of addictswould soar under a legalization regime, compounding all the problems wecurrently have. There is no such thing as a purely private use of drugswithout consequences. There is no known cure for addiction. A choice forlegalization would be a self-inflicted disaster. Mistake #7: Since alcohol and tobacco are legal, and cause far more harmthan dangerous drugs, we should make heroin, cocaine, etc., legal to beconsistent. Doing so would not increase the number of users significantly Here is the legalization argument at its most outrageous. What people areasked to accept is the idea that because we have substances generallyavailable that already cause major harm--tobacco and alcohol--we should adddangerous drugs to the occasions for woe for the sake of consistency. Whatthe argument says is that since we have one major problem we should make itworse by adding another. Who are we kidding? In order to rescue this logic from being completely ludicrous, people areasked to believe a further assertion: that under a legal regime there won'tbe an increase in users. Really? Let's look at what we are being asked tobelieve. We are going to make drugs cheaper and freely available. We aregoing to see them aggressively marketed by the producers. We are going tohave society condone the use of addictive substances. But, we are not goingto see a significant increase in use. Such is our understanding of humannature? We saw what happened with drug use in this country in the 1960s and 1970swhen we allowed the de facto legalization of drugs, condoning personal useand not enforcing our laws. That partial legal environment caused a dramaticincrease in use. Can anyone doubt the effects if we condoned use outright?We cannot afford this kind of logic. These are by no means the only myths. Others hold that drug laws areracist--which is another big lie, but even if true it is hardly an argumentfor making drugs legal; that the health consequences of personal use areexaggerated; or that drug laws lead to locking up lot of innocent people. None of these arguments can sustain serious attention or thought. Nor isthere any major public support for drug legalization. The argument ispressed by only a few, some liberal, some conservative. To make the argumentrequires, however, suspension of judgment, a willingness to acceptassertions over facts, and a professional absence of mind that ignoresexperience. Unfortunately, while the argument for legalization has little publicsupport, it is a major agenda item of many of our cultural elites. They havea disproportionate influence on our public discourse, on our radios andtelevision, in the movies, in music and the arts. This means they have adisproportionate influence on the most at-risk population for drugusers--our young people. By helping to obscure the message of the dangers ofdrug use, by encouraging it as part of a `liberated' life style, theycontribute directly to use. When our political leaders remain silent theyaid and abet this. The result in the 1960s made the point. Our recentexperience confirms it: When you replace `Just Say No' with `Just SayNothing' or `I didn't inhale,' you are opening the door to trouble. [Page: S329]WT01-B20-107IA087-000627-B026-168http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/senate96.html 206.61.184.43 19970122054836 text/html 2563HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:48:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:54:09 GMTContent-length: 2348 1996 Iowa Senate Survey 1994 to 1996 Iowa Senate    FIRST    LAST       ADDRESS                  CITY           ZIP   P  YES  NOT  NO   NAME     NAME                                                             SURE 3 Wilmer   Rensink    3828 Hickory Avenue      Sioux Center   51250 R  1995 4 John     Kibbie     4285 440th Avenue        Emmetsburg     50536 D  1996 5 Mary Lou Freeman    311 W. Lakeshore Drive   Storm Lake     50588 R  1995 8 Berl     Priebe     2106 100th Avenue        Algona         50511 D  1996 9 Stewart  Iverson    3020 Dows-Williams Road  Dows           50071 R       1994 199510 Merlin   Bartz      2081 410th Street        Grafton        50440 R  199611 John     Jensen     1331 120th Street        Plainfield     50666 R       199413 Jim      Lind       230 E. Ridgeway Ave.     Waterloo       50702 R  199515 Allen    Borlaug    P.O. Box 333             Protivin       52163 R       199516 Lyle     Zieman     401 Wilson, P.O. Box 368 Postville      52162 R  199618 Mike     Connelly   3458 Daniels Street      Dubuque        52002 D  199625 Robert   Dvorsky    515 6th Avenue           Coralville     52241 D       199533 William  Palmer     1002 Lakeview Drive      Ankeny         50021 D  199435 Dick     Dearden    3113 Kinsey              Des Moines     50317 D  199536 Elaine   Szymoniak  2116 44th St.            Des Moines     50310 D  199638 O. Gene  Maddox     9759 Elmcrest Drive      Clive          50325 R       199642 Michael  Gronstal   220 Bennett              Council Bluffs 51503 D  199645 Bill     Fink       379 S-23 Highway         Carlisle       50047 D  1995 "YYY" in a column indicates that the respondent is leaning toward a yes vote. "VVV" in a column indicates that the respondent gave only a verbal response. "1994" in a column indicates that the respondent gave a different response last year.WT01-B20-108IA087-000627-B026-192http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/house96.html 206.61.184.43 19970122054910 text/html 4990HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:48:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:53:26 GMTContent-length: 4775 1996 Iowa House Survey 1994 to 1996 Iowa House of Representatives    FIRST    LAST       ADDRESS                  CITY           ZIP   P  YES  NOT  NO   NAME     NAME                                                             SURE 1 Ronald   Nutt       3711 Cheyenne Blvd.      Sioux City     51104 R       1995 4 Ralph    Klemme     RR 4, Box 107            Le Mars        51031 R            1996 5 Kenneth  Veenstra   216 Arizona Ave., SW     Orange City    51041 R       1995 6 Richard  Vande Hoef 1833 100th Avenue        Harris         51345 R       1995 9 Dan      Huseman    6144 Y Avenue            Aurelia        51005 R       199510 Russell  Eddie      1101 Pierce Drive        Storm Lake     50588 R  199513 Michael  Cormack    447 2nd St., N.W.        Fort Dodge     50501 R       199614 Norman   Mundie     RR 4, Box 78             Fort Dodge     50501 D       199517 Russell  Teig       3581 Little Wall Lake Rd Jewell         50130 R            199518 Steve    Sukup      2258 240th Street        Dougherty      50433 R            199619 Gary     Blodgett   1050 Meadow Lake Dr.     Mason City     50401 R       199521 Bill     Dix        325 S. Cherry St.        Shell Rock     50670 R       199622 Bob      Brunkhorst 419 3rd Avenue, SW       Waverly        50677 R            199624 Donald   Hanson     3511 Monticello Ave.     Waterloo       50701 R            199525 Don      Shoultz    295 Kenilworth Road      Waterloo       50701 D       199527 Joseph   Kremer     1217 250th Street        Jesup          50648 R       199528 Charles  Hurley     12227 G Ave.             Fayette        52142 R       199632 Roger    Halvorson  P.O. Box 93              Marquette      52158 R  199634 Robert   Osterhaus  216 Austin Ave.          Maquoketa      52060 D            199636 Pat      Murphy     1770 Hale Street         Dubuque        52001 D  199537 Clyde    Bradley    835 Blackhawk Lane       Comanche       52730 R  1995 199439 Dan      Boddicker  1052 195th Street        Tipton         52772 R  1995 199649 Dick     Myers      9 Woodland Heights, NE   Iowa City      52240 D  199550 Lynn     Schulte    208 3rd Avenue South     Mt. Vernon     52314 R       199552 Ron      Corbett    1517 D Avenue, NE        Cedar Rapids   52402 R            199555 Chuck    Larson     3355 Riverpointe Cir. NE Cedar Rapids   52411 R            199556 Jerry    Welter     RR 1, Box 224            Monticello     52310 R  199659 Phil     Tyrrell    222 N. Mill              North English  52316 R       199464 Beverly  Nelson     3107 Fieldcrest Court    Marshalltown   50158 R  199569 John     Connors    1316 East 22nd Street    Des Moines     50317 D       199570 Ed       Fallon     1321 8th Street          Des Moines     50314 D  199675 Janet    Metcalf    12954 N.W. 29th Drive    Des Moines     50325 R  199576 Steven   Churchill  6140 Nottingham          Johnston       50131 R            199677 David    Lord       1250 K Circle            Perry          50220 R            199578 Dwight   Dinkla     221 South 12th Street    Guthrie Center 50115 R       199580 Jim      Drees      RR 2, Box 111            Manning        51455 D       199581 Jack     Drake      52462 Juniper Road       Lewis          51544 R       YYY83 Linda    Nelson     231 Midland Drive        Council Bluffs 51503 D  199684 Brent    Siegrist   714 Grace Street         Council Bluffs 51503 R       199585 Hubert   Houser     34697 Beechnut Road      Carson         51525 R       199589 Brian    Coon       540 Ninth                Carlisle       50047 R            199490 David    Schrader   RR 2                     Monroe         50170 D  1996 199591 Richard  Arnold     Route 2, Box 149         Russell        50238 R       199594 Jerry    Main       1107 West Gear           Fairfield      52556 R       199595 Harold   Van Maanen 410 Liberty Street       Pella          50219 R            199598 Philip   Wise       503 Grand Avenue         Keokuk         52632 D            1995 "YYY" in a column indicates that the respondent is leaning toward a yes vote. "VVV" in a column indicates that the respondent gave only a verbal response. "1994" in a column indicates that the respondent gave a different response last year.WT01-B20-109IA087-000627-B022-153http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/bkgrnd97.html 206.61.184.43 19970122053833 text/html 4938HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:38:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:52:55 GMTContent-length: 4723 Medical Necessity - Historical Background April 1996 Dear candidate: Historical Background Medical Necessity Over the past 20 years, thirty-seven states have passed legislationrecognizing marijuana's therapeutic value. Iowa enacted a law allowingdoctors to prescribe marijuana in 1979. See Iowa Code  124.204(4)(m),124.204(7) and 124.206(7)(a). To understand the history of this legislationand the need to amend current state law, a brief review of some nationalcourt decisions is enlightening. In 1976, a glaucoma patient by the name of Bob Randall was brought to trialfor growing marijuana plants on the balcony of his apartment in Washington,D.C. The court dismissed the charges, ruling that Randall's use ofmarijuana was a "medical necessity." Federal agencies began providing himwith marijuana, and Randall became the first American to receive marijuanafor the treatment of a medical disorder. In 1981, a multiple sclerosis patient by the name of Sam Diana wasconvicted for possessing marijuana in the state of Washington. TheWashington Court of Appeals overturned the verdict and returned the case tothe lower court for retrial. The Appeals Court ruled that "medicalnecessity" was a valid defense. On retrial, the Washington court concludedthat Diana was "not guilty by reason of medical necessity." In 1989, a glaucoma patient by the name of Elvy Musikka was brought totrial for cultivation of marijuana plants. The court found Musikka notguilty, ruling that her use of marijuana was a "medical necessity." In 1991, a hemophilic patient by the name of Kenneth Jenks was brought totrial for growing marijuana plants. Kenneth received AIDS at a hospitalthrough a blood transfusion and transmitted the disease to his wife beforehe knew that he had the disease. Both Kenneth and Barbara were found guiltyat trial, but the Florida Court of Appeals reversed their convictions,ruling that their use of marijuana was a "medical necessity." The FloridaSupreme Court affirmed the reversal of their criminal convictions. The federal government is the only legal supplier of medical marijuana inthe United States, and currently supplies marijuana to only 8 medicalpatients, two of whom, George McMahon and Barbara Douglass, are Iowans. In1991, the federal government decided to stop accepting any new applications,effectively nullifying all state laws allowing medical use of marijuana.Without a federal license, no one can use medical marijuana by prescriptionin the United States. In 1994, Judge Irwin, an Iowa district court judge for PottawattamieCounty, ruled that "medical necessity" is a recognized defense toprosecution for possession of marijuana in the state of Iowa. A copy ofthat order is enclosed with this letter. Iowa law says that possession of marijuana is legal when used for medicinalpurposes pursuant to rules of the board of pharmacy examiners. We havecontacted the board of pharmacy examiners and discovered that the only rulesare those contained in the regulations of the Food and Drug Administrationand the Drug Enforcement Administration. In 1991, an Iowan with multiple sclerosis by the name of Ladd Huffman wasapproval by both the Food and Drug Administration and the Drug EnforcementAdministration to receive medical marijuana. However, his prescription wasnever filled, because the federal government decided to stop accepting newapplications. Ladd's application was one of 28 which was approved but wasnever honored. It is our position that seriously ill people who use marijuana for medicineshould not be arrested and required to prove their medical necessity in acriminal trial. Seriously ill patients using marijuana as medicine shouldbe able to have a hearing with the board of pharmacy examiners, or otherqualified board. If they have a legitimate medical necessity, they shouldbe certified and exempted from criminal prosecution by the state of Iowa.The Iowa Legislature should amend current state law by immunizing certifiedmedical marijuana users from prosecution by the state. Legislative Questionnaire Response from CandidatesWT01-B20-110IA087-000627-B022-178http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/respon97.html 206.61.184.43 19970122053847 text/html 10069HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:38:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:54:20 GMTContent-length: 9854 Response from Candidates Response from candidates running in the 1996 primary and general elections for the Iowa Legislature April 1996 I would support this legislation only if Medical Marijuana was prescribed by a doctor, and sold through a registered pharmacist! Henry Rayhons 2820 Oak Avenue Garner, IA 50438 Republican Candidate House District 16 April 1996 Yes, if a licensed Iowa doctor prescribed it for them!! Marvin Gudmonson 38671 150th Avenue Leland, IA 50453 Republican Candidate House District 16 April 1996 As a friend of Barb Douglass in Storm Lake, I understand and support your goals. My father, when he was dying of cancer and suffering could have been made more comfortable if this was legally available. Count me in and if elected, I will sponsor your legislation. Thank you. Larry Schroeder P.O. Box 70024 Des Moines, IA 50311 Republican Candidate House District 70 April 1996 No. But I would be open to argument on how this would be supplied legally. Charles Juhl 5724 22nd Ave. Dr. Vinton, IA 52349 Republican Candidate House District 60 April 1996 Dear Sirs, As a person running for an office that is responsible for creating legislation that sets the standards and laws for the State of Iowa, I would not feel comfortable trying to second guess any legal decisions handed down by a Supreme Court, be it State or Federal. As for my either supporting the enacting of medical necessity legislation pertaining to the medicinal use of marijuana to protect from criminal prosecution, I would have to see the proposed House File before taking a stand one way or another on the matter. I, too, like two of the people you cite in your historical background, have Multiple Sclerosis. To date, I've no need of THC to stem any medical problems that are related to the M.S. With the advent of genetic engineering, new drugs to fight M.S. are being brought out for testing and approval by the FDA on, seemingly, a regular basis. I do feel that THC in it's natural form is not needed as a therapeutic substance at this time. Unless I am proven wrong about my thoughts on this and concerns for the potential for abuse of the substance, I would tend to be disinclined to support any legislation in this regard. Thank you. Robert Jolly 310 Longview St. Denver, IA 50622 Democratic Candidate House District 22 May 1996 Iowans for Medical Marijuana: It is the policy of this campaign to not answer any questionaire. Questions are often too broad to be answered properly in such a limited format as a questionaire and answers then could be distorted to mean about anything. However, thank you for sending the questionaire concerning the issues Iowans for Medical Marijuana see as important. I applaud you for being a part of the political process. Sincerely, James Black 411 E. Nebraska Algona, IA 50511 Republican Candidate Senate District 8 May 1996 I have always supported Marijuana for Medical use. Berl Priebe 2106 100th Avenue Algona, IA 50511 Democratic Candidate Senate District 8 May 1996 I really have no opinion one way or the other. I would certainly be fair!! Dan Payne 301 W. 2nd Street Spencer, IA 51301 Republican Candidate Senate District 4 May 1996 Quality Control of Drug is a concern! Bill Dix 325 S. Cherry Street Shell Rock, IA 50670 Republican Candidate House District 21 May 1996 I need to know more about this. Can doctors prescribe marijuana now? Carl Heinrich 825 Simms Avenue Council Bluffs, IA 51503 Republican Candidate House District 42 May 1996 I do believe that it should be directly related to an ailment and with a doctor's supervision. Merlin Bartz 2081 410th St. Grafton, IA 50440 Republican Candidate Senate District 10 July 1996 A recent report from the University of Iowa dealing with marijuana use for medical reasons argues there is no need for this - I'd like to have the opportunity to explore the subject through the legislative investigatory process. Robert Perry 106 Shellrock Dr. Northwood, IA 50459 Democratic Candidate Senate District 10 Letters we received from previous surveys(candidates are running in 1996) December 1992 Dear Mr. McMahon & Mr. Olsen Cancer has not been very kind to my family. In 1978, my brother died from Hodgkins Disease. 1988 my sister was treated and cured of Non-Hodgkins Lymphoma, and in 1992, my nephew was cured of advanced Hodgkins. I need to look into the issue of marijuana for medical use because I have seen personally how it could possibly have made chemotherapymore tolerable to my family. I will look at this issue with an open mind and at this time am supportive of your position. Thank you and best wishes! Dan Boddicker 1052 195th Street Tipton, IA 52772 Republican Candidate House District 39 September 1993 Dear Carl: Thank you for sending me the letter regarding the medical marijuana bill (Senate File 361), as well as a copy the resolution adopted in California last month. Whether the current problem is at the federal level (and it appears to be federal), I do have a few concerns about any statutes or resolutions dealing with the medical or therapeutic uses of marijuana. The chief one is that there continue to be adequate safeguards to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access to the drug. However, in the event that Rep. Miller introduces the resolution, I will discuss the matter with the appropriate committee chair and House leadership. Sincerely, Harold Van Maanen 410 Liberty Street Pella, IA 50219 Republican Candidate House District 95 April 1993 Dear Mr. Olsen: I appreciated receiving the documents you sent supporting your efforts to legalize marijuana for medical purposes in Iowa. You present some good arguments and I will take the time to read your information. I do, however, have continued concerns about the short and long term side effects of marijuana use even in face of apparent short term help for certain patients. Thank you for taking the time to write. Sincerely, Charles Larson 2214 Evergreen St. NE Cedar Rapids, IA 52402 Republican Candidate House District 55 December 1992 Depends how the bill is written. It would be helpful to have the pharmacy board on your side. Richard Drake 420 Parkington Dr. Muscatine, IA 52761 Republican Candidate Senate District 24 December 1992 This sounds like a reasonable request, but I would want to hear the subject debated before deciding. Please contact me anytime. Norman Mundie Route 4 Box 78 Fort Dodge, IA 50501 Democratic Candidate House District 14 Legislative Questionnaire Historical BackgroundWT01-B20-111IA087-000627-B023-209http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/HELMERS/casella3.html 206.61.184.43 19970122054222 text/html 2354HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:42:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:51:05 GMTContent-length: 2139 Casella, Denise - September 10, 1996 September 5, 1996 Black Hawk County District Court 316 East 5th Street Waterloo, IA 50703 Re: State of Iowa v. Helmers, Allen Douglass PIN #483567994Case No. FECR047575 To Whom It May Concern I am writing to plead for mercy in the case of Allen Helmers listed above. How can any of you morally justify your actions when consideringthe facts in this case? To send a disabled man to prisonfor smoking marijuana for pain (his doctoradvises him that it is the best and safest way for him to managehis pain), and at the same time allowing an uninsured drunkmotorist to go free (7 days in jail and 18 months probation)! Seriously ill people who use marijuana as medicine should not bearrested and required to prove their medical necessity in acriminal trial. Seriously ill patients should have their claimsheard by the Iowa Board of Pharmacy Examiners or some otherqualified board. If a seriously ill patient has a legitimatemedical necessity, that patient should be certified and beexempted from criminal prosecution by the state of Iowa. Iowa recognizes the defense of "medical necessity" toprosecution for the possession of marijuana in the state ofIowa. State of Iowa v. JanPleas, No. 22690, Pottawattamie District Court (June 16,1994). Iowa law recognizes the therapeutic value ofmarijuana. Iowa Code 124.206(7)(a). Please refer to the enclosed documents. Thank you. Denise Casella 626 Baltimore Waterloo, Iowa 50702 WT01-B20-112IA087-000627-B024-20http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/HELMERS/casella2.html 206.61.184.43 19970122054236 text/html 2704HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:42:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:50:51 GMTContent-length: 2489 Waterloo Courier - September 18, 1996 Waterloo Courier P.O. Box 540 Waterloo, IA 50704 September 18, 1996 Letters to the Editor Liked marijuana story WATERLOO-- I wish to thank the staff of the Courier for the article in Wednesday's August 28th paperon Allen Helmers. It is veryimportant that the public be informed of the facts. We allknow someone who may have, or still could benefit from usingmarijuana as medicine. We trust our doctors to prescribe thebest medicine for our ailments, but when the best medicine isillegal and unavailable, we are forced to use medicine that cancause severe side effects creating new problems that must betreated. Where is the sense in all of this? If aseriously ill patient has a legitimate medical necessity, thatpatient should be certified and be exempted from criminalprosecution by the state of Iowa. Again, thank you very much. Ihope that in the future the Courier will continue to publish thetruth on controversial issues that affect all of us, so that wemay be informed of the facts and make judgment accordingly. DENISE CASELLA Iowansfor Medical Marijuana WT01-B20-113IA088-000636-B023-338http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/iowa/pleas.html 206.61.184.43 19970122104631 text/html 3199HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:46:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:54:34 GMTContent-length: 2984 STATE v. PLEAS (Pottawattamie County, June 16, 1994) IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF IOWA IN AND FOR POTTAWATTAMIE COUNTY AT COUNCIL BLUFFS _________________________________________________________________ STATE OF IOWA,                    )                                  )             Plaintiff,           )           NO. 22690                                  )        vs.                       )                                  )       ORDER OF THE COURTJAN RENE PLEAS,                   )                                  )             Defendant.           ) _________________________________________________________________     On the 23rd day of May 1994, the State's Motion to StrikeAffirmative Defense came before the Court.  The Court, havingreviewed the pleadings, heard the oral arguents of the parties,and examined the case law provided, makes the followingfindings:    Defendant claims, in her Notice of Affirmative Defense ofMedical Necessity, that the marijuana found in her residenceduring a police search was medically necessary to stabilize theinterocular pressure in her left eye, which has glaucoma.Defendant further claims that there was a specific threat ofimmediate harm, that Defendant did not bring about thecircumstances necessitating the illegal act, that no alternativedrug was effective in minimizing the effects of glaucoma, andthat the harm avoided was greater than the harm caused.Plaintiff argues that the affirmative defense of medicalnecessity is not a recognized criminal defense in the State ofIowa, and so should be stricken.    The Court finds that the necessity defense, by which thedefendant much choose the lesser of two evils, is a recognizeddefense in the state of Iowa.  In State v. Walton, the IowaSupreme Court stated that the necessity defense is availableonly in emergency situations where the threatened harm isimmediate and the threatened disaster imminent.  311 N.W.2d 113,115 (Iowa 1981).  Additionally, no alternative option must existby which the defendant could avoid both evils.  Id.    Defendant is entitled to attempt to establish the defense ofnecessity.  If the trial judge finds that Defendant hasestablished the required elements of the necessity defense inthe State of Iowa, the judge may then instruct the defense ofnecessity.  The Court declines to rule that the defense ofmedical necessity does not exist in the State of Iowa.    IT IS ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that Plaintiff's Motionto Strike Affirmative Defense is hereby denied.    DATED this 16th day of June, 1994.                             JUDGE, FOURTH JUDICIAL DISTRICTWT01-B20-114IA087-000632-B046-174http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/COPTIC/LETTERS/jim-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122073413 text/html 4580HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:34:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:04:25 GMTContent-length: 4365 Tranmer, Jim - September 5, 1996 James Tranmer 17547-050 P.O. Box 1000 Lewisburg, PA 17837 September 5, 1996 Tom Harkin 210 Walnut Des Moines, Iowa 50309 re: Case No. FECR047575 State of Iowa v. Helmers, Allen Douglas PIN # 483567994 People's Representative, U.S. Senator Harkin, I ama Federal Prisoner at the U.S. Pentitentiary at Lewisburg,PA. I am serving a 35-year sentence for Conspiracy toImport and Conspiracy to Possess Marijuana. In 1972 Ivisited one of your predecessors to the United States Senate, theHonorable Harold Hughes. The subject of our discussion at that time was the religious useand the sacramentality of the herb commonly known asmarijuana. After a brief discussion of approximately onehalf hour, the former Senator Hughes cancelled his schedule for the followingafternoon and spent that entire afternoon discussing all mannerof subject matter as diverse as the possible spiritual propertiesof marijuana and ranging to his possible dark horse candidacy forthe Presidency of the United States. I was accompanied bytwo colleagues, Thomas Reilly, who later became known nationallyas Brother Louv - the spokesman forthe Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church,and Jacob Shnurman who is presently living in Des Moines andemployed in some capacity by the State of Iowa. I mentionthis previous encounter simply to indicate to you that I have along and storied experience with this controversial herb and I dopossess the credentials of an herb man. However, the purpose ofthis letter is not for myself nor is it an attempt to enlightenyou concerning the spiritual properties of this "plant ofrenown." I am writing you at the behest of my goodfriend of many years, Carl Olsen, in behalf of a man I do notknow at all, AllenD. Helmers. I am sure that you are aware of the plight of Mr. Helmers. He is attempting to petition for relief from the very real painwhich he suffers daily from the physical debility that heacquired from breaking his back, initially, and, subsequently,from a traffic accident caused by an alcohol-impaired driver. Isthere no one within the government at any level in these UnitedStates who possesses the human compassion to hear the cry ofthese helpless and hopeless folks who are suffering eachday? Isn't there anyone to speak in these legislative hallsof mischief for the souls who claim that their pain is eitherrelieved or more tolerable when they puff some smoke from a plantwhich has been a part of creation long before pharmaceuticalmanufacturers or drug enforcement operatives worked theirdiabolical sciences and created the propaganda that has malignedthe most beneficial plant on this planet? Is there anyonewho is not brainwashed by this vicious lie about marijuana or whois not afraid of the ominous repercussions of a federalbureaucracy that thoroughly intimidates those it purports toserve? I do not see anyone whose motives have not beencompromised by the political process. Human suffering isthe least of concerns by this juggernaut that has nofeelings. How is it that these people who claim torepresent the people can ignore the sincere cries of medicalrelief that arise from thousands of suffering souls who haverisked the fearsome tactics of law enforcement agencies tomedicate themselves and then risk retribution when they arehonest? Lord, how long will thou look on? Let yourconscience be your guide. Everyone is accountable for theiractions. With minimal hope, I remain your brother, James E. Tranmer WT01-B20-115IA087-000631-B005-219http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0001.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074045 text/html 21636HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:40:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:12 GMTContent-length: 21420 Maintenance of Cannabis germplasm in the Vavilov ResearchInstitute Gene Bank - 1993 Maintenance of Cannabis germplasm in the VavilovResearch Institute Gene Bank - 1993 Nikolai Lemeshev1, Lyudmila Rumyantseva1and Robert C. Clarke2 1. N.I. Vavilov Institute of PlantIndustry, 42 Bolshaya Morskaya Street, St. Petersburg 190000,Russia 2. International Hemp Association, Postbus 75007, 1070 AAAmsterdam, The Netherlands Lemeshev, N., L. Rumyantseva and R. C. Clarke.Maintenance of Cannabis germplasm in the Vavilov ResearchInstitute Gene Bank- 1993. Journal of the International HempAssociation 1: 1; 3-5. The collection of Cannabis hemp germplasm at the VavilovResearch Institute (VIR) consists of 397 accessions from 3different eco-geographical groups: Northern, Central andSouthern. Eighty-five collection accessions were sown inisolation at 4 locations in Russia in 1993 for the purpose ofmaintaining the gene pools and replenishing the reserves of seedfor distribution. Sixty accessions yielded from 10 to 2,000 gramsof seed each. The remaining 25 accessions yielded no seeds. Figure 1, N. I. Vavilov, courtesy VIR. Introduction The most important project of the International HempAssociation is a grant of humanitarian aid to the N. I. VavilovInstitute of Plant Industry (VIR) in St. Petersburg, Russia. TheVIR was founded in 1924 by plant collector and geneticist N.I.Vavilov (Fig. 1), one of the first scientists to recognize theimportance of plant genetic resources conservation. The instituteis the longest existing seedbank in the world and houses apriceless collection of over 400,000 seed accessions. The Department of Industrial Crops of the VIR maintains thelargest Cannabis germplasm collection in the world. Mostof these accessions are either wild landraces or fiber hempvarieties, and many of them are found in no other gene banks.Under normal storage conditions, hemp seeds can be kept for about5 years before losing viability. Maintaining a Cannabiscollection therefore involves reproducing the accessions at leastonce every 5 years. Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union,the funding of the VIR has dramatically decreased, threateningthe maintenance of its collections. If the Cannabisaccessions of the VIR are not reproduced they will surely becomeextinct before their true value is ever realized and utilized.Especially in light of the renewed interest in Cannabis,it would be very short-sighted to let this collection die. Table 1. Summary of Cannabis seed accessions inthe VIR gene bank March, 1993. Country of     No. of      No. sownorigin         accessions  in 1993 Afghanistan    2           1            Bulgaria       8                         China          41          14           Czechoslovakia 3           2            France         8           4            Germany        72          3            Hungary        27          4            Italy          8           4            Poland         6                         Portugal       1                         Rumania        7           1            U.S.S.R.       172         46           Spain          2                         Syria          1           1            Turkey         4           1            Yugoslavia     34          4            unknown        1                         Totals         397         85           Bold Face entries indicate the most threatenedaccessions of each general grouping based onboth the amount of seed accessioned and thedate of production of the seed. The VIRattempted to multiply these accessions during1993. Figure 2, Locations of four VIRExperimental Stations. In 1993 the VIR, with the sole support of the IHA, began a 4year program to preserve and evaluate its Cannabisgermplasm. The collection consists of 397 accessions of Cannabisseeds from three basic eco-geographical groups: Northern, Middle,and Southern, collected from 16 nations (Table 1). The collectionrepresents wild and traditional cultivated varieties as well asproducts of plant improvement programs. The vast majority of theaccessions are classified as low-THC chemotypes of Cannabissativa L. All of the accessions will be reproduced during thefirst three years, and in 1996 the entire collection will begrown in replicate gardens and each accession will becharacterized. Two key requirements must be fulfilled before an accession canbe considered adequately reproduced. The primary goal of a germplasmpreservation project is the conservation of the entire gene pool.It is very important that the population size is large enoughto ensure that nearly all of the genes within the gene pool arereproduced in the resultant seed. We have set a minimum limitof 1,000 plants in each population. This should ensure 99% preservationof the gene pool. The second goal is to reproduce the accessionin sufficient amounts to distribute seed to researchers worldwide.We have set a minimum limit of 200 grams of seed for storage andlater reproductions. Two hundred grams is approximately 10,000seeds and will allow 5,000 seeds to be stored in an active collectionfor reproduction and 5,000 seeds to be kept in long-term storage.Seeds can only be released to the research community if more than200 grams of seed from each accession are held by the VIR.This paper reports the results obtained in 1993.Materials and methods Eighty-five accessions of hemp contained in the germplasmcollection of the Department of Industrial Crops at the VIR weresown with the purpose of germplasm maintenance, replenishment ofseed stocks for distribution, and installation in long-termstorage. The accessions were planted at 4 VIR Experiment Stationsin Russia (Fig. 2): Pavlovsk (59N) near St. Petersburg,Ekaterinino (53N) in Tambov Province, Kuban (44N) nearKrasnodar, and Volgograd (48N). At the Pavlovsk Experiment Station 15 collection accessions belongingto the Northern and Central groups were sown in isolated plots.Each plot contained one hemp accession, the distance between theplots being 3-4 kilometers.  The accessions were sown accordingto their ripening period, with early-ripening varieties plantednearer to late-ripening varieties to avoid stray pollination.Agrometeorological conditions during 1993 were unfavorable forthe growth and development of hemp. The spring was late and cold.Air and soil temperatures in May and early June were lower thanaverage by 4-5 C. Because of this the spring sowing wasdelayed by 15 days compared to the average sowing date. The plotswere planted on June 10-13. The seed was sown in densely plantedrows spaced 20 cm apart. The size of the plot varied from 8-12m2 depending on the number of seeds available.The absence of rainfall in late May and strong winds dried outthe soil. The first seedlings appeared 10-12 days after sowingand continued to appear for several days. During the course ofthe whole vegetative period the air temperature was well belowaverage, while the rainfall was above average. Therefore, thedevelopment of the plants was delayed.Sowing of the seed and maintenance of the plants in the isolationplots were performed according to the methods developed by theDepartment of Industrial Crops. Maintenance of the plots consistedof hoeing the soil when needed, thinning the rows where seedlingdensity was too high, weeding, applying fertilizer, removing maleplants after they finished flowering, covering the female plantswith gauze nets at the time of ripening to protect the seeds frombirds, and harvesting of the seed plants.The remaining 70 collection accessions of the Central and Southerneco-geographical groups were sown at the Ekaterinino, Kuban andVolgograd Experiment Stations. At the former two stations accessionswere sown in isolated plots. At the Volgograd Station isolationwas achieved by using wooden and gauze isolation chambers. In1993 the agrometeorological conditions there were as describedfor the Pavlovsk Station, especially the dry and cold spring.This caused a delay in sowing, sporadic germination of the seeds,and poor condition of the seedlings. During the course of thevegetative period the rainfall was 2-3 times the average for manyyears. This also impeded the development of the plants.Results At the Pavlovsk Experiment Station, complete flowering wasobserved in early August. Seed formation occurred in late Augustand early September. Frosts arrived in the end of September andthe temperature fell to minus 5 C. These frosts killed theplants that had not matured and been harvested. Thus out of the15 collection accessions planted at the Pavlovsk Station, 10accessions yielded from 10-1,000 grams of mature seed, twoaccessions did not ripen, two accessions were stolen, and oneyielded only immature seeds (Table 2). Table 2. Results of 1993 VIR/IHA Cannabis germplasmreproduction at the Pavlovsk Experiment Station. Catalog Name and/or    Total  Plant  Seed No.     origin        Plants Height Yield                                (cm)   (g) 313     Kirov Region   4,000    115 1,000 314     Kirov Region     500    112   200 315     Kirov Region     300    135   300 316     Kirov Region     600    110   300 318     Komi Republic    140     95   150 61      Mordovskaya      300    115   200 347     Mariyskaya       320    140   300 361     Udmurtskaya      400    135   250 70      Gorkovskaya    1,000    170    ** 78      Toguchinskaya  1,300    155  40 * 155     Toguchinskaya      5    160    10 413     Kazakhstan     2,100    175   900 414     Kazakhstan       800    160   *** 422     Kazakhstan       700    170   *** 144     Altaiskaya     1,200    150    ** Totals  15 accessions 13,665        3,650 *: Immature seeds; **: Seeds did not ripen, ***:Inflorescences were stolen. Bold Face: Successfulreproductions of more than 200 g of seed from morethan 1,000 plants. Twenty accessions were planted at the Ekaterinino Station; 14of the accessions yielded from 10-1,200 grams of seed and 6 accessionsfailed to germinate because they were from old reproductions (Table3). Twenty accessions were planted at the Kuban Station; 17 accessionsyielded from 10-2,160 grams of seed and three accessions werestolen, (Table 4). Thirty accessions were planted at the VolgogradStation and 19 accessions yielded from 5-790 grams of seed, threeaccessions failed to germinate, and 8 accessions were stolen (Table5). Table 3. Results of 1993 VIR/IHA Cannabis germplasmreproduction at the Ekaterinino Experiment Station. Catalog Name and/or     Total  Plant  Seed No.     origin         Plants Height Yield                                 (cm)   (g) 89     Altaiskaya         180    175 1,175 141    Altaiskaya        none         **** 60     Dalnevostoch.     none         **** 65 ?   Sumskaya           580    180    80 120    Transcarp. Reg.  1,250    147 1,000 127    Transcarp. Reg.    570    150 1,045 132    Transcarp. Reg.  1,000    145   990 536    Saratovskaya       500    180   350 539    Fibrimon 24        900    180   225 528    Tyumenskaya      1,300    210   670 493    Yellow stem 10   1,000    195   530 497    Yuzhnaya Soz. 22   250    230   950 498    Hybrid Krasn. 10   800    240 1,200 445    Unisexual        *****    200    10 557    Zolotonoshsk. 13   550    230   295 477    Local Afghan.      150    165   170 511    Dneprovskaya 5    none         **** 363    Shumperskai       none         **** 311    Yuzhnaya          none         ****        Cherk.                              507    Hybrid Glukh.     none         **** Totals 20 accessions    9,030        8,690 ****: Seeds did not germinate, *****:  poorgermination. Bold Face: see table 2. Table 4. Results of 1993 VIR/IHA Cannabis germplasmreproduction at the Kuban Experiment Station. Catalog Name and/or    Total  Plant   Seed No.     origin        Plants Height  Yield                                (cm)    (g) 538    Felina 34, France  98    160    170 534    Ukraine           110    165  1,200 532    Fibr. 19, France   42    270    200 527    Irkutskaya         20    220    600 524    Daghestan Rep.    160    235  2,160 517    Hybrid Dnepr.1     60    165    620 509    Krasnod. 78        10    280  1,260 513    Irkutskaya         70    310    785 535    Local, Hungary     20    172    250 533    Fedr. 74, France   14    173     90 494    Yuzhnaya Soz. 8    36    160     10 464    Local, Turkey      36    280    500 375    Novosadska, Yug.   18    180    550 280    Distr. di Fatza,   24    195    100        It.                          337    Sai-ma, China     176    312    300 338    Cu-ma, China       48           *** 184    Tin-yan, China     60           *** 499    Yuz. Odn. Soz. 14  76           *** 123    Transcarp. Reg.   900    165    710 397    Local, Syria       22    173    440 Totals 20 accessions   2,000         9,945 ***, Bold Face: see table 2. Table 5. Results of 1993 VIR/IHA Cannabis germplasmreproduction. Volgograd Experiment Station. Catalog Name and/or     Total  Plant  Seed No.     origin         Plants Height Yield                                 (cm)   (g) 19     Nisca, Yugo.       740    175   380 23     Local, Yugo.     1,000    180   200 36     Local,              54    165   260        Czechoslov.44     Yuzhnaya Soz. 1     65    135   450 34     Yuzhnaya Soz. 84 1,000    150   700 138    Linia, Hungary   none         **** 85     Tyumenskaya        213    130   *** 149    Krasnodarskaya       9    120   *** 162    Mozdokskaya         25    160   360 173    Kompolti F          52    175   320 177    Lai-sui, China     600    200   *** 220    Odn. Bernburg.     700    150   *** 221    Odn. Bernburg.   1,000    152   450 225    Odn. Bernburg.   1,000    149   *** 181    Sar-san, China     210    195   *** 187    Sui-yan, China     700    180    35 185    Shan-var, China    800    210   *** 186    Chui-sui-da,       600    200   200        China                                300    Local, China       600    180   260 305    Local, China       240    205   280 306    Fi-cin, China      300    195   160 324    U-chan-da, China   350    200   220 383    Local, China       700    160   200 385    Local, China       700    185   180 278    Napoletana,         20    210    10        Italy                                279    Bolognese         none         **** 204    Local, Ukraine     500    170   900 210    Y.C.A.R. 42/118    500    200   *** 282    Karmanola        1,000          430 345    Daghestan         none         **** Totals 30 accessions   13,678        5,995 GrandTotals 85 accessions   38,373       28,280 ***, ****, Bold Face: see tables 2 and 3. Discussion and conclusions In the introduction to this paper we defined two keyrequirements which must be fulfilled before an accession can beconsidered adequately reproduced: at least 1,000 plants have toproduce a total quantity of at least 200 g of seed. Due to poor weather conditions, poor germination, limited spaceand theft, only 14 of the 60 accessions reproduced were of sufficientpopulation size (more than 1,000 plants). Of these 14 accessionsonly 10 were reproduced in sufficient quantity to allow distribution(more than 200 g seed). This means that although 60 of the 85accessions were reproduced, only 10 were reproduced with sufficientpopulation size and in sufficient quantity to satisfy our criteria.Eighty-five Cannabis seed accessions were sown, 60 Cannabisseed accessions were reproduced, and 10 seed accessions were reproducedin sufficient quantity for distribution. Although the 1993 Cannabisgermplasm reproductions yielded minimal tangible results, we mustremember that this is the first time any Cannabis reproductionshave been attempted during the confusing period since the dissolutionof the Soviet Union. The extensive VIR system for germplasm preservationhas been partly reactivated and the future is now much brighter.Our limited success is encouraging, considering that this is onlythe first year of the VIR/IHA Cannabis germplasm preservationproject. We feel that the project should certainly be continued.However, persistence and considerable additional financing willbe required to complete the reproduction and evaluation of theentire Cannabis germplasm collection of the VIR withinthe remaining three years of the project. Only one thing is certain,we will never succeed if we do not focus our most concerted effortson Cannabis germplasm conservation. Maintenance of Cannabisgermplasm in the Vavilov ResearchInstitute gene bank - 1994 In 1994 the VIR and IHA continue their Cannabisgermplasm preservation programme. A third partner, the ItalianENEA Institute is involved as well. A total of more than 100accessions has been sown on five locations: Pavlovsk, Ekaterininoand Kuban in Russia, Ustimovka in Ukraine and Bari in Italy. In Russia and Ukraine plant emergence and early growth have been slow due to cold spring wheather, but with the advent of higher summer temperatures crop growth has accelerated.A detailed report on the results obtained in 1994 will be presented in the next issue of this journal.Due to inflation in Russia, the costs of the project have doubled in 1994 relative to 1993. Donations to help continue this project are very welcome. Persons or organisations donating US $100 or more to the project will receive a VIR memorial medallion and/or pin and/or a copy of the VIR Cannabis sativa descriptor list, a 34 page booklet in English and Russian. NextWT01-B20-116IA087-000631-B005-252http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0002.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074103 text/html 22346HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:40:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:06 GMTContent-length: 22130 The effect of fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) on selectedsoil-borne pathogens The effect of fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) on selectedsoil-borne pathogens C.J. Kok, G.C.M. Coenen and A. de Heij Research Institute for PlantProtection (IPO-DLO), P.O. Box 9060, NL 6700 GW Wageningen, TheNetherlands Kok, C.J., G.C.M.Coenen and A de Heij, 1994. The effectof fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) on selected soil-bornepathogens. Journal of the International Hemp Association 1:6-9. The effect of the cultivation of fibre hemp (Cannabis sativaL.), cv Kompolti Hibrid TC, on the population dynamics of thesoil-borne pathogens Verticillium dahliae (Fungi), Meloidogynechitwoodi and Pratylenchus penetrans (Nematoda) wasstudied in greenhouse and field experiments. Fibre hempsuppressed the population of M. chitwoodi strongly. Areduction in population of V. dahliae was also noted.Removal of stubble of hemp from soil after harvest was found toinhibit formation of survival structures (microsclerotia) of V.dahliae. Introduction Dutch agriculture faces an increasing problem with soil-bornepathogens (including nematodes) due to intensive growing of alimited number of crops in short rotations. Government plans toreduce the use of soil disinfectants by 50 % by the next centurymay well aggravate the situation. A possible solution to theproblem is the introduction of new crops in the rotation. It is generally assumed that long rotations are lesssusceptible to soil-borne diseases than short rotations. However,this assumption may not apply to soil-borne pathogens with a widehost range (polyphagous pathogens). Several fungi (e.g. Verticilliumdahliae and Rhizoctonia solani) and nematodes (e.g. Pratylenchusspp. and Meloidogyne spp.) have a very large number ofhost plants. Introduction of new crops of unknown host statusinto a rotation may cause or aggravate problems with thesepathogens. Therefore, the population dynamics of importantpolyphagous pathogens on new crops must be assessed before a safeintroduction can be made. Fibre hemp is one of the potential new crops underinvestigation in the Netherlands. Even though hemp is an ancientcrop, there are few reports on soil-borne diseases in this cropand the general impression is that cultivation of hemp poses fewproblems with plant diseases (Termorshuizen 1991). Soil-bornediseases however often remain undetected due to the inconspicuoussymptoms. Furthermore, the absence of damage in a host plant doesnot mean that the pathogen cannot multiply on the host.Therefore, the population dynamics of some important soil-bornepathogens on hemp were investigated. The pathogens selected in this study were the fungus Verticilliumdahliae and the nematodes Meloidogyne chitwoodi and Pratylenchuspenetrans. These pathogens are potentially very harmful topotato, which is the major crop in arable farming in theNetherlands. V. dahliae is a major factor in the earlydying syndrome in potato, which can lead to severe yieldreduction. This pathogen has extremely persistent survivalstructures (microsclerotia), that can endure in soil for over 12years. Control of this pathogen is therefore very difficult(Heale 1988). The Columbian root-knot nematode M. chitwoodi has awide host range including many representatives of the Gramineae,which are commonly used in rotational programmes with potatoes(Santo et al. 1980). Low population levels of M. chitwoodialready cause major crop losses of potato because of reducedtuber quality and heavy infestations can substantially decreaseyields. Tuber infestation by M. chitwoodi causes necroticareas and other blemishes, rendering the tuber unsaleable(Viglierchio 1987). P. penetrans, the root-lesion nematode, has anextremely wide host range. This species can cause severe growthreduction and yield loss in potato production (Mai et al. 1977,Santo 1989). Furthermore, P. penetrans increases theeffect of V. dahliae in the early dying syndrome of potato(Kotcon et al. 1985, Rowe et al. 1985). Materials and Methods The investigations described in this paper were carried outusing the Hungarian fibre hemp cultivar Kompolti Hibrid TC. Thiscultivar was chosen for its good agricultural properties andprior use as a standard in a cluster of research projects onfibre hemp as an arable crop for paper production in theNetherlands ("National Hemp Programme"). The effect of cultivation of fibre hemp on the selectedpathogens was assessed by comparing the population before sowingand after harvest of the crop. M. chitwoodi and V.dahliae were studied in field and greenhouse experiments. Thereproduction of P. penetrans on hemp was studied in thegreenhouse only. The effect of fibre hemp on changes inpopulation of the pathogens was compared with the effect of cropswith known host status. The greenhouse experiment with V. dahliae was carriedout using a organic sandy soil to which microsclerotia of V.dahliae were added (2,500/ml soil). In 400 ml pots, hemp,wheat and pea were grown (5 pots per treatment). A controltreatment contained no plants (fallow). Wheat and pea areresistant and susceptible, respectively, to V. dahliae.Afterwards, above-ground parts of the plants were removed and thepopulation of V. dahliae was estimated. The population of V. dahliae was assessed with abioassay, using the potato as test plant. Rooted potato cuttingswere planted in 400 ml pots containing the soil to be tested. Thepots were placed on a greenhouse bench at 19 C and wateredsparingly. At two to three days intervals, the number of leavesshowing wilt symptoms was determined. The disease progress wasmonitored until the first potato plants died (60 days afterplanting). The cumulative disease score was calculated per plantand taken as the measure of the soil population of V. dahliae. Formation of microsclerotia on crop residues of fibre hempsuch as plant tops and stubble was studied in some detail. Sincemicrosclerotia were very rarely observed on plant parts that werevital (green) at harvest, the effect of pulling stubble directlyafter harvest on the formation of microsclerotia was determined.In a field infested with V. dahliae, plant tops werecollected and green stubble was removed from the soil afterharvest. Three weeks later, when the stubble had died, anotherbatch of stubble was collected in the field. On both occasions,the plant material was left to dry on top of moist soil in agreenhouse, to simulate drying in the field. Once they wereair-dried, the number of stubbles containing microsclerotia wasassessed. The reproduction of M. chitwoodi on hemp was studiedin a greenhouse and in the field. In the greenhouse experimentreproduction of the nematode was determined after 1 generation.Three week old hemp seedlings were inoculated with 200, 400, 800,1,600 or 3,200 nematodes (hatched second-stage juveniles) in 400ml pots in 5 replications. After 1 generation cycle of thenematodes (7 weeks at 20 C), the number of newly formed eggs onthe roots was determined by the method of Vrain (1977). Thesusceptibility of hemp was also tested in the field. On a sandysoil heavily infested with M. chitwoodi (mean population1500 eggs+larvae per 100 ml soil) fibre hemp was compared to fiveother crops. All crops were grown in 6 x 6 m plots. Before sowingand after harvest of the plants, the centre of the plot (1 x 1.5m) was sampled with an auger (100 random samples, in total  3litre soil per plot). The population of M. chitwoodi wasdetermined with an Oostenbrink elutriator ('s Jacob and vanBezooijen 1984). The experiment was set up as a randomized blockdesign with 4 replications. The reproduction of P. penetrans on fibre hemp and,for comparison, sugar beet (Beta vulgaris L.) orfiddleneck (Phacelia tanacetifolia Benth.) was determinedin a greenhouse experiment. P. tanacetifolia and sugarbeet are susceptible and resistant, respectively, to P.penetrans. The test plants were grown in 400 ml potscontaining potting mixture and coarse river sand (1:2, on volumebase). The plants were inoculated with a nematode suspension orwith nematode-infested oat root pieces. P. penetransoriginated from a greenhouse culture maintained on oats (courtesyof Mr. van Bezooijen, Agricultural University Wageningen).Nematodes for inoculum preparation were extracted from oat rootsin a mist chamber ('s Jacob and van Bezooijen 1984). Nematodeswere inoculated in suspension (470 per plant) or in infectedroots (210 per plant). The experiment was stopped at senescenceof the hemp plants, 2 months after inoculation. Nematodes wereextracted from the root system in a mist chamber and from thesoil with an Oostenbrink elutriator. The experiment was carriedout in a completely randomized design on a greenhouse bench at 20C. Per inoculum type, 5 replicates per plant species weretaken. Results -Verticillium dahliae The effect of the plants tested on the resulting disease index ofthe potato test plants is shown in Table 1. Fibre hemp gave adisease index in the bioassay that was not significantlydifferent from the resistant host plant wheat and the fallowtreatment. The susceptible host plant pea caused a significantlyhigher disease index. This experiment was repeated with similarresults. Table 1. Effect of plant species on the Verticillium dahliae diseaseindex of potato test plants in a greenhouse. Plant species                                 Cumulative disease score1,2 None (fallow)                                                    55   (a)Wheat (Triticum aestivum)                                        36   (a)Fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.)                                  58   (a)Pea (Pisum sativum)                                             104   (b) 1 mean cumulative number of leaves with wilt symptoms per potato testplant2 means followed by a different letter are significantly different (LSD-test, p <0.05) In the field, no microsclerotia were observed on the planttops. Stubble harvested before it became senescent showed asignificantly reduced occurrence of microsclerotia of V.dahliae , compared to stubble which was senescent (Table 2, p <0.05,fisher's exact test). Table 2. Occurrence of microsclerotia on green and senescent stubble offibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) from a field infested with Verticilliumdahliae. Stubble                                      %  stems with microsclerotia green                                                                  17 senescent                                                              60 -Meloidogyne chitwoodi M. chitwoodi showed a low reproduction on hemp in thegreenhouse, at all densities of inoculum (Table 3). Table 3. Reproduction of Meloidogyne chitwoodi on fibre hemp, (Cannabissativa) cv. Kompolti Hibrid TC at different levels of inoculum in agreenhouse experiment. Inoculum1                                               Final population2 200                                                                  0   400                                                                5.6   800                                                                2.0 1,600                                                                  0 3,200                                                               13.2 1 second-stage juveniles/plant 2 eggs/g root after 1 generation of the nematode In the field experiment, the reproduction of M. chitwoodi onhemp was so low, that the final population was much lower thanthe initial population. The effect of fibre hemp did not differsignificantly from that of fallow field conditions (Table 4). Table 4. The effect of several plant species on the population ofMeloidogyne chitwoodi after harvest in a field experiment. Host plant                                    Population after harvest1,2 Fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.)                                    10 (a)Bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.)                                        3 (a)Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.)                                      130 (b)Pea (Pisum sativum L.)                                            220 (b)Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.)                                   5,900 (c)Grass (Lolium multiflorum Lamk.)                               12,000 (d)None (fallow)                                                       3 (a) 1 number of larvae / 100 ml of soil2 means followed by the a different letter are significantly different(LSD test after log transformation, p <0.05). in cooperation with plant protection service (pd),centre for agrobiological and soil fertility research (ab-dlo),and research station for arable farming and field production(pagv). -Pratylenchus penetrans The final population of P. penetrans (adults + juveniles) isgiven in Table 5. Since there was no significant effect of theinoculation method, the results are summarized per host plant. Table 5. Effect of different host plants on the final population ofPratylenchus penetrans in a greenhouse experiment. Host plant                              Total number of P. penetrans 1,2 Sugar beet (Beta vulgaris)                                        89 (a)Fiddleneck (Phacelia tanacetifolia)                            1,252 (b)Fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.)                                2,541 (b) 1 sum of nematodes in roots and soil                                        2 means followed by a different letter are significantly different (LSD-test after log transformation, p <0.05) Fibre hemp sustained a large population of P. penetrans,not statistically different from that of the susceptible host P.tanacetifolia. The resistant host sugar beet had a much lowerfinal population. Discussion Fibre hemp (cv. Kompolti Hibrid TC) was shown to be resistantto V. dahliae and M. chitwoodi, but susceptible to P.penetrans, under experimental conditions. Furthermore, it issuggested that pulling of the stubble of fibre hemp directlyafter harvest will reduce the formation of new microsclerotia of V.dahliae. However, the experiments were conducted undergreenhouse conditions or in field trials at a single location andin one year. This can make generalization of the resultsprecarious. Inclusion of crops of known host status in theexperiments reduces this problem. In this way it is possible todraw conclusions on the host status of fibre hemp by comparisonwith the other species. Fibre hemp can possibly be used to suppress M. chitwoodi.In the field experiment strong suppression was found and in thelaboratory experiment reduction of the population of M.chitwoodi was evident even at very low inoculum levels. Thisis an important result, because of the wide host range and thehigh damage potential of this nematode. The population suppression of V. dahliae by hemp wassimilar to that on wheat or in the fallow treatment. Butabove-ground parts of fibre hemp may contribute to the populationof V. dahliae, if the stubble is allowed to die offnaturally. Pulling the stubble inhibited the formation ofmicrosclerotia. This measure can further reduce the population of V.dahliae after the cultivation of fibre hemp. It seems that fibre hemp is susceptible to P. penetrans.The results of the greenhouse experiment call for caution inintroducing fibre hemp in the crop rotation at sites whereproblems with P. penetrans occur and susceptible crops aregrown. However, since this conclusion is based on greenhouseexperiments only, further studies are necessary to assess therisks under field conditions. The host suitability of a large number of hemp cultivars tothe root-knot nematode Meloidogyne hapla was tested by DeMeijer (1993). This author found varying resistance levels,ranging from highly resistant to moderately susceptible hostquality. The standard cultivar, Kompolti Hibrid TC, had anaverage reproduction rate of M. hapla, both in alaboratory and a field trial. Similar results were obtained byKok and Coenen (unpublished results). However, since some sourcesof hemp germplasm showed very high levels of resistance (DeMeijer 1993), it should be possible to develop fibre cultivarswith good yield properties and a high resistance level to M.hapla. Modern European fibre hemp cultivars are thought to berelatively closely related. Landraces, ornamental cultivars anddrug varieties however seem to be more distantly related (DeMeijer and van Soest 1992). Therefore, generalization of theresults to the latter types of hemp is precarious. The results presented indicate that fibre hemp reactsdifferently to various soil-borne diseases and that the notionthat fibre hemp will cause no problems with diseases in croprotation is not generally justified. Cultivation of fibre hemp islikely to reduce the population of M. chitwoodi and of V.dahliae. Problems with P. penetrans however could beincreased by fibre hemp. The results presented here are, however,more of a qualitative than of a quantitative nature. Long-termfield studies are necessary to accurately assess the quantitativeimpact of the cultivation of fibre hemp on soil-borne diseases. References 's Jacob , J.J. and van Bezooijen, J., 1984, A manual for practical work   in nematology. Agricultural University, Wageningen, the Netherlands,   77 pp.Heale, J.B., 1988, Verticillium spp., the cause of vascular wilts in many   species. Adv. Plant Pathol. 6: 291-311.Kotcon, J.B., Rouse, D.I. and Mitchel, J.E., 1985, Interactions of   Verticillium dahliae, Colletotrichum coccodes, Rhizoctonia solani   and Pratylenchus penetrans in the early dying syndrome of Russet   Burbank potatoes. Phytopathology 75: 68-73.Mai, W.F., Bloom, J.R. and Chen, T.A., 1977, Biology and ecology of   the plant-parasitic nematode Pratylenchus penetrans. Penn. State   Univ. Coll. Agr. Bull. 815: 1-64.Meijer, E.P.M. de, 1993, Evaluation and verification of resistance to   Meloidogyne hapla Chitwood in a Cannabis germplasm collection.   Euphytica 71: 49-56.Meijer, E.P.M. and Van Soest, L.J.M., 1992, The CPRO Cannabis   germplasm collection. Euphytica 62: 201-211.Rowe, R.C., Rieder, R.M. and Martin, M.J., 1985, Synergistic   interaction between Verticillium dahliae and Pratylenchus   penetrans in potato early dying disease. Phytopathology 75:   412-418.Santo, G.S., 1989, The role of crop rotation systems on non-cyst   nematodes affecting potatoes in the temperate zones. In: Vos, J.,   van Loon, C.D. and Bollen, G.J. (Eds.):  Effect of crop rotation on   potato production in the temperate zone. 310 pp. Kluwer, Dordrecht.Santo, G.S.,O'Bannon, J.H., Finley, A.M. and Golden, A.M., 1980,   Occurrence and host range of a new root-knot nematode   (Meloidogyne chitwoodi) in the Pacific Northwest. Plant Dis. 64:   951-952.Termorshuizen, A.J., 1991, Literature study on diseases on potential   alternative crops. IPO-DLO Rapport nr. 91-08 (In Dutch). Viglierchio, D.R., 1987, Biological criteria in management   considerations for Meloidogyne chitwoodi. Nematol. Medit. 15:   65-70.Vrain, T.C., 1977, A technique for the collection of larvae of   Meloidogyne spp and a comparison of eggs and larvae as inocula.   J. Nematol. 9: 249-251. NextWT01-B20-117IA087-000631-B006-30http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0003.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074115 text/html 16967HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:41:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:20:59 GMTContent-length: 16751 Medical Marijuana Medical Marijuana Robert C. Clarke (1) and David W. Pate (2) 1. PharmTex Consultants, P.O. Box 1158, Ben Lomond, CA 95005, USA 2. International Hemp Association, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, The Netherlands Clarke, Robert C. and David W. Pate. Medical Marijuana, 1994. Journal of the International Hemp Association 1: 9-12. Cannabis is a plant with worldwide distribution, yielding fiber and food, as well as a psychoactive drug. The flowers have been used as a medicine for millennia. Investigation of its major chemical components has revealed their utility for the treatment of a wide variety of diseases. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol is currently approved as an oral prescription drug for the treatment of the nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy and for appetite stimulation in cases of the anorexia associated with AIDS. However, many patients find that smoking Cannabis offers a superior route of administration and therefore illicitly self-medicate. Introduction For those not familiar with marijuana and in need of it for medical purposes, the prospect of consuming an illicit drug may seem rather daunting. However, marijuana is used by 20-30 million people in the US and many times that number worldwide, under completely uncontrolled circumstances, with little apparent harm. It is the world's fourth most popular recreational drug behind caffeine, alcohol and nicotine. Unlike these latter drugs, Cannabis is not addictive and no one in the several thousand year history of its use is known to have died from its effects. The intent of this article is to provide the prospective medical user with an introduction to this drug as a possible therapeutic option. The basics of our subject start with the realization that this much-discussed drug, like many of the others we consume, is from a plant with an interesting natural history. Cannabis, the plant Cannabis is a dioecious annual producing approximately equal numbers of male and female plants. Marijuana comes from the flower-associated bracts of female Cannabis. The male plant is much less useful for this purpose. Almost all of the Cannabis found worldwide is classified as Cannabis sativa. Many taxonomists argue that C. indica and C. ruderalis are also valid species names (Emboden 1974, Schultes et al. 1974) although this remains controversial (Small and Cronquist 1976). However, even accounting for these additional species, 95% of the cultivated Cannabis in the world would still be classified as Cannabis sativa. As it grows well at low temperatures, Cannabis is well adapted to temperate climates (Van der Werf 1994). Ancient northern Asian and European societies used Cannabis mostly for its fiber and seed. It is also an aggressive weed plant at higher latitudes worldwide. South Asian and African cultures used Cannabis mostly for its drug content, and the frost-free climates allowed more time for development of the psychoactive resin. Intense levels of ambient ultraviolet radiation and of insect predation in the tropics may also have contributed to a natural selection for these drug types (Pate 1983). In any case, Cannabis has evolved into two basic races. Plants grown for fiber and seed are universally called "hemp". Cannabis grown for its drug content is commonly called "marijuana" or "drug Cannabis". Its female flower bracts are covered with numerous small resin glands containing the pharmacologically active cannabinoids (Fig. 1) that that are unique to this genus. Most of the psychoactive properties of marijuana can be attributed to its content of a cannabinoid (Fig. 1a) named delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). In some literature, it is designated as delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol due merely to a conflict between two methods of naming chemicals, but it is the very same molecule. Modern hemp varieties are nearly devoid of THC and, therefore, cannot be practically diverted into the drug trade. Hemp has been heavily selected for high fiber content, high stalk yield, high seed yield, and low (<0.3 %) inflorescence THC content (De Meijer et al. 1992). Drug-type Cannabis varies widely in THC content from approximately 1-2% in unselected strains to over 10% in the best modern varieties (Watson 1994). It is not feasible to "get high" on hemp, and most marijuana produces very little low-quality fiber. Hemp should never be confused with marijuana, as their roles cannot be reversed. Cannabis, the medicine Cannabis has been recognized for centuries as a valuable therapeutic agent. Folk uses of Cannabis include treatment of insomnia, inflammation, various psychoses, digestive disorders, depression, rheumatism, migraine, neuralgia, fatigue, constipation, diarrhea, parasites, appetite disorders and it has also been employed by women to facilitate childbirth, stimulate lactation, and relieve menstrual cramping (Mechoulam 1986). These traditions continue in every region where Cannabis is available. Modern Western Cannabis users also frequently claim relief from many of these same medical complaints. Cannabis or THC have been used experimentally to effectively lower the elevated intraocular pressure of glaucoma (Adler and Geller 1986) and have shown potential for the treatment of alcoholism (Rosenburg 1976) and drug dependence (Hine et al. 1975). THC has been used as a bronchodilator for the relief of asthma symptoms (Graham 1986) and may also be effectively used as an analgesic for pain relief (Segal 1986). It has even been shown to have antibacterial properties (Van Klingeren and Ten Ham 1976). The low toxicity of THC is best indicated by its widespread use with very few reports of anything even approaching an overdose. Occasionally, people may get too "high" for their psychic comfort, but their bodies continue to function fairly normally. The dosage sufficient to kill half of the organisms tested (LD50) for orally ingested THC is approximately 1 g/kg of body weight. Simply interpreted, this means an average sized human would have to consume 50-100 g of pure THC to reach the LD50 level. Since high-potency Cannabis contains approximately 10% THC, a person would have to eat at least 500-1,000 g of this marijuana before having a 50% chance of death. A 1 g marijuana cigarette of 10% THC Cannabis contains 100 mg of THC and is usually shared among several smokers. Clinically effective oral doses for the relief of nausea start at 5-10 mg. This means that, even accounting for pyrolytic decomposition and smoke loss, there is a several-thousandfold difference between an effective dose of THC and a potentially lethal one! For alcohol, this difference is only about twentyfold. Other common non-prescription drugs, such as aspirin, have similar relatively narrow margins of safe use. Research into the actions of the natural cannabinoids led to the creation of many artificial ones based on variations of their basic molecular structure. However, none of these artificial compounds are currently approved for medical use in the US. Nabilone proved to be toxic to laboratory test animals and in 1978, human tests were suspended, although it is available in Canada, Switzerland and the United Kingdom as Cesamet. Levonathrodal, another synthetic cannabinoid analog, was not approved for use in the US, also following incidents of toxicity in test animals. Other natural cannabinoids (Fig. 1b-d), such as cannabichromene (CBC), cannabidiol (CBD) and cannabigerol (CBG) have been shown to have potential therapeutic value, and can be isolated from both non-psychoactive as well as psychoactive Cannabis varieties, Epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, dystonias, and other neurological disorders have been experimentally treated with CBD (Consroe and Snider 1986). CBD has also been shown to relieve anxiety, especially the minor anxiety occasionally associated with the medical use of THC (Zuardi et al. 1982). CBC, CBD, and CBG and related analogs have been shown to have anti-microbial action (ElSohly et al. 1982, Van Klingeren and Ten Ham, 1976). These non-psychoactive compounds are generally not restricted by international regulations prohibiting Cannabis and THC. Various delivery systems for these cannabinoids, such as suppositories, time release encapsulation, eye drops, nasal sprays, aerosols, topical ointments, and transdermal patches will eventually become available. Several such cannabinoid delivery systems have already been patented (e.g., ElSohly 1990, Hussain 1984). The only cannabinoid medicine currently available in the US is a synthetic THC encapsulated in sesame oil (generically known as "Dronabinol"). It is sold under the trade name Marinol as a Schedule II controlled substance (allowing restricted prescription, similar to morphine and cocaine) and was afforded a narrow, specific legal exemption from the Schedule I status of other Cannabis products (forbidden from clinical use). It has been accepted and prescribed in the United States since 1985 as an anti-emetic to treat the nausea associated with cancer chemotherapy (Levitt 1986). Use as an appetite stimulant to correct the weight loss related to anorexia in AIDS patients was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration on December 22, 1992 (Anonymous 1992). THC is not a cure for cancer or AIDS, but helps to relieve suffering and improve quality of life, perhaps prolonging the lives of those afflicted. THC may also eventually win approval as a general appetite stimulant for anorexia nervosa and other appetite disorders. Before other cannabinoids or Cannabis can become available to patients in the US, they must be similarly rescheduled. This also applies to the non-psychoactive compounds or even an otherwise identical, but plant-derived THC medicine! On April 29, 1991, the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs decided that delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol should be transferred from Schedule I to Schedule II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances to facilitate its therapeutic use. Similar rescheduling in each member country would allow doctors to prescribe it as a medicine and permit easier research. This has already been accomplished in England and Germany. Patients claim there is an acute need to reform the laws concerning other Cannabis products, especially in response to the medical plight of thousands of cancer and AIDS patients. If economic incentives could be created by liberalizing outdated anti-Cannabis laws and streamlining new drug registration and testing procedures for AIDS related medicines, several new Cannabis medicines would appear on the market within the next few years. Currently, in the US, the cost of a single dose of Marinol ranges between $4.00 and $8.00 and the average patient cost ranges from $12.00 to $32.00 per day. Since Marinol is expensive, narrowly prescribed and often less effective than crude Cannabis preparations, potent sinsemilla-type (seedless) marijuana remains the most viable form of Cannabis medicine, despite the fact that its illegality artificially inflates its cost. Physicians learned as much from their patients and began to publish guidebooks on the appropriate medical use of Cannabis (e.g., Roffman 1982), which is most often smoked or consumed in baked goods. In some respects, it may be unfortunate that Cannabis has played such a prominent role in the American media's coverage of the counterculture movement since the 1960s. The popularization of Cannabis as the drug of choice increased its exposure to the general public, but government disinformation promoted the mainstream cultures confusion of it with hard drugs. It has been difficult for even the more knowledgeable patients and practitioners to view Cannabis as a genuine medicine rather than merely a recreational drug. Of course, many doctors are also reluctant to suggest Cannabis use because it is illegal. Marinol is too expensive for many patients to afford and orally ingested anti-emetics are of questionable value because their application must be carefully timed to avoid vomiting the drugs. Many patients who both smoke Cannabis and swallow Marinol report that THC absorbed through the lungs offers more immediate relief, better dose titration, fewer side-effects and shorter duration of action. Conclusions For millennia, Cannabis has been used as an effective medicine. Modern research has revealed the clear potential for this plant and its cannabinoid products to resume their place in the pharmacopoeia. Further work is urgently needed to determine how Cannabis can be best utilized as a clinical tool. Meanwhile, cancer and AIDS patients and members of the medical marijuana movement have taken responsibility for their own health and self-medicate without a doctor's prescription. References Adler M.W. and E.B. Geller, 1986. Ocular effects of cannabinoids. Pages 51-70 in R. Mechoulam, ed., Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. Anonymous, 1992. Wall Street Journal, Dec. 23. Consroe P. and S.R. Snider, 1986. Therapeutic potential of cannabinoids in neurological disorders. Pages 21-49 in R. Mechoulam, ed., Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. De Meijer E.P.M., H.J. van der Kamp and F.A. van Eeuwijk, 1992. Characterization of Cannabis accessions with regard to cannabinoid content in relation to other plant characters. Euphytica 62: 187-200. ElSohly M.A., 1990. Method for effecting systemic delivery of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) using suppository compositions containing polar THC esters. US Patent 4933363. ElSohly H.N., C.E. Turner, A.M. Clark, and M.A. ElSohly, 1982. Synthesis and antimicrobial activity of certain cannabichromene and cannabigerol related compounds. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 71: 1319-1323. Emboden W.A., 1974. Cannabis-a polytypic genus. Economic Botany 28: 304-310. Graham J.D.P., 1986. The bronchodilator action of cannabinoids. Pages 147-158 in R. Mechoulam, ed., Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. Hine B., E. Friedman, M. Torrelio and S. Gershon, 1975. Blockade of morphine abstinence by Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. Science 190: 590-591.. Hussain A.A., 1984. Nasal administration of narcotic antagonists and analgesics. US Patent 4464378. Levitt M., 1986. Cannabinoids as antiemetics in cancer chemotherapy. Pages 71-83 in R. Mechoulam, ed., Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. Mechoulam R., 1986. The pharmacohistory of Cannabis sativa. Pages 1-19 in R. Mechoulam, ed., Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. Pate D.W., 1983. Role of ultraviolet radiation in evolution of Cannabis chemotype. Economic Botany 37: 396-405. Roffman R.A., 1982. Marijuana as medicine. Madrona Publishers, Seattle, Washington. Rosenburg C.M., 1976. The use of marijuana in the treatment of alcoholism. Pages 173-85 in Cohen, S. and R. Stillman, eds., The therapeutic potential of marijuana. Plenum Medical Book Publishing Company, New York. Schultes R.E., W.M. Klein, T. Plowman and T.E. Lockwood, 1974. Cannabis: an example of taxonomic neglect. Harvard Botanical Museum Leaflets 23: 337-367. Segal M., 1986. Cannabinoids and analgesia. Pages 105-120 in R. Mechoulam, ed., Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents, CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. Small E. and A. Cronquist, 1976. A practical and natural taxonomy for Cannabis. Taxon 25: 405-435. Van der Werf, H.M.G. 1994. Crop physiology of fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). Doctoral thesis, Wageningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, The Netherlands. Van Klingeren B. and M. Ten Ham, 1976. Antibacterial activity of delta-9-THC and cannabidiol. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek Journal of Microbiology and Serology 42: 9-12. Watson D.P., 1994. Personal communication. Zuardi A.W., I. Shirakawa, E. Finkelfarb and I.G. Karniol, 1982. Action of cannabidiol on the anxiety and other effects produced by delta-9-THC in normal subjects. Psychopharmacology 76: 245-250. NextWT01-B20-118IA087-000631-B006-59http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0004.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074130 text/html 13887HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:41:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:22:09 GMTContent-length: 13671 Hemp Pulp and Paper Production Hemp Pulp and Paper Production Gertjan van Roekel jr. ATO-DLO Agrotechnology, P.O.box 17, 6700 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands Van Roekel, G J, 1994. Hemp pulp and paper production. Journal of the International Hemp Association 1: 12-14. A brief review of the history of paper making reveals the important role of hemp in the development of the industry. The technical aspects of classical hemp pulping and paper making and the present status of the hemp pulp and paper industry are discussed. It is shown that for new applications of hemp as a paper making fibre source, new pulp technology is required. This article is the first in a series about hemp pulping and paper making. History of paper making The use of fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) for pulp and paper dates back more than 2,000 years. The oldest surviving piece of paper in the world was discovered by archeologists in 1957 in a tomb near Sian in Shensi province, China (Temple 1986). It is about 10 cm square and can be dated precisely between the years 140 and 87 BC. This paper and similar bits of paper surviving from the next century are thick, coarse, and uneven in their texture. They are all made of pounded and disintegrated hemp fibres. Paper historians agree that the earlier Egyptian papyrus sheets should not be referred to as paper, because the fibre strands are woven and not wet-laid (Hunter 1957). The Chinese paper-making craftsmanship was transferred to Arabic and North-African countries, and from there to Europe. The first European paper making was reported in the first half of the 16th century (Hunter 1957). Until the early 19th century, the only raw material available for paper making was rags. Rags are worn-out clothes. Since at that time clothing was solely made of hemp and flax (sometimes cotton), almost all paper in history was thus made of hemp and flax fibres. With the industrial revolution, the need for paper began to exceed the available rag supply. Although hemp was the most traded commodity in the world up to the 1830s (Conrad 1993), the shortage of rags threatened the monopoly for hemp and flax as paper-making fibres. This was the major incentive for inventors and industries to develop new processes to use the worlds most abundant (and cheap) source of natural fibres: our forests. Currently, only about 5% of the world's paper is made from annual plants like hemp, flax, cotton, sugarcane bagasse, esparto, wheat straw, reeds, sisal, abaca, banana leaf, ananas and some other more exotic species. The world hemp paper pulp production is now believed to be around 120,000 tons per year (FAO 1991), which is about 0.05 % of the worlds annual pulp production volume. Hemp pulps are generally blended with other (wood-) pulps for paper production. There is currently no significant production of 100 % true hemp paper. Renewed interest in hemp paper The recent renewed interest in hemp as a paper-making fibre seems to originate from a strong environmental motive. All primary forests in Europe, and most in North America have been destroyed, amongst others for paper production. Now we accuse the nations which still have primary forests of not guarding theirs. In Europe all trees harvested for paper making were intended for that purpose, so there seems to be no valid reason to switch to a non-wood or tree-free fibre source. This of course is a little different in the Americas and in Asia and Australia, where primary forests are cleared at a huge environmental cost. In these regions hemp has a number of advantages as an alternative source of paper-making fibre. Hemp does not need pesticides or herbicides, and yields three to four times more usable fibre per hectare per annum than forests. And last but not least: paper recycling was invented to make up for the mistake of cutting down our primary forests. Technically speaking, one doesnt need to recycle hemp paper, because it is a renewable raw material. One disadvantage of using hemp or other annual plants as fibre source is that the present pulping technology has been optimised for tree-fibre pulping, so some adjustments in the pulping processes need to be made when applying this technology to hemp fibres. Before going into technical details, we will first examine the technology of pulp and paper making. Pulping and paper making Paper making is essentially the rearranging of elementary fibres from whatever source (a tree, a hemp stalk, an old pair of jeans or even a scoop of algae) into a flat thin sheet. Elementary fibres are the basic building blocks of trees and many plants. The average paper making fibre is about 2 mm long and about 20 micrometers (0.02 mm) thick. All fibres are assembled of chains of cellulose molecules, arranged as a rigid structure. These building blocks are glued together with other biological components (lignins, pectins), which give a certain flexibility and strength to the tissue, so that the tree or plant can bend at high stresses, and doesnt break in a storm, and is able to carry its seeds and fruits. The following explains what is needed to process a fibre source into paper (Smook 1982): Pulping (from fibre source to pulp): cleaning: all non-fibrous components need to be removed from the raw material, and the remaining fibres must be cleaned of dirt, rocks and other contaminants. fiberizing: the elementary fibres are taken apart by either chemically removing the glue that holds them together, or mechanically tearing the fibre structure apart. From this step on, the material is referred to as "pulp". cutting: especially hemp fibres are too long to give a homogeneous paper sheet, so the fibres have to be cut to the right size. classification: the fibres suitable for use in paper are separated from the ones too short, too long, too wide, too thin, too crooked, too dirty and too old. Fibres can be classified by weight (centrifugal and gravitational processes) and size (various sieving processes). bleaching: optionally, the suitable fibres may be bleached to a higher "whiteness". The whiter a sheet, the better the contrast with the ink. Old-style pulp mills use chlorine compounds with hazardous side-effects. Modern pulp mills use oxygen-based bleaching (compounds like oxygen, ozone and peroxide). Hemp pulp can be bleached with relatively harmless hydrogen peroxide. For some applications bleaching is not required, for instance for packaging paper and board. refining: this is a separate process step in which the fibre surfaces are "roughened". The greater surface roughness of a fibre, the better it adheres to other fibres in the paper sheet and the greater the strength of the paper. Papermaking (from pulp to paper): Dilution: in order to lay the fibres evenly into a homogeneous sheet, the pulp is diluted with large amounts of water (sometimes up to 200 times as much water as fibre pulp). Formation: the fibre-water slurry is poured on a fine mesh wire. Most of the water will fall through the wire, leaving the fibres to settle into a flat sheet. Drying: in the next steps, the wet sheet is dried by subsequent pressing and steam heating. Sheeting: finally, the formed sheet is cut to the required size. These processes are essentially the same for manual paper making and for modern paper machines, with the difference that the old paper maker put out one handmade sheet per minute, and the state-of-the-art Fourdrinier newsprint paper machine puts out 15,000 square meters a minute: a 10 meter wide sheet at 90 kilometers an hour! Remainders of the hemp pulp industry Although there are thousands of non-wood paper mills in the world, only a few of them use hemp as a fibre source. At present 23 paper mills use hemp fibre, at an estimated world production volume of 120,000 tons per annum. Most of the mills are located in China and India, and produce moderate quality printing and writing paper. Typically, these mills do not really have a fixed source of fibre, but they simply use whatever can be found in the region. About 10 of the mills are located in the western world (US, UK, France, Spain, eastern Europe, Turkey), and these mills produce so-called specialty papers such as: cigarette paper: even popular American cigarette brands have a 50% hemp cigarette paper and filter. Some countries still have legislation prescribing the use of hemp in cigarette paper, because other fibres (like spruce) generate hazardous fumes when incinerated (!). filter paper (for technical and scientific uses) coffee filters, tea bags specialty non wovens insulating papers (for electrical condensators) greaseproof papers security papers various specialty art papers These papers can generally only be produced from special fibres like hemp, flax, cotton and other non-wood fibre sources. The average hemp pulp and paper mill produces around 5000 tons per annum. This should be compared to a normal pulp mill for wood fibre, which is never smaller than 250,000 tons per annum. The only reason the remaining mills can still produce at this extremely small size is that there is a very special use for the pulp. This partly explains the high price for a hemp pulp: about US $2500 per ton versus about US $400 for a typical bleached wood pulp. The remaining mills in the western world are unable to cope with western environmental regulations because of their small size and archaic technology. Some mills survive by shipping their waste water to a large wood pulp mill nearby, others have to close down. There is a clear shift in capacity towards countries that do not as yet take environmental problems very seriously. One reason for the high price of hemp pulp is the inefficient pulping processes used. Another reason is that hemp is harvested once a year (during August) and needs to be stored to feed the mill the whole year through. This storage requires a lot of (mostly manual) handling of the bulky stalk bundles, which accounts for a high raw material cost. Classical pulping technology Most mills predominantly process the long hemp bast fibres, which arrive as bales of cleaned ribbon from preprocessing plants located near the cultivation areas. The bales are opened and fed into a spherical tank, called a digester. Water is added (5 to 10 times the fibre weight), together with the cooking chemicals to remove the "glue" components lignin and pectin from the fibres. Most mills use sodium hydroxide and sulphur cocktails. The fibres are cooked for several hours (sometimes up to eight hours) at elevated temperature and pressure, until all fibres are separated from each other. After cooking, the cooking chemicals and the extracted binding components are separated from the fibres by washing with excess water. This is where most of the polluting waste emerges from the process. Often wastes are discharged as such into the local surface water. The remaining clean fibres are then fed into a Hollander beater, which is best compared to an industrial size bathtub, with a large wheel revolving around a horizontal axis at one point in the tub. The wheel pumps the pulp round and round, and meanwhile cuts the fibres to the right length, and also gives the fibres the required surface roughness for better bonding capacity. This beating goes on for up to twelve hours per batch. Some mills add bleaching chemicals in this beating process, other mills pass the pulp from the beating machines to separate tanks for bleaching. These separate bleaching treatments often use chlorine compounds, which are also discharged into the environment. The bleached pulp is then ready to be pumped to the paper machine, or can be pressed to a dryness suitable for transportation to a paper mill elsewhere. The processing time of more than twenty hours make this process very expensive, as the costly equipment and handling must be depreciated over a very low throughput. Necessity for new technology New applications for hemp as a paper making raw material require a new pulping technology which must be able to use hemp from wet storage. Some new technologies have been developed, albeit in laboratory or on pilot scale. The next item in this series about hemp pulping and papermaking will discuss these new technologies and their benefits. References Abel E.L. 1980. Marihuana, the first twelve thousand years. Plenum press, New York, 289 pp. Conrad C., 1993. Hemp, lifeline to the future. Creative Xpressions Publishing, Los Angeles, California. FAO 1991. The outlook for pulp and paper to 1995. Paper products, and industrial update. Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations, Rome. Hunter, D. 1957. Papermaking, the history and technique of an ancient craft. 2nd Ed. Albert A. Knopf Smook G.A. 1982. Handbook for pulp & paper technologists. 2nd Ed. Angus Wilde Publications, Vancouver, B.C. Temple R.K.C, 1986. China, land of discovery and invention. Patrick Stevens Ltd., United Kingdom. NextWT01-B20-119IA087-000631-B006-88http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0005.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074146 text/html 3549HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:41:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:22:04 GMTContent-length: 3334 Commercial hemp cultivation in the Netherlands in the 17th and 18th centuries Commercial hemp cultivation in the Netherlands in the 17th and 18th centuries From the late middle ages until the 19th century hemp was grown in the Netherlands for use in the fishing industries. Further light has been shed on this interesting subject by a study carried out at Wageningen Agricultural University with financial support from the Historical Research Foundation, which is part of the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO). By the end of this year, H. Hoogendoorn will publish the results of this study in his PhD thesis. The rise of commercial hemp cultivation was associated with an increasing demand for vegetable oils and for fibrous materials. In a sea-faring nation such as the Netherlands, there was a major demand for hemp fibre as the raw material for making ropes, sails and fishing nets. This demand was very large during the 17th century, which for the Dutch was their Golden Century. The herring fleet and the sailcloth industry gave preference to hemp produced in the Netherlands for the manufacture of nets, rigging and cordage, and sails. (The word canvas is, in fact, derived from the Latin word Cannabis) The sail makers required a fine type of fibre and Dutch hemp producers introduced specific processes in order to meet this demand. This commercial chain from raw material to finished product provided a living for a large number of specialists such as hacklers (who combed the fibres), spinners, weavers and sail canvas manufacturers and represented a significant contribution to the contemporary economy. The Dutch model became an example for the other countries. Commercial hemp cultivation was a specialty in the western part of the central Netherlands, and required a number of special facilities in the areas of agricultural engineering, hydraulic engineering and commercial management. The hemp farmers grew the crop on a small scale using advanced water-supply methods, and largely as a monoculture, therefore necessitating the intensive use of manure. Hemp cultivation was a labour-intensive activity, and the process of "retting", in which the crop was soaked in water in ditches to separate the fibres, led to a high level of environmental pollution. After the 17th century, developments on both the supply and demand sides led to the gradual decline of hemp cultivation. Dutch maritime activity had passed its zenith, and other fibrous products such as flax, cotton, jute and even silk competed with hemp. Moreover, cheaper hemp was imported from eastern Europe. It became increasingly difficult for Dutch hemp farmers to produce at a profit, and they therefore gradually changed over from a combination of hemp growing and cattle rearing to dairy farming. Current overproduction in the foodstuffs sector means that agricultural interest is once again being shown in hemp, while new industrial applications for hemp fibres are also being studied. Further information can be obtained from: Harmen Hoogendoorn (Wageningen Agricultural University), telephone +318370 82478, -82096, -23241, fax +318370 84763. NextWT01-B20-120IA087-000631-B006-113http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0006.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074157 text/html 6223HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:41:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:22:01 GMTContent-length: 6008 The UK hemp project in 1993 The UK hemp project in 1993 Ian Low, Director Hemcore Ltd. Station Road, Felsted, Essex CM6 3HL, United Kingdom Pulling, retting, grassing, breaking, scutching and hackling were going on in East Anglia in Elizabethan times. There was even a law which enforced hemp growing on pain of a fine. The hemp produced was quite coarse and was used for smocks, sheets, bolsters, fishing nets and rope. All over the area there are village names to remind us of the long hemp growing tradition such as Hempstead, Heckfield and Bleach Green. So in 1993 when Hemcore was formed by two East Anglian businesses to redevelop the hemp crop in the area, we were treading a well-worn path, albeit one that hadn't been walked for 50 years. The reasoning behind our move into hemp production involved a common mixture of circumstances and opportunities, in detail: Market Openings: for the fibre into paper and textiles, for the core of the plant as livestock bedding, for the seed as fishing bait and bird seed. Growing Opportunities: with farmers looking for alternative crops to remove the pressure from over production in most of the main arable crop markets. Environmental Benefits: which were commonly seen as coming from hemp cultivation, both in the growing crop and in the replacement of synthetic or imported products in the market place. The project In 1992 my partner Robert Lukies and myself set up a trials programme covering as many different varieties of hemp as we could obtain. These trials were taken through to harvest at Hatfield Broad Oak in Essex and the resulting plants were trial processed. Following the successful outcome of these trials, a decision was made to go ahead with a commercial venture. An application was made to the British Home Office for a licence to grow 600 ha (1,500 acres) of hemp in 1993. After considerable discussion a licence was granted on February 18, 1993, and our plans went into action for establishing a new U.K. hemp industry. In March 1993, Hemcore Ltd. was formed. It is owned by Harlow Agricultural Merchants, a large East Anglian Merchanting Company and Robert Lukies, who farms and runs a seed processing business in Essex. During March and April, 30 growers were chosen and sites were approved by the Home Office. The growing crop Drilling took place during the first week of May at approximately 50 kg/ha of seed, drilled 2-3 cm deep on 10-18 cm row widths. We found it important to obtain as fine as possible a seed bed with minimum compaction and used conventional cereal drills for sowing. No agricultural chemicals were used in the growing of the crop, but we did find it very responsive to fertilizer. We used fertilizer rates of about 120 kg/ha of nitrogen, 100 kg/ha of phosphate and 160 kg/ha of potash. The impressive growth rate of the hemp crop is already well known and our crops certainly lived up to expectations, average heights reached were 3 metres with some up to 3.5 m. Maximum heights were reached in early to mid August. There were noticeable plant losses between establishment and full growth, with final plant populations ending at around 180 per metre square. In July and August, a number of incidents occurred where people stole cuttings of our contract crops. It is extremely doubtful whether they were rewarded for their troubles, but they were certainly of considerable nuisance value and caused the authorities some concern. One particularly troubled crop was harvested in early August to get it out of the way, otherwise harvesting did not begin until September. The harvest September and early October were very wet in East Anglia in 1993. This proved a considerable test of our pioneering harvest plans. Whilst we tried different machines and methods, the mainstay of our operation hinged on a modified rape swather and John Deere Round Balers. We are particularly grateful to the latter company for their wholehearted support. Although weather conditions delayed a large proportion of the baling until mid October, we were delighted by the condition of the crop, and in the end every hectare of every field was cleared. Following such a steep learning curve, we intend to put into practice for the '94 harvest a number of new plans that give us a lot of confidence for the long-term future of hemp production. The market I will not go into detail on processing, as a large amount of what we are doing is at the prototype stage and all of it is confidential. Suffice to say that we have at the moment two products coming out of the factory, fibre from the stem sheath for paper and possibly for the textile trade, and the core of the stem which is going into the livestock bedding market. Both products have created a lot of interest and there seems at the moment to be good demand. Summary 1993 was a year of considerable achievement for Hemcore. The ripples from what we have done have gone round the world. We succeeded in a difficult year to grow and harvest 600 hectares of hemp and we will build on this in 1994. We have continued to do extensive variety and agronomic trials and these too will be extended this year. Processing caused us many more problems than we originally envisaged. Marketing will also present a challenge as the present volumes are only satisfying a small niche market. We have made it clear from the outset that Hemcore's philosophy, unlike that of much of the agricultural world, will be to satisfy market leads, not to be output driven. Ian Low, DirectorHemcore Ltd.Station Road,Felsted, Essex CM6 3HL, United Kingdom NextWT01-B20-121IA087-000631-B006-145http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0007.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074218 text/html 6003HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:42:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:58 GMTContent-length: 5788 Hemp or wood: potential substitutes Hemp or wood: potential substitutes V.S. Krotov The Ukranian Pulp and Paper Research Institute 18/7 Kutuzovstreet, Kiev 252133, Ukraine Introduction Three major factors are restraining the development of the pulp and paper industry of Ukraine: 1. The capital costs for the construction of new production facilities are high, with payback time often exceeding the normative service life of the main process equipment. 2. The current obsolete equipment causes environmental problems, as it has a high consumption of raw materials, water and energy and a relatively low yield of finished products. Over 10 % of the raw materials, the pulping chemicals, and almost all bleaching agents are discharged into the environment. 3. Ukraine is sparsely wooded, and a lack of traditional raw materials hampers the development of its pulp and paper industry. Forests take up only 13.2 % of its territory, and logging covers about one third of its pulp requirements. At the same time, Ukraine's agriculture generates millions of tons of fibrous products: cereal straw, sunflower and corn stems, flax, hemp and others. In this paper fibre hemp as a raw material for paper pulp will be compared to poplar. Pulping of non-wood raw materials In principle, all fibre-containing by-products can be used for pulping, but their processing in the pulp and paper industry is more expensive than the processing of wood. Agricultural by-products are more bulky and dispersed over larger territories than wood, making their transport and storage more costly. Other factors increasing the costs of pulping of non-wood raw materials using existing technologies are: -heterogenous morphology of the raw material containing stems, leaves, spikes, seeds etcetera, and the presence of non-fibrous impurities (e. g. soil), -high ash content of raw materials and especially the presence of silicon compounds, -lower pulp yield as compared to wood pulping. The negative effect of these factors on production and environmental safety can be minimized by additional expenses for the preparation of raw materials, the removal of silicon and the disposal of wastes. However, the extra costs involved would make non-wood pulp more expensive than wood pulp. Poplar or hemp? The development of a competitive pulp industry in sparsely wooded countries requires: 1. Setting up plantations of fast-growing plants with a high yield of fibrous raw materials, 2. The development of a new technology adapted to the specific characteristics of local raw materials, including agricultural by-products. For the conditions of Ukraine, the choice of plants to be grown on plantations and to be used for pulp and paper is limited to fast-growing poplars or hemp. The technology for growing poplar in short rotation (12 years) plantations has been developed by one of the Ukrainian Research Stations. In the south of Ukraine, Toropogritsky's poplar is recommended for growing. The annual increment of such poplar plantations on irrigation areas of the Kherson Region varies from 20 to 40 m3/ha, depending on fertility, planting pattern and irrigation practice. Taking an average annual increment of 30 m3/ha, and a poplar wood density of 420 kg/m3, we obtain an amount of wood of 12.6 ton per ha per year. A feasibility study for such poplar plantations has shown that the costs of the wood were four to five times higher than those of aspen wood logged and delivered to the Kherson Pulp and Paper Mill from Central European regions of Russia. Hemp is promising as a raw material for pulp and paper. Southern hemp is most suitable for growing under the conditions of Ukraine, since it is hardy, suffers little damage from pests and diseases, and can be grown in monoculture for many years. At present its yield of dry stems is 8-10 ton/ha in many areas, which is four to five times more than the average annual increment in Ukranian forests and approaches the increment of the most productive plantations of fast growing poplars. Perspectives The Ukranian Institute of Bast Crops (UIBC) at Glukhov, Sumy Region, has bred hemp cultivars containing practically no psycho-active components. Until the present the hemp selection was aimed at breeding varieties for the textile industry, i.e. the selection work took into account the bast portion of the stem, as well as the content of THC. In the pulp and paper industry, the entire stem can be used. Based on its large experience, the UIBC expects it can breed cultivars yielding 12-14 ton/ha of dry stems. In this case the stem yield is comparable to the wood yield of the best polar hybrids. As opposed to hardwoods such as poplar, hemp can meet all the requirements of the paper industry for short- and long-fibred pulps for practically any paper or board grade.In 1992, UIBC compared the labour costs of growing and harvesting hemp to those of poplar. Proceeding from the present average yield of 6 ton/ha for hemp and from an annual increment of poplar of 12.6 ton/ha, the costs were comparable. Thus, hemp plantations are more efficient than poplar plantations as a source of raw materials for the pulp and paper industry. However, the advantages of hemp can be realized only if a new technology allowing pulping of the entire stem is developed. Such a technology has been developed at the Ukrainian Pulp and Paper Research Institute. Its basic concepts are summarized in a research proposal (page 28) and will be presented more in detail in a future paper. NextWT01-B20-122IA087-000631-B007-31http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0008.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074311 text/html 9738HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:42:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:53 GMTContent-length: 9523 Hemp in Australia Hemp in Australia The Tasmanian Hemp Company In the beginning "What happens to those beautiful native forests in Tasmania?" was the question posed in a Dutch living-room in 1988 when we were sharing photographs and experiences. After explaining that a good proportion ended up as woodchips for Japan which we then bought back as paper, a friend said that he had seen something on Dutch TV about hemp for paper. I was brought up as a logger's daughter in Tasmania, and began to feel very angry with myself for not having seen beyond trees for paper. So began our long search to track down this curious phenomenon. Our lives are now totally dominated by hemp, despite the warnings of a visiting Dutch Hemp Project leader not to let it do so.Frits' niece helped us to locate the Dutch university students researching hemp and our knowledge (and Frits' translation skills) began to improve dramatically. Since then, we have visited the Dutch Hemp Project's pulp researchers and the research farm and hosted two of the top researchers for a whirlwind tour here in 1993. The Tasmanian hemp story Our achievements, apart from notoriety and positive public education throughout Australia, include three annual licensed trials of low-THC hemp supervised by the University of Tasmania. Frits harvested our 1994 trial between a morning rehearsal and evening orchestral concert with the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra at the end of March. Our bureaucrats are nervous about the venture, but have not yet put a stop to our endeavours, although they suggest that we should walk before we run. In our opininon we have walked for too long: the world can't wait for sensible solutions and our campaign has broadened from hemp for paper to hemp for just about everything! Tasmanian farmers are most interested and the general public is supportive. The only abusive phone call we ever had was from an elderly ex-employee of one of Australia's pulp and paper manufacturers who claimed the Dutch were "decadent"! We set up the Tasmanian Hemp Company to help our negotiations with government and business. We had already founded the Hemp for Paper Consortium Incorporated, a small non-profit community association aiming to spread information on the agricultural, industrial and environmental benefits of a hemp industry. I began by submitting a plan to the Tasmanian Government in February 1991 for an environmentally sound pulp mill based on hemp. This was in answer to a call for expressons of interest in a Northern Tasmanian Pulp and Paper Mill. Frits' translations of Dutch research as well as information gathering since 1988 provided the basis for the submission. The later establishment of the company was seen as a practical example of promoting an industrial approach to hemp, a lead which the consortium had hoped would be taken up by business people in Tasmania. This did not happen, however, mainly through lack of government interest. Considering the enormous obstacles placed in the way of the Hemp for Paper Consortium Incorporated when lobbying for licences to grow hemp, it is little wonder that others have not wanted to venture in. Our company is the first importer of hemp fabric to Tasmania. We are sewing this into clothes which we sell, to promote products that could be produced from fibre grown here. Our biggest step will be achieving a commercial licence to grow hemp here in Tasmania, for which we began negotiations with the Tasmanian government officials recently.It is interesting to note that our licence applications now need to go through the Poppy Advisory Board of Tasmania. Tasmania is the only Australian state which grows opium poppies. The poppy officials are nervous of Tasmania's "clean" image being ruined by the media painting Tasmania as the drug state of Australia, were we also to grow hemp. They insist that the low THC content of our crop will not get in the way of a good story. Our objectives Long-term: to develop hemp as a new crop and a sustainable industry which will help overcome Australia's problems of soil degradation, pollution from agricultural chemicals, and controversy over the use of native forests. Short-term: a) to provide organically grown hemp for export to existing markets, b) to set up separating machinery in Tasmania as a first step to down-streaming, so that companies in Tasmania interested in either the bast or core fibre can be supplied (e.g. to replace expensive, imported Kraft pulp; to provide horse bedding), c) to set up a small integrated pulp/paper/textile/fluff mill in Tasmania. Patsy & Frits Harmsen, Directors, Tasmanian Hemp Company, 430 Tinderbox Road, Tinderbox, 7054 Tasmania, Australia. Tasmanian trials During the 1992/93 growing season, the University of Tasmania at Hobart, carried out field trials together with the Tasmanian Hemp Company to investigate the production potential of fibre hemp in Tasmania. The dioecious Hungarian cultivar Kompolti was sown in a replicated field experiment at a rate of 50 kg/ha of seed. Sowing dates were November 2, 16 and 30 and the experimental plots were harvested about 4 months later. All crops emerged rapidly within a week of sowing, and full ground cover was reached soon. Weeds were effectively smothered, so no extra control methods were required. No significant pest or disease damage was observed. Irrespective of sowing time, plants started to form inflorescences in the middle of January, which slowed down vegetative growth in favour of reproductive development. Yields were 8.0, 8.4 and 6.1 ton/ha of stem dry matter. Delta-9-THC content was measured in young leaves and female inflorescences several times during the growing season, and it was always well below the legal limit of 0.3 %. If better adapted (i.e. later flowering) varieties were used, yields of 10 to 12 ton/ha of stem dry matter could probably be obtained in Tasmania. Wolfgang Spielmeyer, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia. Australia, Eucalypts and Hemp In many countries around the world, the impact of decades of neglect and thoughtless exploitation of the natural environment is beginning to show. Australia is one such country. Despite much rhetoric to the contrary, it remains that our country continues to suffer severe degradation of the land, air and water due to thoughtless agricultural, forest and water management policies. Australia enjoyed unparalleled prosperity for decades, based on the production of wool and wheat. The agricultural base has broadened to include sugar cane, many fruits and cotton for domestic consumption and export. The fragile soils of the Australian continent were not suitable for chemical methods of farming, neither were they able to withstand the impact of imported domestic cattle and sheep. Intensive herbicide and pesticide dependent cultivation methods lead to high costs and decreasing returns. One of the most profound problems has been that of water management. Even though Australia has lush tropical rain forests in the north-east, it is the driest continent on earth. Large scale damming of rivers and sinking bores for irrigation have led to severe salination due to evaporation, concentrating trace amounts of salt present in artesian water. This has been compounded by clearing of tree cover. The most shameful aspect of policy here is to allow the clear-felling of old growth forest to be chipped for Kraft paper. The roots of Eucalyptus trees reach deep into the subsoil to extract water. After clearing of trees, the water table rises, bringing buried salt to the surface. In some parts of the inland river system thousands of hectares have been permanently lost to a smothering layer of salt. Excess phosphates from chemical fertilizers have entered the waterways. With flow rates seriously reduced by irrigation, the protective flushing effect is lost and there have been several outbreaks of toxic blue green algae. Fortunately, there have been small improvements. Forward thinking people have formed a "land care" organization to plant trees and practice more sustainable farming. There is a growing movement in Australia to introduce fibre hemp for the production of fabric and paper, as well as developing a ligno-cellulosic ethanol fuel industry. Despite recent developments in Europe and England, where fibre hemp cultivation under licence is in progress, little cultivation is taking place. The legislative power to regulate hemp is held by each state government. Modest progress has been made in Tasmania by the "Hemp for Paper" Consortium.In New South Wales, the most populous state with the most suitable agricultural land and climate, there has been a complete refusal by the authorities to allow fibre hemp trials, despite the support of Universities, agricultural firms and farmers. Economic projections have indicated that hemp will be a highly profitable crop, provided we can convince the government to follow the United Nations policy on fibre hemp and permit industrial scale trials. Andrew Katelaris, Bio-logical Products, 3 Luton Place, St. Ives 2076, Sydney, Australia. NextWT01-B20-123IA087-000631-B007-52http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0009.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074321 text/html 7775HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:43:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:49 GMTContent-length: 7560 Paper from Dutch hemp? Paper from Dutch hemp? Hayo M. G. van der Werf International Hemp Association, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, The Netherlands From January 1990 until December 1993, a total of 12 research institutes in the Netherlands spent Dfl 17 million (US $9 million) on a hemp research programme. The objective of this programme was to establish whether fibre hemp can be of economic interest to farmers and to the pulp and paper industry in the Netherlands. The major research disciplines within the programme were: plant breeding, crop physiology, plant pathology, harvest and storage technology, pulp technology, and economics and market research. This research yielded a large amount of factual information, which was recently summarized in two reports in Dutch (Bakker et al. 1993, Van Berlo 1993). Several researchers who were involved in the Hemp Research Programme will contribute papers on the results they obtained in their field to this and following issues of this Journal. One of the major results of the programme: a business concept, outlining the required specifications for a viable hemp-paper business to be set up in the Netherlands, is summarized in this article (Van Berlo 1993). The business concept Pulp markets Market research has shown that both high-value and low-value markets are relevant for fibre hemp grown in the Netherlands. High-value pulp markets consist of applications in Light-Weight Coated paper (LWC), sanitary papers and tissues, and 'fluff', which is used in the production of diapers. In the Netherlands, the size of each of these three markets is about 10,000 ton/year. Low-value pulp markets consist of applications in the production of massive and corrugated cardboard. In the Netherlands, the market for hemp pulp for cardboard production is about 160,000 ton/year. Pulp quality specifications, such as whiteness and purity, are lower for low-value markets than for high-value markets. The high-value market is the eventual major objective, but initially pulp will be made for the low-value cardboard market, because it does not require top quality specifications. Pulp technology will be gradually optimised, and pulp production for high-value markets will then be possible. First the LWC market will be approached, and finally the sanitary paper, tissue and fluff markets. The low-value market will continue to be served, as the high-value market probably can not absorb all the pulp produced.Initially, when pulp is produced for low-value markets only, a market price of Dfl 600/ton of pulp is expected. After several years, when pulp will be produced for both high- and low-value markets, a price of Dfl 1,000/ton is possible. Hemp production A hemp-growers cooperative should be set up by arable farmers in the north-east of the Netherlands. In the first year, the members of this cooperative will grow 2,500 hectares (1 hectare or ha = 2.47 acres) of fibre hemp. Over a period of 6 to 7 years, this area will expand to 11,000 ha and the cooperative will consist of a total of 1,000 to 1,100 farmers. In the crop rotation, hemp will replace cereals. Initially a yield of 10 ton/ha of stem dry matter is expected. After 5 years, improved cultivars will be available and an average stem yield of 12 ton/ha is expected. Initially farmers will get Dfl 130/ton of stem dry matter, this price will increase to Dfl 180/ton as pulp production is geared more to high-value pulp markets. In addition, the European Union (EU) supplies a Dfl 1,700/ha subsidy to hemp growers. The crop is harvested in September by contractors who will use modified silage maize harvesters. The crop is ensiled on the farm and sodium hydroxide is added to the chopped stems for preservation. Provided the EU maintains its Dfl 1,700/ha subsidy, and if a an average yield of 12 ton/ha at a price of Dfl 180/ton is obtained five years after the start of the project, the farmer's gross margin (financial yield minus direct costs) will be Dfl 2,343/ha. This is more than the gross margin of wheat and less than that of potato. Pulp production The pulp factory will be set up stepwise. It will start at a production capacity of 20,000 ton/year of pulp. Ensiled hemp will be brought from the farms to the factory and separated into bark and core using a flotation system. Both fractions will be pulped using chemo-mechanical pulp technology. The resulting pulp will meet the requirements of the low-value market. At this scale, pulp technology and waste water treatment technology will be further optimised. The size of the factory will then be increased to 40,000 and finally to 90,000 ton/year by adding parallel chemo-mechanical pulp lines. As the pulping process will be more sophisticated, pulps for the high-value markets will be produced. A total investment of Dfl 127 million would be required for a pulp factory producing 90,000 ton/year for both high- and low-value markets. Financing In order to be economically feasible, the pulp factory should reach a capacity of at least 40,000 ton/year. This would require an investment of Dfl 57 million. Three sources could contribute to this investment: a) Shares. Shares are owned by the hemp growers (Dfl 500/ha), other farmer cooperatives, banks and paper factories. Shares should finance 50 % of the total investment. b) Subsidies. Subsidies from several sources should supply 25 % of the total investment. c) Low-interest loans. These should be supplied by national and regional governments, and make up the remaining 25 % of the total investment.Based on this financial structure and on the other assumptions outlined above, the shares would yield a return on investment of 16 % with a pay back time of 4.8 years. Feasibility of the business concept A committee, consisting of representatives of farmers, the paper industry, farmers cooperatives and of the provincial and national government, was asked to give its advice on the business plan. This committee concluded that some of the assumptions the business plan relies on are uncertain, which make it impossible to decide on its feasibility. The committee recommends further research to resolve the uncertainties. This research should include setting up a pilot plant producing 1,000-5,000 ton/year of pulp, and growing the hemp required to supply the pilot plant. The pilot plant would allow improvement of the pulp technology and a better estimate of the costs involved. This additional research would take about 2 years and cost Dfl 8-10 million. Currently, funding for this pilot research is being solicited from the paper industry and the national and provincial governments. References Bakker H. and M.J.J.M van Kemenade, 1993. Papier uit hennep van Nederlandse grond. Eindrapportage van vier jaar hennep-onderzoek: Samenvatting, conclusies en aanbevelingen. [Paper from hemp grown in the Netherlands. Final report of four years of research on hemp: Summary, conclusions and recommendations.] ATO-DLO, Wageningen, 37 pp Van Berlo J.M., 1993. Papier uit hennep van Nederlandse grond. Eindrapportage van vier jaar henneponderzoek: Business Concept en onderbouwing. [Paper from hemp grown in the Netherlands. Final report of four years of research on hemp: Business Concept and foundations.] ATO-DLO, Wageningen, 222 pp. NextWT01-B20-124IA087-000631-B007-78http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0010.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074329 text/html 5177HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:43:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:45 GMTContent-length: 4962 Review Review Bioregional Fibres, the potential for a sustainable regional paper and textile industry based on flax and hemp. By S. Riddlestone, P. Desai, M. Evans and A. Skyring. Bioregional Development Group, Sutton Ecology Centre, Honeywood Walk, SM5 3NX Carshalton, Surrey, UK. 33, 130 pp. This report, printed on hemp-straw-recycled paper, is a study of the feasibility of reviving the cultivation and processing of flax and hemp as a sustainable industry in south-east England. The first section of the report provides the background of the study. It explains why the authors think that local production for local needs is required for a sustainable society. The environmental and social problems accompanying the growing of cotton and the need for alternatives to cotton are summarized; the link between paper use and the disappearance of ancient forests is outlined. The second section starts with an interesting overview of the history of flax and hemp, followed by a review of cultivation and processing of flax and hemp in the 1990s, with particular emphasis on the situation in the European Union. It discusses textile and paper markets in the UK and evaluates the potential of flax and hemp as sustainable alternatives to cotton and wood. Section three provides details of the expertise and technology available and under development for processing hemp and flax into textiles and paper. It goes into the details of fibre extraction and pulping technologies. The environmental and economic implications of the technologies are discussed.Sections four and five summarize the main points from the previous sections, build models for a bioregional fibre industry in south-east England and present conclusions and recommendations.This study makes very interesting reading for all those interested in fibre hemp. It is well written, well documented and very quantitative. The attitude and approach of this study is nicely illustrated by the following citation from Section II.8, entitled: 'Current and potential uses and markets for hemp': "Much of the information promoted in favour of the revival of hemp comes from the lobby for the legalisation of Cannabis as a recreational drug. Some of these sources are quoted in this section, but our own experience has suggested that in certain instances the case for hemp is overstated. The facts will have to be verified in the field. Nonetheless, hemp is a truly remarkable plant with a myriad of potential uses." For both flax and hemp the study advocates whole crop utilisation. The highest value line fibre should be processed into textiles, the lower value short fibres (tow) should be pulped to produce high quality paper. The woody core (hurds) can be used for paper, composite boards or heat generation. The study points out that currently, there is no hemp textile industry in western Europe. If hemp is to be revived for textile use, considerable investment in machinery would be required. In conclusion, this study provides a realistic assesment of the role fibre hemp may play in a more sustainable society. It indicates the potential of the crop, as well as some problems to be resolved. All in all, this publication seems very much worthwhile for those seriously interested in the topic. HvdW. Review Marijuana, the first twelve thousand years By Ernest L. Abel 1980. Plenum Press, New York US $39, 289 pp. Marijuana, the first twelve thousand years is the single most complete and authorative work on the history of the genus Cannabis. Abel presents his thorough and unbiased investigation of the history of drug Cannabis, as well as the even more ancient uses of Cannabis hemp as a source of edible seed and fiber for the manufacture of paper, rope, and textiles. The detailed explanations of the spread of hashish by the Arabs, and the introduction of hemp to the New World by European colonists, provide fascinating reading for historians and Cannabis aficionados alike. The section presenting the relationship between hemp and slavery is particularly enlightening. Abel describes the strategic importance of supplies of high quality hemp, especially for naval rigging. The Romans, Venetians, Portuguese, Dutch, and English all used the power of hemp to exert their naval might and build trade routes to the world's corners. Abel's sources span a wide range of disciplines, and are well referenced in an extensive bibliography. A detailed index allows ready access to the many facts contained in the text. No Cannabis researchers, nor botanical libraries, could possibly consider their collections complete without including the extensive knowledge contained in Marijuana, the first twelve thousand years. RCC, DPW & HvdW. NextWT01-B20-125IA087-000631-B007-106http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0011.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074341 text/html 17347HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:43:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:42 GMTContent-length: 17131 Interview Interview Professor Dr. Raphael Mechoulam, the discoverer of THC Although research into the psychoactive components of Cannabis began before the start of this century, it was not until 1964 that Dr. Raphael Mechoulam, of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, identified delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) as the most active compound. Mechoulam's discovery led to a lot of research into other natural and synthetic cannabinoids. In recent years many exciting discoveries were made. In 1990 the cannabinoid receptor, the "lock" into which cannabinoids fit, activating the specific biochemical events, was discovered. This of course intensified the search for the cannabinoid-like brain molecule that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. In 1992 William Devane and Raphael Mechoulam identified a natural brain molecule that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. They called it anandamide, from the Sanskrit word for "eternal bliss". While the substance mimics the action of THC, interestingly, it doesn't look anything like it. Additional natural anandamides have since been found and it is speculated that a family of receptors may exist. One thing is certain: the pace of cannabinoid research has picked up and the field is entering a new and exciting era! An exclusive interview (June 17 1994) with the man who has been in the forefront of Cannabis research for the last thirty years: Professor Raphael Mechoulam. David Pate: Can you describe anandamide, its possible function in the brain and where its discovery leads us? Raphael Mechoulam: It has been known since 1988 that THC acts on a specific receptor in the brain. This specific receptor obviously was not built by the brain just for the sake of tetrahydrocannabinol - a compound present in a plant - which is of course foreign to the receptor. Presumably the receptor is present because it has a function, which has nothing to do with a plant constituent. We considered that possibly this particular receptor is activated by a compound found in the brain itself. We succeeded 2 years ago to identify such a compound in pig brain. We called it anandamide. It binds to this cannabinoid receptor. Anandamide differs completely from THC in its structure. THC is an aromatic compound, while anandamide is a fatty acid derivative. It also has a nitrogen atom in it, which is rather unusual for fatty acid derivatives. DP: Any speculation as to why it is there, what it actually does, both the receptor and its ligand? RM: We know that the cannabinoid receptor system is involved in sedation; at high doses THC can even cause catalepsy in animals. In humans we know that Cannabis has a lot of effects which together cause the well known "high". These also include memory effects and some effects on movement. Most of the effects caused by THC are also seen with anandamide in animals. Anandamide has not yet been given to humans but judging from the animal effects these two compounds seem to parallel each other in activity. Whatever THC does, anandamide does as well. DP: What is the role of anandamides in the brain? RM: Anandamides and the receptor are found in areas of the brain which have to do with the coordination of movement, with memory and with emotions. We assume that the brain has anandamides and the receptors to participate in the regulation of movement and to participate in memory and emotions. But there is no proof that this is indeed the case, it is a circumstantial evidence. DP: Since three natural anandamides have been found, how broad do you think the family is? Are there multiple types of receptors? RM: The three anandamides which are known bind to the same receptor. They are actually a family of closely related compounds. This is well known with other fatty acid derivatives in the body which also appear in large families of closely related substances, such as prostaglandins and the leukotriens. The three anandamides so far known seem to have the same biological activity, but once we know more about how and what they do we may find small differences. DP: Are there families of receptors as well? RM: This is another point. In the brain, so far, just one receptor has been found. However, a second receptor has been found in the spleen, it is related chemically to the brain receptor and anandamide binds to both the central receptor (in the brain) and to the peripheral receptor (in the spleen). Anandamide has not been found so far in the periphery, so chances are that the fact that it binds to the receptor in the spleen is just because the structures of the two receptors are somewhat close. Maybe the brain transmits the brain mediator. The peripheral receptor seems to have its own endogenous ligands. As a matter of fact we have found an endogenous compound in the gut which binds to both the central and peripheral receptors. We are working on it at the moment and have not published its structure or function. I think that the peripheral receptor has to do with the immune system as it is well known that THC affects this system. At present however this is just a speculation. DP: Can you further speculate on what triggers production of anandamides naturally and whether they are degraded by an enzyme system like the cannabinoids? RM: Incidentally, also in answer to your previous question, the peripheral receptor is found in the spleen, but there is also a receptor in the testis, we do not know whether it is the peripheral or the central receptor and we know that THC and anandamides act on the sperm. There is a paper in publication in the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences showing that both THC and anandamides act on activation of the sperm before it fertilizes the egg. So it is involved, whether that is relevant or not, I don't know. We do not know what triggers the production of anandamides. Inciden-tally, Bill Devane and J. Axelrod at NIH have now found an enzyme which synthesizes anandamide in the brain from arachidonic acid and ethanolamine. The anandamides are labile compounds and they are degraded by an enzyme - an amidase. DP: Are there interactions between the cannabinoid receptor and other receptors or receptor systems? RM: Most definitely. The cannabinoids (and presumably the anandamides) like most mediators in the body interact with other systems: the dopaminergic, the adrenergic, the opiate systems etc. For example we have found that when anandamides are injected into the brain the concentration of cortical steroids goes up. There are indications that the cortical steroids themselves may act on the cannabinoid receptor, presumably bringing down its activity. DP: Were you surprised that anandamide was the structure it was and not a protein? RM: No, there is no reason why it should be a protein. As a matter of fact, we thought originally that anandamide should be a lipid-soluble compound, because the cannabinoids are lipid-soluble, and therefore chances were that the compound in the body will be lipid-soluble and it turned out to be a fatty acid. DP: How do cannabinoids and anandamides happen to fit into the same receptor, considering their structures are quite different? RM: We assume that in space and in distribution of electronic charges the anandamides and the cannabinoids take up the same kind of structure. A few groups are using models to calculate the electronic densities and the structures of both types of compounds in space and to compare them. However, as yet no definite answer has been provided. DP: Are the relative affinities of cannabinoids and anandamides and their receptors about the same? RM: Anandamides and THC have more or less the same affinity for the receptor. There are synthetic cannabinoids which are a hundred and maybe a thousand times more active than THC. But that is irrelevant, THC and anandamide are not very potent, but then the body does not want very potent compounds. It wants compounds with intermediate potency, because if the potency is very high and there is a chance increase of the compound the body will go into stress. Changes in the body are usually gradual so one does not need very active compounds in the body. This is of course a generalization which does not aply to all body constituents as there are some compounds present in the body which act at extremely low concentrations. DP: Do you think there is sufficient research into cannabinoids and will cannabinoids play a significant role in the future of therapeutic medicine? If so, for what indications? RM: After the identification of delta-9-THC as the active component of Cannabis there was a huge wave of research in chemistry, pharmacology and clinical aspects dealing with this plant constituent. Many thousands of papers were published on it. By the late 1970s research started slowing down as the mode of action was not clear at all. With the discovery of receptors and of endogenous ligands interest has very much increased and numerous new laboratories are working on various aspects. We can expect in the future clarification of many of the problems associated with cannabinoid activity and possibly advances in the field of therapeutics. So far the only cannabinoid which has been legalized is THC for use in cases of vomiting due to cancer chemotherapy. THC has also been used for a few other things like appetite stimulation (in cases of AIDS) as well as in glaucoma. There is also illegal use in some neurological diseases such as spasticity in multiple sclerosis and even in asthma. In the past several companies worked on synthetic cannabinoids as analgetics or in reduction of blood pressure but these projects were terminated. The synthetic compounds produced still caused psychotropic effects which were unacceptable. In the last few years we have synthesized and widely tested a cannabinoid, HU-211, which causes none of the typical psychotropic cannabinoid effects but is a blocker of the action of the stimulatory transmitter glutamic acid, in particular on one of its subreceptors named NMDA. This receptor is involved in stimulatory activity. However, during trauma it causes excessive opening of ion channels in many cells in the vicinity of the trauma. This introduces large amounts of calcium ions into the cells and they may die. Blocking this activity is of considerable potential importance in cases of trauma and possibly stroke, and a company with which we are associated is developing HU-211 as an anti-trauma agent. We expect to start human testing within a few months.The discovery of anandamide has apparently stimulated interest in several pharmaceutical companies. I am aware of a Japanese company which is working in the field as well as a French one. Apparently the French company has discovered an antagonist to anandamide - the first ever described antagonist in the cannabinoid series. They are about to present it at a forthcoming meeting. DP: Do you see the very limited use of cannabinoids in medicine as the result of their intrinsic medicinal value or as the result of the restrictions surrounding them? RM: In the past most companies refrained from working on cannabinoids mostly because of the legal restrictions. It seems reasonable to expect that as at the moment there are no such legal restrictions concerning anandamides it will be easier for companies to start projects in this field. I expect that such research projects will be mostly in the neurological area and possibly in inflammation research and immunology. This assumption is based on the high concentrations of the cannabinoid receptor in the basal ganglia - an area involved in coordination of movement and the peripheral receptor being in the spleen - an organ of immune importance. DP: Do you think new delivery systems would help cannabinoid therapeutics gain more acceptance? RM: Definitely. One delivery system which has not been investigated is the aerosol system. People smoke cannabinoids, this is the best way of getting them into the body, and getting them to act fast. And in asthma for example, THC is known to be a bronchodilator. So if people want to use a compound against asthma, obviously they will prefer inhalation rather than any other way and very little work has been done in this area. DP: Was THC patentable at the time of your discovery? Why didn't you patent its synthesis? RM: We didn't patent THC as it was of no apparent medical use. One cannot patent compounds which have no practical use. DP: I'm thinking now of the Unimed use of this as a pharmaceutical. RM: We didn't patent the synthesis either. I had asked my university authorities about this and they decided against it. There was no apparent practical use of THC or its synthesis. On the other hand we should have patented the major cannabinoid metabolite - THC-11-oic-acid which we identified and synthesized in 1972. This acid stays in the body for a very long time and most tests of cannabinoid use look for the presence of this acid rather than for THC itself. Numerous radio immuno assays are based on this acid and we realize now that it was foolish not to patent it. DP: Is this approach basically a reflection of your background, which is academic rather than industrial? RM: Yes, now we patent quite a few things, we patented HU-211 and that's why a company was willing to take it over. We now patent quite a few more compounds, but at that time we didn't and it is a pity, and the university lost a lot of money. DP: Is there any relatively unknown or unusual Cannabis research, past or present, that deserves a wider mention? RM: Well, if you look at what is going on now, there is a huge amount of research going in all kind of directions. For example, groups working on the immune system may be using the receptor in the spleen. Research goes into subjects like emotions, asking why does Cannabis do what it does? People are looking into schizofrenia and finding some unusual things, some relationship between cannabinoids and schizofrenia, I think it has to do with the receptor. Even though all these things are not well defined, I am under the impression that there is a burst of research in many directions. Where that will lead I don't know. I think that the most promising approach is to look into neurological problems, coordination of movement and things of that sort. DP: So the cannabinoids serve less as prototypes for drugs per se, but rather as probes of the systems, which other drugs may be later able to affect. RM: Many if not most drugs used today are really structural modifications of natural products, be they plant products of known therapeutic value, or hormones, or transmitters. In most cases the new drugs have less side effects than the natural product. I expect that this is going to happen with the cannabinoids and anandamides. Academic and industrial research groups will probably try to modify these molecules in order to minimize the side effects as well as to make the compounds more specific. This is what we did with HU-211 and this is probably going to be done with these compounds in other fields as well. DP: Is there anything else you may want to add to any of the previous questions? RM: Research in the last 20 years has shown that Cannabis differs from most other illicit drugs - it is not a major addictive agent and it seems to act through mechanisms which are quite different from those of the opiates and cocaine. Hence investigations in this field may lead us into understanding of very basic problems in biology such as memory and emotions. There are few tools for work in these areas and any additional one may be of great importance. The National Institute of Drug Abuse of the USA which is the major granting agency in the field of drug abuse is looking into cannabinoids with great interest now and this will be of considerable help. I would like to mention that the United Nations which has a huge budget devoted to drug abuse prevention does not support research at all. This is a strange situation and probably reflects the background of the officials dealing with drug abuse at the UN level. They view drug abuse as a social problem with little value of research for the solution of this problem. Too bad. DP: Would you say that the perceptions are changing as cannabinoids are seen less as a source of problems and more as a source of opportunity for exploration? RM: Right, you just put it down very well. DP: Sorry, I didn't want to put words in your mouth. RM: No, no, you just said it. NextWT01-B20-126IA087-000631-B007-133http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0012.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074400 text/html 12302HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:43:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:36 GMTContent-length: 12086 American Hemp Culture Verbatim American Hemp Culture Verbatim extracted from "Fiber Wars" by David P. West, in Hemp Today, E. Rosenthal, ed. "In 1824, domestic hemp was pitted against Russian hemp by rigging the USS Constitution on one side with American and the other with Russian grown hemp, 'and after being thus worn for nearly a year, it was found, on examination, that the Russian rope, in every instance, after being much worn, looked better and wore more equally and evenly than the American.' But the commander said, 'the difference between them was not so great as to warrant a declaration that the proof was conclusive in favor of the Russian....'" Dodge, C. A. 1896. A report on the culture of hemp and jute in the United States. USDA Office of Fiber Investigations. Report No. 8. p.15. "The Federal Government in 1841 authorized a bounty, which allowed for the payment of not more than $280 per ton for American water-retted hemp, provided it was suitable for naval cordage. Many of the planters prepared large pools and water-retted the hemp they produced. But the work was so hard on Negroes that the practice was abandoned. Many Negroes died of pneumonia contracted from working in the hemp-pools in the winter, and the mortality became so great among hemp hands that the increase in value of the hemp did not equal the loss in Negroes." Bidwell, P. W. and J. I. Falconer. 1941. History of Agriculture in the Northern United States: 1620-1860. Carnegie Inst. Washington, D.C. p.365. "There is no reason why hemp culture should not extend over a dozen States and the product used in manufactures which now employ thousands of tons of imported fibers." Dodge, C. A. 1890. The Hemp Industry. USDA Division of Statistics 1: 66. "Several [varieties of hemp] are grown in this country, that cultivated in Kentucky and having a hollow stem, being the most common. China hemp, with slender stems, growing very erect, has a wide range of culture. Smyrna hemp is adapted to cultivation over a still wider range and Japanese hemp is beginning to be cultivated, particularly in California, where it reaches a height of 15 feet. Russian and Italian seed have been experimented with, but the former produces a short stalk, while the latter only grows to a medium height. A small quantity of Piedmontese hemp seed from Italy was distributed by the Department in 1893, having been received through the Chicago Exposition...." Dodge, C. A. 1896. A report on the culture of hemp and jute in the United States. USDA Office of Fiber Investigations. Report No. 8. p.7. "In Nebraska, where the [hemp] industry is being established, a new and important step has been taken in cutting the crop with an ordinary mowing machine. A simple attachment which bends the stalks over in the direction in which the machine is going facilitates the cutting...The cost of cutting hemp in this manner is 50 cents per acre, as compared with $3 to $4 per acre, the rates paid for cutting by hand in Kentucky." USDA. 1902. USDA. Yearbk of Agric. p. 23. "The most important fact to be recorded in connection with the hemp industry during the past year is the successful operation of a machine brake in the fields of Kentucky. This machine breaks the retted stalks and cleans the fiber, producing clean, straight fiber equal to the best grades prepared on hand brakes, and it has a capacity of 1000 pounds or more of clean fiber per hour. So far as we have any record, this is the first machine having sufficient capacity to be commercially practical that has cleaned bast fiber in an entirely satisfactory manner." USDA. 1905 Report of Office of Fiber Investigations. Bureau of Plant Industry. p. 145. "When the work with hemp was begun in Wisconsin, there were no satisfactory machines for harvesting, spreading, binding, or breaking. All of these processes were performed by hand. Due to such methods, the hemp industry in the United States had all but disappeared. As it was realized from the very beginning of the work in Wisconsin that no permanent progress could be made so long as it was necessary to depend upon hand labor, immediate attention was given to solving the problem of power machinery. Nearly every kind of hemp machine was studied and tested. The obstacles were great, but through the cooperation of experienced hemp men and one large harvesting machinery company, this problem has been nearly solved. The hemp crop can now be handled entirely by machinery." Wright, Andrew. 1918. Wisconsin's Hemp Industry. Wisconsin Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin # 293. p.5. "The organized hemp growers of Wisconsin, working in cooperation with the field agent of fiber investigations [Andrew Wright], have so improved the quality and standardized the grades of hemp fiber produced there that it has found a market even in dull times. The hemp acreage in that State has been kept up, although there has been a reduction in every other hemp-producing area throughout the world." USDA. 1921. Annual Report of the Department of Agriculture: Hemp. p. 46. "The crop of hempseed last fall, estimated at about 45,000 bushels, is the largest produced in the United States since 1859. A very large proportion of it was from improved strains developed by this bureau in the hempseed selection plats at Arlington and Yarrow Farms." USDA. Bureau of Plant Industry. 1917. Report of the Chief. p. 12. "Early maturing varieties, chiefly of Italian origin, are being grown at Madison, Wisconsin, in cooperation with the Wisconsin Agricultural Experiment Station. This is the third year of selection for some varieties, and the results give promise of the successful production in that State of seed of hemp fully equal to the Ferrara of northern Italy." USDA. Bureau of Plant Industry. 1918. Report of the Chief. p. 28. "The second-generation hybrid Ferramington, combining the height and long internodes of Kymington with the earliness and heavy seed yield of Ferrara, gives promise of a good fiber type of hemp that may ripen seed as far north as Wisconsin." USDA. Bureau of Plant Industry. 1919. Report of the Chief. p. 21. "The work of breeding improved strains of hemp is being continued at Arlington Farm, Va., and all previous records were broken in the selection plats of 1919. The three best strains, Kymington, Chington and Tochimington, averaged, respectively, 14 feet 11 inches, 15 feet 5 inches, and 15 feet 9 inches, while the tallest individual plant was 19 feet. The improvement by selection is shown not alone in increased height but also in longer internodes, yielding fiber of better quality and increased quantity." USDA. Bureau of Plant Industry. 1920. Report of the Chief. p. 26. "In 1929 three selected varieties of hemp (Michigan Early, Chinamington and Simple Leaf) were grown in comparison with unselected common Kentucky seed near Juneau, Wis. Each of the varieties had been developed by 10 years or more of selection from the progeny of individual plants. The yields of fiber per acre were as follows: Simple Leaf, 360 pounds; Michigan Early, 694 pounds; Chinamington, 1054 pounds; common Kentucky, 680 pounds." USDA. 1929. Bureau of Plant Industry, Annual Report. p. 27. "The hemp breeding work, carried on by the Bureau for more than 20 years, was discontinued in 1933, but practical results are still evident in commercial fields. A hemp grower in Kentucky reported a yield of 1750 pounds per acre of clean, dew-retted fiber from 100 acres of the pedigreed variety Chinamington grown in 1934. This is more than twice the average yield obtained from ordinary unselected hemp seed." USDA. 1935. Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture, p.6. THIS IS AN EXAMPLE OF CRADLE TO GRAVE PLANNING TO THE END RESULT March 30, 1943 The New Deal Bureaucrats and their fellow "dollar a year" fiber racketeers of the War Production Board are now offering Hemp Marijuana (dope) narcotic to the American people instead of increased food production. The American people are footing the bill. In one of the most dastardly propositions ever "cooked" up the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the War Production Board are manipulating the proposition of a promotion and scheme to grow and produce hemp from a plant, outlawed by law, that is the fount of the insiduous [sic] drug known as Marijuana, the worst and most serious source of all (dope) narcotic evils afflicting children, in the schools and outside, and grown-ups alike in all walks of life. The fiber itself from this plant is worthless. The seeds from this plant fly far and wide. The resultant wild growth becomes dangerously uncontrollable. In the face of shortage and scarcity of labor, foodstuffs, linseed oil, fibers and other critical materials which are peculiarly being denied us, these corruptors [sic] of American life are now engaged in the promoting of 350,000 acres, erecting 100 buildings and building a large volume of equipment and machinery in a number of Mid-Western States for the production of this narcotic (dope) plant product, all of which must reach the staggering cost of $500,000,000 and end in catastrophic failure. A number of land-grant educational institutions are in on this racket. The Commodity Credit Corporation and the War Production Board and the Defense Plant Corporation, through their own created socalled [sic] "War Hemp Industries, Inc., Agency," something new in the New Deal bureaucratic set-up, are running this (dope) narcotic show with private racketeers as undercover men. Large profits have been made already by them on the seeds by cheating and gipping [sic] the government. The financial "kill" is figured to be colossal for all the participants. The kill to agriculture, industry, (the choicest and most fertile land or soils are being demanded) and health and welfare of the American people is going to reach disastrous proportions from which recovery may never be found possible. Congressman Hampton P. Fulmer, Chairman, Agricultural Committee, and Congressman Paul Brown, overseeing the Commodity Credit Corporation, and certain other members of the Congress, among them Senators Harry S. Truman and Scott W. Lucas, and Donald M. Nelson, Chairman, War Production Board, and John R. Hutson, President of the government Commodity Credit Corporation, Agricultural Adjustment Administration, etc. (the latter active participant) are acquainted with the facts as are being described here and have been presented to them in detail. The power-pressure of the participants in this narcotic (dope) racket is obviously superior to the best interests of the American people even during these dangerous times of their sacrifices and sufferings at home and on the battle front. The truth of the above report is vouched for. Do you want this (dope) narcotic in your community? You are lined up for it. It is to be noted that increased acreage for guayule rubber has been stopped because of the acute food shortages but though rubber scarcities exist yet. HOWARD D. SALINS, Managing Director Flax and Fibre Institute of America, 6423 North Newgard Avenue Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A. NOTE:---This whole hemp marijuana racket will be dumped out of existence right after the war is over in accordance to with [sic] a statement from Washington, D.C., but obviously not before the "kill" in taxpayers' money has been made and the narcotic has been spread to dope them. Reproduced in Barash, L. 1971. A Review of Hemp Cultivation in Canada. MS. NextWT01-B20-127IA087-000631-B007-165http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0013.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074429 text/html 5622HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:44:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:32 GMTContent-length: 5407 Guide for authors Guide for authors The Journal of the International Hemp Association publishes original research, literature reviews and news items on hemp. Contributions concern fibre, seed and resin, and can come from a wide range of disciplines such as agronomy, chemistry, ecology, economy and markets, genetic resources and breeding, history, medicine, physiology, phytopathology, products and applications, and technology. Since the readership of the IHA Journal is much broader than for a single-discipline journal, highly specialized terminology should be defined or avoided. The significance of a statement, or the reasoning behind a conclusion, may have to be more fully explained than in a more specialized journal. Contributions should be written in English and not exceed 10 double-spaced typed pages (ca. 4000 words), longer contributions may be accepted if they can be serialized in two consecutive issues. Authors not fluent in English should have their paper reviewed and checked by a colleague who is fluent. Manuscripts can be submitted to: IHA Journal, Editorial Office, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, The Netherlands. The preferred medium of submission is on disk with accompanying manuscript in triplicate. Units. Research papers and literature reviews should use the International (SI, or metric) system throughout. Title page. The title page should give the following information: 1) title of the paper; 2) names and addresses of the authors. Abstract. The abstract should be 100 to 250 words suitable for readers from a broad range of disciplines. The abstract should summarize the aim of the work, the methods used, and give the main results and conclusions. Structure. Research papers should be subdivided into four main sections: Introduction, Materials and Methods, Results and Discussion. The last three sections may be subdivided to improve clarity; a Conclusions section may be added if appropriate. The section on Materials and Methods should be succinct, but should contain sufficient detail to enable the reader to deduce what exactly was done. All abreviations and acronyms must be fully defined when first used. Numerical results should be shown in tables or figures. References. Publications are cited in the text by author(s) and date e.g. (Smith 1980). For publications by more than two authors use (first author et al. date). Under references, papers should be cited as follows: Journal articles: Pate D. W., 1983. Possible role of ultraviolet radiation in evolution of Cannabis chemotypes. Economic Botany 37: 396-405. Bedetti R., R. Ciarrocca and N. Ciaralli, 1979. Caratteristiche chimiche di sette cultivar di canapa. [Chemical characteristics of seven hemp cultivars.] Cellulosa e Carta 29: 25-34. Book: Clarke R. C., 1980. Marijuana Botany. And/Or Press, Inc., Berkeley, California. Part of a book: Adler M. W. and E. B. Geller, 1986. Ocular effects of cannabinoids. Pages 51-70 in R. Mechoulam, ed., Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. Manuscript preparation. The entire manuscript, including abstract and references, should be typed on one side of standard-size paper, double spaced with all margins 2.5 cm. Starting with the title page, label all pages in the upper righthand corner with the first author's last name and the page number. Do not use hyphens unless the hyphen is part of the word. Tables should fit on one page, be numbered consecutively, and each table should be on a separate sheet. Every figure and table should have an explanatory title, so that it can be understood without reference to the text. For both tables and figures, authors should indicate on the manuscript the preferred position of insertion in the text of the paper. Every table and figure should be mentioned at least once in the text. Manuscript submission. Manuscripts should be submitted in triplicate to: Editorial Office, IHA Journal, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, The Netherlands. All research papers and literature reviews will be carefully refereed for international relevance and quality. Submission of an article is understood to imply that the article is an original contribution that has not been published elsewhere in substantially the same form, and that it is not being considered for publication elsewhere. Electronic manuscripts. Once a paper is accepted, the preferred medium of submission is on 3.5 inch disk (Macintosh or MS-DOS format), preferably MS word 5.0 or later, with accompanying manuscript. It is important that the file on disk and the printout are identical. Do not allow the word processor to introduce word splits and do not use a 'justified' layout. It is very important that files are saved in the word processor format. If the word processor features the option to save files "in flat ASCII", please do not use it. Please ensure that only the relevant file (one complete article) is on the disk. Also, specify the type of computer and word processing package used and label the disk with the first author's name and the name of the file on the disk. NextWT01-B20-128IA087-000631-B007-198http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0014.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074445 text/html 638HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:44:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:28 GMTContent-length: 424 CannabAds CannabAds CannabAds Information. Size : 4 cm high and 8 cm wide. US $100. Give ad location preferences. Add must be delivered camera ready to the JIHA 60 days before printing (1 June and 1 December). The JIHA reserves the right to refuse any ad we find untruthful, deceptive or objectionable. NextWT01-B20-129IA087-000631-B007-222http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N1/iha0015.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074455 text/html 5770HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:44:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:21:26 GMTContent-length: 5555 Clean hemp pulp technology Clean hemp pulp technology At the Ukranian Pulp and Paper Research Institute (UPPRI) a new ammonia-sulfite-alcohol drip percolation pulping technology has been developed on laboratory scale. Current pulping technology for bast fibre crops such as hemp and kenaf requires the separation of the stems into bast and core. The processes of removal, storage and utilisation of the core involve environmental and technical problems which had not been solved so far. The pulping of the bast encounters problems associated with the tendency of its long fibres to twist. The new drip percolation technology makes it possible to process the whole hemp stem into pulp. Costs for capital, energy and labour are less than with current technologies and environmental pollution is strongly reduced. The UPPRI wants to set up a pilot plant with a capacity of 7 ton/day of air dried pulp to further develop and optimize the new technology. The project will be partially financed from the institute's budget. The UPPRI is looking for parties interested in this project. A more detailed proposal is available at the IHA, or inquiries can be made to The Ukranian Pulp and Paper Research Institute: 18/7 Kutuzovstreet, Kiev 252133, Ukraine. Marijuana and driving ability After alcohol, Cannabis is the drug which is found most often in the blood of drivers involved in road accidents. The effects of THC, the major psychoactive component of Cannabis, on driving ability have been investigated by Dr. H.W.J. Robbe at the Institute of Human Psychopharmacology of the University of Limburg in Maastricht, The Netherlands. In his PhD thesis, "Influence of Marijuana on Driving" (available through the IHA), which Robbe defended on May 26, he concludes that marijuana is not a safe drug in traffic. After using marijuana drivers were less able to drive in a straight line. However, compared to the effects of alcohol and many medicines (antidepressants and sedatives) on driving ability, the effects of marijuana are not exceptional. The use of a moderate amount of marijuana did not affect driving ability, but the drivers thought their ability had been negatively affected. The use of a moderate amount of alcohol had a negative effect on driving ability, while the drivers thought their performance had not been affected. The use of alcohol seems to stimulate risky behaviour, whereas the use of marijuana leads to a more prudent driving style. Higher yields from late hemp By growing very late-flowering cultivars at a relatively low plant density, fibre hemp yields can be much higher than when using conventional cultivation techniques. This is the main practical conclusion from the research on fibre hemp conducted by Dr. H.M.G. van der Werf at the Research Institute for Agrobiology and Soil Fertility and the Agricultural University in Wageningen, The Netherlands. In his PhD thesis, "Crop physiology of fibre hemp" (available through the IHA), which van der Werf defended on June 30, he concludes fibre hemp may be an interesting new crop. Traditionally fibre hemp is sown very densely (300-400 plants/m2), and harvested in August. By using late-flowering hemp cultivars and harvesting these at the end of September the growing season is longer and yields can be increased by about 30 %. Such late high-yielding hemp crops are not compatible with the traditional high plant density. As a result of severe inter-plant competition, many plants die during August and September in these late crops ("self-thinning"). As a consequence of the occurrence of self-thinning, in fibre hemp optimum plant density is lower when the yield is higher. In our next issue, Vol. 1 No. 2 Dec. 1994 Harvesting fibre hemp Chemical ecology of Cannabis Marijuana's microbes Hemp pulp technology Cannabis use and driving Interview: Ivan Bocsa PLUS MORE ! Membership Application Form Send this form to: International Hemp Association, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Please enclose the annual fee, preferably as an International Postal Money Order or an American Express or Thomas Cook Money Order. 1994 membership fees, student: US $25, individual: US $50, sustaining US $100 or more. (PLEASE PRINT) Name/organisation............................................................................................. Street address........................................................................................................ City............................................State/Province................................................. Postal code........................... Country.............................................................. Tel................................ fax............................. e-mail........................................ Membership: O Student O Individual O Sustaining Main field of interest or expertise.......................................................................... Can we include your name, address and field of interest or expertise in a membership list to be made available to our members? O Yes O No Date............................. Signature Journal of the International Hemp Association, Volume 1, Number 1, 1994. WT01-B20-130IA087-000631-B008-39http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01201.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074519 text/html 55752HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:45:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:10 GMTContent-length: 55536 Chemical ecology of <em>Cannabis</em> Chemical ecology of Cannabis David W. Pate International Hemp Association, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, The Netherlands Pate, D.W., 1994. Chemical ecology of Cannabis.Journal of the International Hemp Association 2: 29, 32-37. The production of cannabinoids and their associated terpenesin Cannabis is subject to environmental influences aswell as hereditary determinants. Their biosynthesis occurs inspecialized glands populating the surface of all aerialstructures of the plant. These compounds apparently serve asdefensive agents in a variety of antidessication, antimicrobial,antifeedant and UV-B pigmentation roles. In addition, the moreintense ambient UV-B of the tropics, in combination with the UV-Blability of cannabidiol, may have influenced the evolution of analternative biogenetic route from cannabigerol totetrahydrocannabinol in some varieties. Figure 1.Resin-producing stalked glandular trichome (Briosi and Tognini1894). Introduction Cannabis may have been the first cultivated plant.Records indicate use of this crop for paper, textiles, food andmedicine throughout human history (Abel 1980). It is a dioeciousannual with rather distinctive palmate leaves, usually composedof an odd number of leaflets. Best growth occurs on recentlydisturbed sites of high soil nitrogen content, so it is commonlyfound as a persistent weed at the edge of cultivated fields.Mature height ranges from 1 to 5 meters, according toenvironmental and hereditary dictates. Typically, the male plantis somewhat taller and more obviously flowered. These flowershave five yellowish tepals, and five anthers that hangpendulously at maturity, dispersing their pollen to the wind. Thefemale plant exhibits a more robust appearance due to its shorterbranches and dense growth of leaves and flower-associated bracts.Its double-styled flower possesses only a thin, closely adherentperianth, but is further protected by enclosure in a cuplikebracteole (i.e., perigonal bract), subtended by a usuallymonophyllous leaflet. A single achene is produced per flower andshed or dispersed as a result of bird predation. The life cycleof the male is completed soon after anthesis, but the femalesurvives until full seed ripeness. Cannabis seems a virtual factory for the productionof secondary metabolic compounds. A variety of alkanes have beenidentified (Adams, Jr. and Jones 1973, De Zeeuw et al.1973b, Mobarak et al. 1974a & 1974b), as well asnitrogenous compounds (ElSohly and Turner 1976, Hanus 1975b),flavonoids (Gellert et al. 1974, Paris et al.1975b, Paris and Paris 1973) and other miscellaneous compounds(Hanus 1976a & 1976b). Terpenes appear in abundance (Hanus1975a, Hendricks et al. 1975) and contribute to thecharacteristic odor of the plant (Hood et al. 1973) andsome of its crude preparations, such as hashish. The compoundswhich comprise the active drug ingredients are apparently uniqueto this genus and are termed cannabinoids. Cannabinoids wereoriginally thought to exist as the phenolic compounds, but laterresearch (Fetterman et al. 1971a, Masoud and Doorenbos1973, Small and Beckstead 1973, Turner et al. 1973b) hasindicated their existence predominantly in the form of carboxylicacids which decarboxylate readily with time (Masoud and Doorenbos1973, Turner et al. 1973b), upon heating (De Zeeuw etal. 1972a, Kimura and Okamoto 1970) or in alkalineconditions (Grlic and Andrec 1961, Masoud and Doorenboos 1973).There are over 60 of these type compounds present in the plant(Turner et al. 1980). Much has been published concerning the influence of heredityon cannabinoid production (e.g., Fetterman et al. 1971b,Small and Beckstead 1973), but ecological factors have long beenthought to have an important influence by stressing the Cannabisplant (Bouquet 1950). The resultant increased biosynthesis of thecannabinoid and terpene containing resin, in most cases, seemslikely of advantage to the organism in adapting it to a varietyof survival-threatening situations. This work reviews thesebiotic and abiotic challenges and speculates on the utility of Cannabisresin to the plant. Anatomical distribution and biogenesis of the cannabinoids The major sites of cannabinoid production appear to beepidermal glands (Fairbairn 1972, Hammond and Mahlberg 1973,Lanyon et al. 1981, Malingre et al. 1975) whichexhibit a marked variation in size, shape and population density,depending on the anatomical locale examined. While there are nopublished reports of glands present on root surfaces, most of theaerial parts possess them, along with non-glandular trichomes (DePasquale et al. 1974). These epidermal glands seem tofall into two broad categories: stalked and sessile. The stalkedgland (Fig. 1, front page) can consist of a single cell or smallgroup of cells arranged in a rosette on a single or multicellularpedestal. Lack of thorough ontogenetic study has led to thespeculation that some of this variation may be attributable toobservation of various developmental stages (Ledbetter andKrikorian 1975). The sessile gland possesses no stalk and hassecretory cells located at or below the epidermal surface(Fairbairn 1972). In either case, the glandular cells are coveredwith a "sheath" under which the resins are secreted viavesicles (Mahlberg and Kim 1992). This sheath consists of acuticle that coats a polysaccharide layer (presumed cellulose)originating from the primary cell wall (Hammond and Mahlberg1978). The resins accumulate until the sheath bulges away fromthe secretory cells, forming a spheroid structure. The resin isthen released by rupture of the membrane or through pores in itssurface (De Pasquale 1974). The cannabinoid content of each plantpart varies, paralleling observable gland distribution (Fetterman etal. 1971, Honma et al. 1971a & 1971b, Kimuraand Okamoto 1970, Ohlsson et al. 1971, Ono et al.1972), although Turner et al. (1978) have disagreed.Roots contain only trace amounts. Stalks, branches and twigs havegreater quantities, although not as much as leaf material.Vegetative leaf contains varying quantities depending on itsposition on the plant: lower leaves possessing less and upperones more. Leaf glands are most dense on the abaxial (underside)surface. The greatest amount of cannabinoids is found in the newgrowth near each apical tip (Kimura and Okamoto 1970, Steinberg etal. 1975), although Ono et al. (1972) seem todiffer on this point. This variation in leaf gland placement maybe due to either loss of glands as the leaf matures or a greaterthe endowment of glands on leaves successively produced as theplant matures. Additional study on this point is required. Once sexual differentiation has occurred, the generation offemale reproductive organs and their associated bracts increasestotal plant cannabinoid content. Bracts subtending the femaleflowers contain a greater density of glands than the leaves. Thesmall cuplike bracteole (perigonal bract) enclosing the pistilhas the highest cannabinoid content of any single plant part(Kimura and Okamoto 1970, Honma et al. 1971a &1971b). Second only to this is the flower itself (Fetterman etal. 1971b). Since it has no reported epidermal glandstructures, the cannabinoids present must be due to eitherundiscovered production sites or simple adherence of resin fromthe inner surface of its intimately associated bracteole. Thisconjecture is supported by the finding that the achenes do notcontain substantial amounts of the cannabinoids (Fetterman etal. 1971b, Ono et al. 1972). Reproductivestructures of the male plant are also provided with greaterconcentrations of the cannabinoids (Fetterman et al.1971b, Ohlsson et al. 1971). Stalked glands have beenobserved covering the tepal, with massively stalked glandsoccurring on the stamen filament (Dayanadan and Kaufman 1976). Inaddition, rows of very large sessile glands are found situated ingrooves on the anther itself (Dayanadan and Kaufman 1976,Fairbairn 1972) and apparently provide the pollen with aconsiderable cannabinoid content (Paris et al. 1975a). Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is the cannabinoidresponsible for the main psychoactive effects of most Cannabisdrug preparations (Mechoulam 1970). In some varieties of Cannabis,additional cannabinoid homologs appear that have the usual pentylgroup attached to the aromatic ring, replaced by a propyl (DeZeeuw et al. 1972b & 1973a, Fetterman and Turner1972, Gill 1971, Gill et al. 1970, Merkus 1971, Vree etal. 1972a, Turner et al. 1973a) or occasionally amethyl group (Vree et al. 1971 & 1972b). Otherclaims have been made for butyl (Harvey 1976) or heptyl (Isbell1973) substitutions, but the latter announcement seemsparticularly tenuous. THC is thought to be produced by the plant(Fig. 2, next page) from cannabidiol (CBD) which, in turn, isderived from cannabigerol (CBG) generated from non-cannabinoidprecursors (Hammond and Mahlberg 1994, Shoyama et al.1984, Turner and Mahlberg 1988). CBG is also the biogeneticprecursor of cannabichromene (CBC). Some of the cannabinoids(e.g., cannabielsoin, cannabinol, and cannabicyclol) are probablydegradation products of the enzymatically produced cannabinoids(e.g., CBD, THC and CBC, respectively). Figure 2.Biosynthesis of cannabinoid acids (redrawn after Shoyama etal. 1975): 1 = cannabigerol (CBG); 2 = cannabidiol (CBD); 3= cannabichromene (CBC); 4 = delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol(THC). Cannabinoids and environmental stress Desiccation THC is a viscous hydrophobic oil (Garrett and Hunt 1974) thatresists crystallization (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1971) and is of lowvolatility (Adams et al. 1941). Since the sticky resinsproduced and exuded on the surface of the plant are varyingcombinations of THC, other cannabinoids and a variety ofterpenes, they can be seen as analogous to the waxy coatings ofthe cacti and other succulents that serve as a barrier to waterloss in dry environments. Bouquet (1950) has mentioned that the western side ofLebanon's mountainous Cannabis growing areas is lessfavorable for resin production because of humid sea winds. DeFaubert Maunder (1976) also observed that the copious separableresin needed for hashish production occurs only "in a beltpassing from Morocco eastwards, taking in the Mediterranean area,Arabia, the Indian sub-continent and ending in Indo-China."These are mostly areas notable for their sparse rainfall, lowhumidity and sunny climate. Is it merely coincidence that resinis produced according to this pattern, as well? Experimental evidence is accumulating that reinforces thesenotions. Sharma (1975) reported a greater glandular trichomedensity on leaves of Cannabis growing in xericcircumstances. Paris et al. (1975a) have demonstrated amarked increase in the cannabinoid content of Cannabispollen with decreased humidity. Murari et al. (1983)grew a range of Cannabis fiber cultivars in threeclimatic zones of Italy and found higher THC levels in thoseplants grown in the drier "continental" (versus"maritime") climate. Hakim et al. (1986)report that CBD-rich English Cannabis devoid of THCproduced significant amounts of THC and less CBD, when grown inthe Sudan. This trend was accentuated in their next generation ofplants. Haney and Kutscheid (1973) have shown significant correlationsof plant cannabinoid content with factors affecting soil moistureavailability: content of clay or sand, percent slope of plot, andcompetition from surrounding vegetation. In some cases, this lastfactor was noted to have induced a stunted plant with"disproportionally smaller roots", which would tend toincrease both the frequency and severity of desiccation stress. In a study of 10 Kansas locations, Latta and Eaton (1975)found wide differences in plant cannabinoid content, observingthat "delta-9-THC ranged from 0.012 to 0.49% andgenerally increased as locations became less favorable for plantgrowth, suggesting increased plant stress enhanced delta-9-THCproduction." Mention was also made of a positive correlationbetween competing vegetation and THC content. Although thesampling area was not considered very moisture deficient, theyspeculated that "Greater difference among locations mighthave been observed under drought conditions." Temperature Temperature may play a role in determining cannabinoidcontent, but perhaps only through its association with moistureavailability. Boucher et al. (1974) reported an increasein cannabinoid content with temperature (32o C. vs. 22oC.), however, some variables such as increased water loss due toaccelerated evaporation and plant transpiration at hightemperatures were left unaccounted. In contrast, Bazzaz etal. (1975), using 4 Cannabis ecotypes of bothtropical and temperate character, demonstrated a definitedecrease in cannabinoid production with increased temperature(32o C. vs. 23o C.). Later studies by Braut-Boucher(1980) on clones of 2 strains from South Africa revealed a morecomplex pattern of biosynthesis according to strain, gender andchemical homologue produced. Clearly, further study of thisparameter is needed. Soil Nutrients Mineral balance seems to influence cannabinoid production.Krejci (1970) found increases related to unspecified "poorsoil conditions". Haney and Kutcheid (1973) have shown theinfluence of soil K, P, Ca and N concentrations on Illinois Cannabis.They report a distinctly negative correlation between soil K andplant delta-9-THC content, although K-P interaction, Nand Ca were positively correlated with it. These minerals werealso shown to affect the production of CBD, delta-8-THCand cannabinol (CBN), although the latter two compounds are nowthought to be spontaneous degradation products of delta-9-THC.Kaneshima et al. (1973) have demonstrated the importanceof optimal Fe levels for plant synthesis of THC. Latta and Eaton(1975) reported Mg and Fe to be important for THC production,suggesting that these minerals may serve as enzyme co-factors.Coffman and Gentner (1975) also corroborated the importance ofsoil type and mineral content, and observed a significantnegative correlation between plant height at harvest and THClevels. Interestingly, Marshman et al. (1976) reportgreater amounts of THC in Jamaican plants growing in"organically" enriched (vs. artificiallyfertilized) soils. Insect predation Wounding of the plant has been employed as a method toincrease resin production (Emboden 1972). This increase may be aresponse to desiccation above the point of vascular disruption.Under natural circumstances, wounding most often occurs as aresult of insect attack. This is a source of environmental stresswhich the production of terpenes and cannabinoids may be able tominimize. Cannabis is subject to few predators (Smithand Haney 1973, Stannard et al. 1970) and has even beenutilized in powdered or extract form as an insecticide (Bouquet1950) or repellent (Khare et al. 1974). Its apparentdefensive mechanisms include a generous covering of non-glandulartrichomes, emission of volatile terpenoid substances, andexudation of the sticky cannabinoids. Cannabis is oftennoted for its aromatic quality and many of the terpenes producedare known to possess insect-repellent properties. Among these arealpha and beta pinene, limonene, terpineol and borneol. Pinenesand limonene comprise over 75% of the volatiles detected in thesurrounding atmosphere, but account for only 7% of the essentialoil (Hood et al. 1973). Consistent with glandulartrichome density and cannabinoid content, more of these terpenesare produced by the inflorescences than the leaves, and theiroccurrence is also greater in the female plant (Martin et al.1961). No insect toxicity studies using isolated cannabinoids havebeen published to date. Rothschild et al. (1977) foundTHC-rich Mexican (vs. CBD-rich Turkish) Cannabisfatal to tiger moth (Arctia caja) larvae, but notNigerian grasshopper (Zonocerus elegans) nymphs.Rothschild and Fairbairn (1980) later found that pure THC (vs.CBD) sprayed on cabbage leaves, does repel the large whitecabbage butterfly (Pieris brassicae). The cannabinoids may also serve as a purely mechanicaldefense. A tiny creature crossing the leaf surface could rupturethe tenuously attached globular resin reservoirs of the glandulartrichomes (Ledbetter and Krikorian 1975) and become ensnared inresin. A sizable chewing insect, if able to overcome thesedefenses, would still have difficulty chewing the gummy resin,along with the cystolithic trichomes and silicified coveringtrichomes also present on the leaf. The utility of theseepidermal features as insect antifeedants is also inferable fromtheir predominant occurrence on the insect-favored abaxial leafsurface. Although the above strategies represent a seeminglysophisticated system, many other plants (Levin 1973) and evenarthropods (Eisner 1970) utilize similar defense mechanisms,often employing identical terpenes! Competition Terpenes may also help to suppress the growth of surroundingvegetation (Muller and Hauge 1967, Muller et al. 1964).Haney and Bazzaz (1970) speculated that such a mechanism may beoperative in Cannabis. They further ventured that sincethe production of terpenes is not fully developed in very youngplants, this may explain their inability to compete successfullywith other vegetation until more mature. The observation (Lattaand Eaton 1975) of increased THC production by plants incompetition with surrounding vegetation "at a time in thegrowing season when moisture was not limiting", may indicatea stimulus for cannabinoid production beyond that of simple waterstress. Bacteria and fungi The cannabinoids may serve as a protectant againstmicroorganisms. Cannabis preparations have long servedas medicines (apart from their psychoactive properties) and areeffective against a wide variety of infectious diseases (Kabelic etal. 1960, Mikuriya 1969). These antibiotic properties havebeen demonstrated with both Cannabis extracts (Ferenczy etal. 1958, Kabelic et al. 1960, Radosevic et al.1962) and a variety of isolated cannabinoids (ElSohly et al.1982, Farkas and Andrassy 1976, Gal and Vajda 1970, Van Klingerenand Ten Ham 1976). CBG has been compared (Mechoulam and Gaoni1965) in both "structure and antibacterial properties togrifolin, an antibiotic from the basidiomycete Grifoliaconflens." Ferency (1956) has demonstrated theantibiotic properties of Cannabis seed, a factor thatmay aid its survival when overwintering. Adherent resin on theseed surface, as well as a surrounding mulch of spent Cannabisleaves, may serve in this regard. Some of the many fungal pathogens that affect Cannabisinclude Alternaria alterata (Haney and Kutsheid 1975), Ascochytaprasadii (Shukla and Pathak 1967), Botryosphaeriamarconii (Charles and Jenkins 1914), Cercosporacannabina and C. cannabis (Lentz et al.1974), Fusarium oxysporum (McCain and Noviello 1985), Phomasp. (Srivastava and Naithani 1979) and Phomopsis ganjae(McPartland 1984). While A. alterata attacks Illinois Cannabisand destroys 2.8-45.5% of the seed (Haney and Kutsheid 1975), thebalance of these species are leaf spot diseases. McPartland(1984) has demonstrated the inhibitory effects of THC and CBD on Phomopsisganjae. However, De Meijer et al. (1992), inevaluating a large collection of Cannabis genotypes, didnot find a correlation between cannabinoid content and theoccurence of Botrytis. Fungal evolution of a mechanismfor overcoming the plant's cannabinoid defenses may beresponsible for their success as pathogens. Indeed, some havebeen demonstrated to metabolize THC and other cannabinoids(Binder 1976, Binder and Popp 1980, Robertson et al.1975). Ultraviolet radiation Another stress to which plants are subject results from theirdaily exposure to sunlight. While necessary to sustainphotosynthesis, natural light contains biologically destructiveultraviolet radiation. This selective pressure has apparentlyaffected the evolution of certain defenses, among them, achemical screening functionally analogous to the pigmentation ofhuman skin. A preliminary investigation (Pate 1983) indicatedthat, in areas of high ultraviolet radiation exposure, the UV-B(280-315 nm) absorption properties of THC may have conferred anevolutionary advantage to Cannabis capable of greaterproduction of this compound from biogenetic precursor CBD. Theextent to which this production is also influenced byenvironmental UV-B induced stress has been experimentallydetermined by Lydon et al. (1987). Their experimentsdemonstrate that under conditions of high UV-B exposure,drug-type Cannabis produces significantly greaterquantities of THC. They have also demonstrated the chemicallability of CBD upon exposure to UV-B (Lydon and Teramura 1987),in contrast to the stability of THC and CBC. However, studies byBrenneisen (1984) have shown only a minor difference in UV-Babsorption between THC and CBD, and the absorptive properties ofCBC proved considerably greater than either. Perhaps therelationship between the cannabinoids and UV-B is not so directas first supposed. Two other explanations must now be considered.Even if CBD absorbs on par with THC, in areas of high ambientUV-B, the former compound may be more rapidly degraded. Thiscould lower the availability of CBD present or render it the lessenergetically efficient compound to produce by the plant.Alternatively, the greater UV-B absorbency of CBC compared to THCand the relative stability of CBC compared to CBD might nominatethis compound as the protective screening substance. The presenceof large amounts of THC would then have to be explained as merelyan accumulated storage compound at the end of the enzyme-mediatedcannabinoid pathway. However, further work is required to resolvethe fact that Lydon's (1985) experiments did not show acommensurate increase in CBC production with increased UV-Bexposure. This CBC pigmentation hypothesis would imply the developmentof an alternative to the accepted biochemical pathway from CBG toTHC via CBD. Until 1973 (Turner and Hadley 1973), separation ofCBD and CBC by gas chromatography was difficult to accomplish, sothat many peaks identified as CBD in the preceding literature mayin fact have been CBC. Indeed, it has been noted (De FaubertMaunder 1970) and corroborated by GC/MS (Turner and Hadley 1973)that some tropical drug strains of Cannabis do notcontain any CBD at all, yet have an abundance of THC. Thisphenomenon has not been observed for northern temperate varietiesof Cannabis. Absence of CBD has led some authors (DeFaubert Maunder 1970, Turner and Hadley 1973) to speculate thatanother biogenetic route to THC is involved. Facts scatteredthrough the literature do indeed indicate a possible alternative.Holley et al. (1975) have shown that Mississippi-grownplants contain a considerable content of CBC, often in excess ofthe CBD present. In some examples, either CBD or CBC was absent,but in no case were plants devoid of both. Their analysis ofmaterial grown in Mexico and Costa Rica served to accentuate thistrend. Only one example actually grown in their respectivecountries revealed the presence of any CBD, although appreciablequantities of CBC were found. The reverse seemed true as well.Seed from Mexican material devoid of CBD was planted inMississippi and produced plants containing CBD. Could CBC be involved in an alternate biogenetic route to THC?Yagen and Mechoulam (1969) have synthesized THC (albeit in lowyield) directly from CBC. The method used was similar to the acidcatalyzed cyclization of CBD to THC (Gaoni and Mechoulam 1966).Reaction by-products included cannabicyclol, delta-8-THCand delta-4,8-iso-THC, all products which have beenfound in analyses of Cannabis (e.g., Novotny et al.1976). Finally, radioisotope tracer studies (Shoyama et al.1975) have uncovered the intriguing fact that radiolabeled CBGfed to a very low THC-producing strain of Cannabis isfound as CBD, but when fed to high THC-producing plants, appearedonly as CBC and THC. Labeled CBD fed to a Mexican example ofthese latter plants likewise appeared as THC. Unfortunately,radiolabeled CBC was not fed to their plants, apparently in thebelief that CBC branched off the biogenetic pathway at CBD anddead ended. Their research indicated that incorporation oflabeled CBG into CBD or CBC was age dependent. Vogelman etal. (1988) likewise report that the developmental stage ofseedlings, as well as their exposure to light, affects theoccurrence of CBG, CBC or THC in Mexican Cannabis. NoCBD was reported. Conclusions Although the chemistry of Cannabis has come underextensive investigation, more work is needed to probe therelationship of its resin to biotic and abiotic factors in theenvironment. Glandular trichomes are production sites for thebulk of secondary compounds present. It is probable that thecannabinoids and associated terpenes serve as defensive agents ina variety of antidessication, antimicrobial, antifeedant and UV-Bpigmentation roles. UV-B selection pressures seem responsible forthe distribution of THC-rich Cannabis varieties in areasof high ambient radiation, and may have influenced the evolutionof an alternate biogenetic pathway from CBG to THC in some ofthese strains. Though environmental stresses appear to be adirect stimulus for enhanced chemical production by individualplants, it must be cautioned that such stresses may also skewdata by hastening development of the highly glandular floweringstructures. Future studies will require careful andrepresentative sampling to assure meaningful results. References Abel E., 1980. Marihuana: The first 12,000 years. Plenum Press, New York. Adams R. and C.K. Caine, W.D. McPhee and T.N. Wearn, 1941. Structure of cannabidiol. XII. Isomerization to tetrahydro-cannabinols. Journal of the American Chemical Society 63: 2209-2213. Adams Jr., T.C. and L.A. Jones, 1973. Long chain hydrocarbons of Cannabis and its smoke. Agr. Food Chemistry 21: 1129-1131. Bazzaz F.A., D. Dusek, D.S. Seigler and A.W. Haney, 1975. Photosynthesis and cannabinoid content of temperate and tropical populations of Cannabis sativa. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 3: 15-18. Binder M., 1976. Microbial transformation of (-)-delta-3,4-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol by Cunninghamella blakesleena Lender. Helvetica Chimica Acta 63: 1674-1684. Binder M. and A. Popp, 1980. Microbial transformation on cannabinoids. Part 3: major metabolites of (3R, 4R)-delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol. Helvetica Chimica Acta 2515-2518. Boucher F., L. Cosson, J. Unger and M.R. Paris, 1974. Le Cannabis sativa L.; races chemiques ou varietes. Pl. Med. Phytotherap. 8: 20-31. Bouquet J., 1950. Cannabis. UN Bulletin on Narcotics 2: 14-30. Braut-Boucher F., 1980. Effet des conditions ecophysiologiques sur la croissance, le developpement et le contenu en cannabinoides de clones correspondant aux deux types chimiques du Cannabis sativa L. originaire d'Afrique du Sud. Physiol. Veg. 18: 207-221. Brenneisen R., 1984. Psychotrope Drogen II. Bestimmung der Cannabinoid in Cannabis sativa L. und in Cannabisprodukten mittels Hochdruckflussigkeitschromatographie (HPLC). Pharm. Acta Helv. 59: 247-259. Briosi G. and F. Tognini, 1894. Anatomia della canapa. Parte prima: Organi sessuali. Atti. Ist. Bot. Pavia Ser. II. 3: 91-209. Charles,V. and A. Jenkins, 1914. A fungous disease of hemp. J. Agric. Res. 3: 81-85. Coffman C.B. and W.A. Gentner, 1975. Cannabinoid profile and elemental uptake of Cannabis sativa L. as influenced by soil characteristics. Agronomy Journal 67: 491-497. Dayanandan P. and P.B. Kaufman, 1976. Trichomes of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). American Journal of Botany 63: 578-591 De Faubert Maunder M.J., 1970. A comparative evaluation of the tetrahydrocannabinol content of Cannabis plants. J. Ass. Pub. Anal. 8: 42-47. De Faubert Maunder M.J., 1976. The forensic significance of the age and origin of Cannabis. Med. Sci. Law 16: 78-89. De Meijer E.P.M., H.J. Van der Kamp and F.A. Van Eeuwijk. Characterization of Cannabis accessions with regard to cannabinoid content in relation to other plant characters. Euphytica 62: 187-200. De Pasquale A., G. Tumino and R.C. De Pasquale, 1974. Micromorphology of the epidermic surfaces of female plants of Cannabis sativa L. UN Bulletin on Narcotics 26: 27-40 De Zeeuw R.A., Th. M. Malingre and F.W.H.M. Merkus, 1972a. Tetrahydrocannabinolic acid, an important component in the evaluation of Cannabis products. J. Pharm. Pharmacology 24: 1-6. De Zeeuw R.A., T.B. Vree, D.D. Breimer and C.A.M. Van Ginnekin, 1973a. Cannabivarichromene, a new cannabinoid with a propyl side chain in Cannabis. Experientia 29: 260-261. De Zeeuw R.A., J. Wijsbek, D.D. Breimer, T.B. Vree, C.A. Van Ginneken and J.M. van Rossum, 1972b. Cannabinoids with a propyl side chain in Cannabis. Occurence and chromatographic behavior. Science 175: 778-779. De Zeeuw R.A., J. Wijsbek and Th.M. Malingre, 1973b. Interference of alkanes in the gas chromatographic analysis of Cannabis products. J. Pharm. Pharmacology 25: 21-26. Eisner T., 1970. Chemical defense against predation in arthropods. Page 127 in E. Sondheimer and J.B. Simone, eds., Chemical ecology, Academic Press, New York. ElSohly M.A. and C.E. Turner, 1976. A review of nitrogen containing compounds from Cannabis sativa L. Pharmaceutisch Weekblad III: 1069-1075. ElSohly H., C.E. Turner, A.M. Clark and M.A. ElSohly, 1982. Synthesis and antimicrobial properties of certain cannabichrome and cannabigerol related compounds. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 71: 1319-1323. Emboden W.A., 1972. Ritual use of Cannabis sativa L.: a historical-ethnographic survey. Page 224 in P. Furst, ed., Flesh of the gods, Praeger Press, New York. Fairbairn J.W., 1972. The trichomes and glands of Cannabis sativa L. UN Bulletin on Narcotics 24: 29-33. Farkas J., and E. Andrassy, 1976. The sporostatic effect of cannabidiolic acid. Acta Alimentaria 5: 57-67. Ferenczy L., 1956. Antibacterial substances in seeds of Cannabis. Nature 178: 639. Ferenczy L., L. Grazca and I. Jakobey, 1958. An antibacterial preparation from hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). Naturwissenschaften 45: 188. Fetterman P.S., N.J. Doorenbos, E.S. Keith and M.W. Quimby, 1971a. A simple gas liquid chromatography procedure for determination of cannabinoidic acids in Cannabis sativa L. Experientia 27: 988-90. Fetterman P.S., E.S. Keith, C.W. Waller, O. Guerrero, N.J. Doorenbos and M.W. Quimby, 1971b. Mississippi-grown Cannabis sativa L.: Preliminary observation on chemical definition of phenotype and variations in tetrahydrocannabinol content versus age, sex, and plant part. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 60: 1246-1249. Fetterman P.S. and C.E. Turner, 1972. Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. I. Propyl homologs of cannabinoids from an Indian variant. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 61: 1476-1477. Gal I.E. and O. Vajda, 1970. Influence of cannabidiolic acid on microorganisms. Elelmez. Ipar. 23: 336-339. Gaoni Y. and R. Mechoulam, 1966. Hashish, VII. The isomerization of cannabidiol to tetrahydrocannabinols. Tetrahedron 22: 1481-1488. Gaoni Y. and R. Mechoulam, 1971. The isolation and structure of delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol and other neutral cannabinoids from hashish. Journal of the American Chemical Society 93: 217-224. Garrett E.R. and C.A. Hunt, 1974. Physico-chemical properties, solubility and protein binding of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 63: 1056-1064. Gellert M., I. Novak, M. Szell and K. Szendrei, 1974. Glycosidic components of Cannabis sativa L. I. Flavonoids. UN Document ST/SOA/SER.S/50 Sept. 20. Gill E.W., 1971. Propyl homologue of tetrahydrohcannabinol: Its isolation from Cannabis, properties and synthesis. Journal of the Chemical Society p. 579-82. Gill E.W., W.D.M. Paton and R.G. Pertwee, 1970. Preliminary experiments on the chemistry and pharmacology of Cannabis. Nature 228: 134-136. Grlic L. and A. Andrec, 1961. The content of acid fraction in Cannabis resin of various age and provenance. Experientia 17: 325-326. Hakim H.A., Y.A. El Kheir and M.I. Mohamed, 1986. Effect of climate on the content of a CBD-rich variant of Cannabis. Fitoterapia 57: 239-241. Hammond C.T. and P.G. Mahlberg, 1973. Morphology of glandular hairs of Cannabis sativa from scanning electron microscopy. American Journal of Botany 60: 524-528. Hammond C.T. and P.G. Mahlberg, 1978. Ultrastructural development of capitate glandular hairs of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). American Journal of Botany 65: 140-151. Hammond C.T. and P.G. Mahlberg, 1994. Phloroglucinol glucoside as a natural constituent of Cannabis sativa. Phytochemistry 37: 755-756. Haney A. and F.A. Bazzaz, 1970. Discussion in The botany and chemistry of Cannabis. Joyce, C.R.B. and S.H. Curry, eds. Churchill, London. Haney A. and B.B. Kutscheid, 1973. Quantitative variation in chemical constituents of marihuana from stands of naturalized Cannabis sativa L. in east central Illinois. Economic Botany 27: 193-203. Haney A. and B.B. Kutscheid, 1975. An ecological study of naturalized hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) in east-central Illinois. American Midland Naturalist 93: 1-24. Hanus I., 1975a. The present state of knowledge in the chemistry of substances of Cannabis sativa L. III. Terpenoid substances. Acta Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis Facultatis Medicae 73: 233-239. Hanus I., 1975b. The present state of knowledge in the chemistry of substances of Cannabis sativa L. IV. Nitrogen containing compounds. Acta Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis Facultatis Medicae 73: 241-244. Hanus I., 1976a. The present state of knowledge in the chemistry of substances of Cannabis sativa L. V. Addendum to part I-IV. Acta Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis Facultatis Medicae 76: 153-166. Hanus I., 1976b. The present state of knowledge in the chemistry of substances of Cannabis sativa L. VI. The other contained substances. Acta Universitatis Palackianae Olomucensis Facultatis Medicae 76: 167-173. Harvey O.J., 1976. Characterization of the butyl homologs of delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol in samples of Cannabis by combined gas chromatography and mass spectrometry. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 28: 280-285. Hendricks H., T.M. Malingre, S. Batterman and R. Bos, 1975. Mono- and sesquiterpene hydrocarbons of the essential oil of Cannabis sativa. Phytochemistry 14: 814-15. Holley J. H., K.W. Hadley and C.E. Turner, 1975. Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XI. Cannabidiol and cannabichromene in samples of known geographical origin. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 64: 892-895. Honma S., H. Kaneshima, M. Mori,and T. Kitsutaka, 1971a. Cannabis grown in Hokkaido. 2. Contents of cannabinol, tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol in wild Cannabis. Hokkaidoritsu Eisei Kenkyushoho 21: 180-185. Honma S., H. Kaneshima, M. Mori and T. Kitsutaka, 1971b. Cannabis grown in Hokkaido. 3. Variation in the amount of narcotic components of Cannabis and its growth. Hokkaidoritsu Eisei Kenkyushoho 21: 186-190. Hood L.V.S., M.E. Dames and G.T. Barry, 1973. Headspace volatiles of marijuana. Nature 242: 402-403. Isbell H., 1973. Research on Cannabis (marijuana). UN Bulletin on Narcotics 25: 37-48. Kabelik J., Z. Krejci and F. Santavy, 1960. Cannabis as a medicament. UN Bulletin on Narcotics 12: 5-23. Kaneshima H., M. Mori and N. Mizuno, 1973. Studies on Cannabis in Hokkaido (Part 6). The dependence of Cannabis plants on iron nutrition. Hokkaidoritsu Eisei Kenkyusho 23: 3-5. Khare B.P., S.B. Gupta and S. Chandra, 1974. Biological efficacy of some plant materials against Sitophilus oryzae Linneaeous. Indian Journal of Agricultural Research 8: 243-248. Kimura M. and K. Okamoto, 1970. Distribution of tetrahydrocannabinolic acid in fresh wild Cannabis. Experientia 26: 819-20. Krejci Z., 1970. Changes with maturation in amounts of biologically interesting substances of Cannabis. Page 49 in The botany and chemistry of Cannabis. Joyce, C.R.B. and S.H. Curry, eds. Churchill, London. Lanyon V.S., J.C. Turner and P.G. Mahlberg, 1981. Quantitative analysis of cannabinoids in the secretory product from captitate-stalked glands of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). Botanical Gazette 142: 316-319. Latta R.P. and B.J. Eaton, 1975. Seasonal fluctuations in cannabinoid content of Kansas marijuana. Economic Botany 29: 153-163. Ledbetter M.C. and A.D. Krikorian, 1975. Trichomes of Cannabis sativa as viewed with scanning electron microscope. Phytomorphology 25: 166-176. Lentz P.L., C.E. Turner, L.W. Robertson and W.A. Gentner, 1974. First North American record for Cercospora cannabina, with notes on the identification of C. cannabina and C. cannabis. Plant Disease Reporter 58: 165-168. Levin D.A., 1973. The role of trichomes in plant defense. Quarterly Review of Biology 48: 3-16. Lydon J., 1985. The effects of Ultraviolet-B radiation on the growth, physiology and cannabinoid production of Cannabis sativa L. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Maryland. Lydon J. and A.H. Teramura, 1987. Photochemical decomposition of cannabidiol in its resin base. Phytochemistry 26: 1216-1217. Lydon J., A.H. Teramura and C.B. Coffman, 1987. UV-B radiation effects on photosynthesis, growth and cannabinoid production of two Cannabis sativa chemotypes. Photochemistry and Photobiology 46: 201-206. Mahlberg P.G. and E.-S. Kim, 1992. Secretory vesicle formation in glandular trichomes of Cannabis sativa (Cannabaceae). American Journal of Botany 79: 166-173. Malingre T.N., H. Hendricks, S. Batterman, R. Bos and J. Visser, 1975. The essential oil of Cannabis sativa.. Planta Medica 28: 56-61. Marshman J., C.D. Yawney and R.E. Popham, 1976. A note on the cannabinoid content of Jamaican ganja. UN Bulletin on Narcotics 28: 63-68. Martin L., D.M. Smith and C.G. Farmilo, 1961. Essential oil from fresh Cannabis sativa and its use in identification. Nature 191: 774-776. Masoud A.N. and N.J. Doorenbos, 1973. Mississippi grown Cannabis sativa L. III. Cannabinoid and cannabinoic acid content. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 62: 313-315. McCain A.H. and C. Noviello, 1985. Biological control of Cannabis sativa. Pages 635-642 in Proceedings of the sixth international symposium on biological control of weeds. Delfosse, E.S., ed. Agricultural Canada, Ottawa, Canada. McPartland J.M., 1984. Pathogenicity of Phomopsis ganjae on Cannabis sativa and the fungistatic effect of cannabinoids produced by the host. Mycopathologia 87: 149-154. Mechoulam R., 1970. Marijuana chemistry. Science 168: 1159-1166. Mechoulam R. and Y. Gaoni, 1965. Hashish IV. The isolation of cannabinolic, cannabidiolic and cannabigerolic acids. Tetrahedron 21: 1223-1229. Merkus F.W.H.M., 1971. Two new constituents of hashish. Nature 232: 579-580. Mikuriya T.H., 1969. Marijuana in medicine: past, present and future. California Medicine 110: 34-40. Mobarak Z., D. Bieniek and F. Korte, 1974a. Studies on non-cannabinoids of hashish. Isolation and identification of some hydrocarbons. Chemosphere 3: 5-8. Mobarak Z., D. Bieniek and F. Korte, 1974b. Studies on non-cannabinoids of hashish II. An approach to correlate the geographical origin of Cannabis with hydrocarbon content by chromatographic analysis. Chemosphere 3: 265-70. Muller W.H. and R. Hauge, 1967. Volatile growth inhibitors produced by Salvia leucophylla: effect on seedling anatomy. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club 94: 182-190. Muller C.H., W.H. Muller and B.L. Haines 1964. Volatile growth inhibitors produced by aromatic shrubs. Science 143: 471-73. Murari G., S. Lombardi, A.M. Puccini and R. De Sanctis, 1983. Influence of environmental conditions on tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC) in different cultivars of Cannabis sativa L. Fitoterapia 54: 195-201. Novotny M., M.L. Lee, C.-E. Low and A. Raymond, 1976. Analysis of marijuana samples from different origins by high-resolution gas-liquid chromatography for forensic application. Analytical Chemistry 48: 24-29. Ohlsson A., C.I. Abou-Chaar, S. Agurell, I.M. Nilsson, K. Olofsson and F. Sandberg, 1971. Cannabinoid constituents of male and female Cannabis sativa. UN Bulletin on Narcotics 23: 29-32. Ono M., M. Shimamine and K. Takahashi, 1972. Studies on Cannabis. III. Distribution of tetrahydrocannabinol in the Cannabis plant. Eisei Shikenjo Hokoku 90: 1-4. Paris M., F. Boucher and L. Cosson, 1975a. The constituents of Cannabis sativa pollen. Economic Botany 29: 245-253. Paris R.R., E. Henri and M. Paris, 1975b. O c-flavonoidima Cannabis sativa L. Arh. Farmaciju 25: 319-28. Paris R.R. and M.R. Paris, 1973. Sur les flavonoides du chanvre (Cannabis sativa L.). Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci. Ser. D. 277: 2369-71. Pate D.W., 1983. Possible role of ultraviolet radiation in evolution of Cannabis chemotypes. Economic Botany 37: 396-405. Radosevic A., M. Kupinic and Lj. Grlic, 1962. Antibiotic activity of various types of Cannabis resin. Nature 195: 1007-1009. Robertson L.W., M.A. Lyle and S. Billets, 1975. Biotranformation of cannabinoids by Syncephalastrum racemosum.. Biomedical Mass Spectroscopy 2: 266-271. Rothschild M., M.G. Rowen and J.W. Fairbairn, 1977. Storage of cannabinoids by Arctia caja and Zonocerus elegans fed on chemically distinct strains of `Cannabis sativa. Nature 266: 650-651. Rothschild M. and J.W. Fairbairn, 1980. Ovipositing butterfly (Pieris brassicae L.) distinguishes between aqueous extracts of two strains of Cannabis sativa L. and THC and CBD. Nature 286: 56-59. Sharma G.K., 1975. Altitudinal variation in leaf epidermal patterns of Cannabis sativa. Bulletin of the Torrey Botanical Club 102: 199-200. Shoyama Y., H. Hirano and I. Nishioka, 1984. Biosynthesis of Propyl Cannabinoid Acid and Its Biosynthetic Relationship with Pentyl and Methyl Cannabinoid Acids. Phytochemistry 29: 1909-1912. Shoyama Y., M. Yagi, I. Nishioka, and T. Yamauchi, 1975. Biosynthesis of cannabinoid acids. Phytochemistry 14: 2189-2192. Shukla D.D. and V.N. Pathak, 1967. A new species of Ascochyta on Cannabis sativa L. Sydowia Annals of Mycology 21: 277-278. Small E. and H.D. Beckstead, 1973. Common cannabinoid phenotypes in 350 stocks of Cannabis. Lloydia 36: 144-165. Smith G.E. and A. Haney, 1973. Grapholitha tristrigana (Clemens) (Lepidoptera: Tortricidae) on naturalized hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) in east-central Illinois. Transactions of the Illinois State Academy of Sciences 66: 38-41. Srivastava S.L. and S.C. Naithani, 1979. Cannabis sativa Linn., a new host for Phoma sp. Current Science of India 48: 1040-1005. Stannard L.J., J.R. Dewitt and T.C. Vance, 1970. The marijuana thrips, Oxythrips cannabensis, a new record for Illinois and North America. Transactions of the Illinois Academy of Sciences 63: 152-156. Steinberg S., J. Offermeier, B.I. Field and F.W. Jansen Van Ryssen, 1975. Investigation of the influence of soil types, environmental conditions, age and morphological plant parts on the chemical composition of Cannabis sativa (Dagga) plants. South African Medical Journal 45: 279. Turner C.E., M.A. ElSohly and E.G. Boeren, 1980. Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. XVII. A review of the natural constituents. Journal of Natural Products 43: 169-234. Turner C.E. and K. Hadley, 1973. Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. II. Absence of cannabidiol in an African variant. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 62: 251-255. Turner C.E., K. Hadley and P.S. Fetterman, 1973a. Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. VI: Propyl homologs in samples of known geographic origin. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 62: 1739-1741. Turner C.E., K.W. Hadley, P.S. Fetterman, N.J. Doorenbos , M.W. Quimby and C. Waller, 1973b. Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. IV: Stability of cannabinoids in stored plant material. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Sciences 62: 1601-1605. Turner J.C., J.K. Hemphill and P.G. Mahlberg, 1978. Cannabinoid composition and gland distribution in clones of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). UN Bulletin on Narcotics 30: 55-65. Turner J.C. and Mahlberg, P.G., 1988. In vivo incorporation of labeled precursors into cannabinoids in seedlings of Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae). Pages 263-270 in Chesher, G., P. Consroe and R. Musty, eds. Marihuana. Australian Government Publications, Canberra. Van Klingeren B. and M. Ten Ham, 1976. Antibacterial activity of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek Journal of Microbiology and Serology 42: 9-12. Vogelmann A.F., J.C. Turner and P.G. Mahlberg, 1988. Cannabinoid composition in seedlings compared to adult plants of Cannabis sativa. Journal of Natural Products 51: 1075-1079. Vree T.B., D.D. Breimer, C.A.M. Van Gienneken and J.M. Rossum, 1971. Identification of methyl and homologs of CBD, THC and CBN in hashish by a new method of combined gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Acta Pharm. Sue. 8: 683-84. Vree T.B., D.D. Breimer, C.A.M. Van Gienneken and J.M. Rossum, 1972a. Identification of cannabicyclol with a pentyl or propyl side-chain by means of combined gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Journal of Chromatography 74: 124-127. Vree T.B., D.D. Breimer, C.A.M. Van Gienneken and J.M. Rossum, 1972b. Identification in hashish of tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol and cannabinol analogs with methyl side-chain. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 24: 7-12. Yagen B. and R. Mechoulam, 1969. Stereospecific cyclizations and isomerizations of cannabichromene and related cannabinoids. Tetrahedron Letters 60: 5356-5363. Next WT01-B20-131IA087-000631-B008-64http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01202.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074530 text/html 9534HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:45:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:14 GMTContent-length: 9319 Dear Membership Dear Membership, It has been an exciting 6 months sincepublication of our premier issue and your response has been overwhelming.Our membership has doubled, substantially advancing us towardthe goal of 1000 dues-paying members. This goal represents a financialbreak-even point, enabling the IHA to become self-sufficient!We suggest that all our present members send us a list of peoplethey consider good candidates for membership, and we will contactthem. Also, please show the first two issues of the journal tolibraries, universities or other institutions that you think mightbe interested in subscribing to the JIHA, on a Sustaining Memberbasis. Don't forget to send us your 1995 membership renewal feebefore March 31! Remember, all operating expenses and projectfunding come from annual membership dues and the private donationsof a generous few. We have received a lot of good publicityaround the world, having been mentioned or featured in articlesfrom Economic Botany (US), Farmers Weekly (UK), the Amsterdamdaily newspaper Het Parool, the Dutch national newspaper AgrarischDagblad and the last 3 issues of Hemp World (US). Upcoming articlesabout the IHA will appear in Diversity (US) and elsewhere. Weare also seeking funding from foundations, the Italian governmentand the European Union, for support of our project to save theworlds most extensive collection of hemp varieties, locatedat the Vaviliov Research Institute (VIR). Many prospective new members ask, "Whatdo I get for my annual membership fee, besides the journal?".Your dues go towards initiation and support of many projects,worldwide. Included are the following: 1. The aforementioned VIR project, withactivities expanded in 1994 to include grow-outs in Italy andthe Ukraine, as well as Russia. (See page 68 of this issue.) 2. Although not yet fully implemented,the IHA is developing archives of live hemp seed lots (1-50 kg)for every developed hemp variety available and a few native landraces, too. This gives researchers and entrepreneurs quick accessand enables them to avoid having to spend many months locatingand procuring these seeds. As a result, start-up projections willbe shorter for their pilot projects. We can also aid in locatingcommercial amounts of most varieties. 3. The IHA is attempting to put theworlds Cannabis literature (>20,000 citations)on a computer. First to come will be a simple title/author/journal-or-bookcitation. Later, they will be annotated or abstracted. Finally,their full text and illustrations will be included. The cost ofthis will be very high (>US$ 200,000) and there are copyrightproblems to be worked out, but a feasibility study has been doneand the initial steps have been made. Included in this projectis translation of the entire VIR bibliography from the originalRussian to English. This project will forge a tool that we feelwill eventually become an indispensible part of every seriousCannabis researchers information-access repertoire. 4. We are entertaining the idea of havinga convention of IHA members in the Netherlands, sometime in 1996,as our membership rolls and funding permit. We are presently involvedin the upcoming BIORESOURCE HEMP events in Frankfurt, March 2-5,1994 (see page 64). A computer group in Luxembourg has offeredto distribute the JIHA over the Internet (USENET ALT.HEMP). Thisis being done by other scientific publications (see ScientificAmerican, December 1994, pages 72-77). The advantages of havingmore information accessable to more people are obvious, and maywell result in a larger membership. However, this may alienatepresent dues-paying members. For the moment, as a trial, we willdisplay the VIR cover story of the JIHA Vol. 1, #1, along withour Guide for Authors and the back cover displaying a membershipapplication, in an effort to increase membership and donations.A compromise has been suggested that only outdated issues of theJIHA be put on "The Net". Please let us know whatyou think about this topic. We do care about your opinion! Speaking of computers, an apology isdue to those who may have tried to contact us at our e-mail address.Our computer has been "down" for many weeks. Forthe present, the most reliable way to contact us is by fax orvia the good ol post office. Henry Brookman Treasurer Robert Clarke Projects Manager David Pate Secretary David Watson Chairman Hayo van der Werf Editor-in-Chief The Journal of the International HempAssociation is a bi-annual publication of the International HempAssociation (IHA), Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, The Netherlands.Tel./fax: +31 20 6188758. Please note our new e-mail address is: "iha@euronet.nl".ISSN nr 1381-091X.  1994, International Hemp Association.All articles accepted for publication by this journal are copyrightedby the IHA, unless the author retains their copyright. The IHAreserves the right to reprint copyrighted articles or to supplythem to third parties. No part of this publication may be reproduced,stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or byany means without the prior written permission of the publisher,the International Hemp Association. The publisher is not responsiblefor statements and opinions expressed by the authors in this publication.Although all advertising material is expected to conform to thebest ethical standards, inclusion in this publication does notconstitute a guarantee or endorsement of the quality or valueof such a product or of the claims made of it by its seller. The International Hemp Association isa non-profit organization established in 1992 to promote the beneficialuses of hemp products worldwide. The organization encourages andfacilitates the accumulation and exchange of information on Cannabis,sponsors projects in several countries and publishes a journalfor its members. The IHA is supported by memberships and by donationsfrom foundations, corporations and individuals. Although many IHA members may feel thatin light of the great economic potential of Cannabis, thecurrent legal restrictions hampering Cannabis researchand hemp cultivation should be reconsidered, the IHA does notendorse a political stance on Cannabis legislation, norwill it serve as a forum for the Cannabis legalizationdebate. Membership The IHA has three types of membership:Student (US $25/NLG 45 per year), Individual (US $50/NLG 90 peryear) and Sustaining (US $100/NLG 180 or more per year). Membershipparticipation will be balloted. Members may order additional orprevious issues for US $10 (postpaid), non-members pay US $ 15(postpaid). Members joining after June may join for the next yearand purchase the issues of the current year. Payments may be madeby International Postal Money Order, American Express/Thomas CookMoney Order, or via AmEx credit card. Authors who contribute an accepted articleto the journal will receive a year's membership including subscriptionto the journal. Sustaining members can direct their contributiontoward any specific project they prefer. A financial audit ofincome and expenditures is available to sustaining members. Submission of manuscripts The IHA Journal publishes original research,literature reviews and news items on hemp. Preferably, contributionsshould not exceed 10 double-spaced typed pages (ca. 4000 words).Longer contributions may be accepted if they can be serializedin two consecutive issues. Manuscripts can be submitted in triplicateto: IHA Journal, Editorial Office, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam,The Netherlands. Once a paper is accepted, the preferred mediumof submission is on disk (Macintosh or MS-DOS format), preferablyMS Word 5.0 or later, with accompanying manuscript. A guide forauthors can be found on page65 of this issue or can be obtained from the IHA. Editor-in-Chief Hayo M. G. van der Werf Editorial Advisory Board Ivn Bcsa, GATE AgriculturalResearch Institute, Kompolt, Hungary Henry F. Brookman, Omni Iure BV, Amsterdam,Netherlands Robert C. Clarke, Pharmtex, San Diego,California, USA Sebastiaan Hennink, Hemp-Flax BV, Ressen,Netherlands Michael Karus, nova-Institute, Hrth/Cologne,Germany John M. McPartland, VAM, Middlebury,Vermont, USA Raphael Mechoulam, Hebrew University,Jerusalem, Israel Etienne P. M. de Meijer, Utrecht, Netherlands David W. Pate, HortaPharm BV, Amsterdam,Netherlands Gertjan van Roekel, ATO-DLO, Wageningen,Netherlands David P. Watson, HortaPharm BV, Amsterdam,Netherlands Donald Wirtshafter, Ohio Hempery, Athens,Ohio, USA NextWT01-B20-132IA087-000631-B008-82http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01203.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074539 text/html 4317HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:45:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:09 GMTContent-length: 4102 LETTERS LETTERS Congratulatory Congratulations on a journal, well done. The Journal of the International Hemp Association is the worlds first authoritative organ on the economic botany of hemp. A peer reviewed journal offering a balanced blend of scholarly and newsworthy information, JIHA is destined to become the main vehicle of information critical to the renewed industrializaton of hemp. I recommend it as essential reading, whether ones interest is medical, economic, agricultural or general. Kenneth Jones, Director of Armana Research, Gibsons, BC, Canada. Australian Australian Hemp Recource and Manufacture (AHRM) is a business recently formed in Brisbane, Australia. The ultimate objective of this business is to pave the way for broad acre planting of fibre hemp throughout the country. In all the states and territories of Australia, Cannabis is classified as an illicit drug and as a consequence, Cannabis sativa seeds, plant material and various by-products are subject to legal prosecution. Slowly, Australians are waking up to the fact that selected varieties of Cannabis sativa have a very high agricultural value with absolutely no drug value. Past endeavours to start a hemp industry in Australia have been clouded over by the highly volatile drug debate involving the decriminalisation or legalisation of marijuana. This debate has been running for several decades and appears to be no closer to a united resolution. In the meantime, any importation of Cannabis seed is illegal and subject to extensive scrutiny (as experienced in the Tasmanian experiments, see JIHA, Vol. 1, #1). As an initial step in the development of a hemp industry in this country, AHRM aims to challenge the blanket drug status of Cannabis sativa. We are asking the governments to distinguish between the drug and fibre varieties of the plant. This is certainly not a novel approach, as both the United Nations and the E.C. have recognised Cannabis sativa as an agricultural crop for a number of years. Understandably seed would be sourced by authorised bodies from registered fibre hemp seed companies that comply with international standards. Once the two types of Cannabis sativa have been officially distinguished and recognised hemp industry on a major scale will be the same as introducing any other major crop into this country. Fibre hemp will finally be disentangled from the drug debate where it logically does not belong. Carolyn Ditchfield, AHRM, Brisbane, Australia. Serious I have received the premier issue of the Journal, and I am pleased to note the serious approach that you are taking; we certainly need much more solid research than we now have. It is shameful that our approach to hemp use and abuse remains so puerile, ignorant and vindictive. We do need truthful information about responsible drug use and irresponsible drug abuse, of both licit and illicit drugs. We need to change the entrenched bureaucratic policies so totally committed to zero tolerance that police state environments are created. We need to change from repressive responses (police arrest, prosecution, and prison) to positive responses (education, decriminalization, treatment and rehabilitation) - no easy task, for it entails demonstrating that existing policies are counterproductive and only exacerbate a very sad situation. We seem unable to learn from history, but perhaps the generations to come can learn. And perhaps the Journal of the International Hemp Association can play a major role in effecting needed change of national and international policies. Good luck! Dr. A.C. Germann, Prof. Emeritus, Dept. of Criminal Justice, California State University, USA. NextWT01-B20-133IA087-000631-B008-104http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01204.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074556 text/html 19862HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:45:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:06 GMTContent-length: 19646 New technology to harvest and store fibre hemp for paperpulp New technology to harvest and store fibre hemp for paper pulp Eddy A.A. de Maeyer 1and Willem Huisman 2 1. Institute of Agricultural andEnvironmental Engineering (IMAG-DLO), P.O. Box 43, 6700 AAWageningen, The Netherlands 2. Wageningen Agricultural University,Department of Agricultural Engineering and Physics, Bomenweg 4,6703 HD Wageningen, The Netherlands de Maeyer, E.A.A. and W. Huisman, 1994. Newtechnology to harvest and store fibre hemp for paper pulp.Journal of the International Hemp Association 1: 38-41. After mowing fibre hemp in September, field-drying isweather-dependent and therefore not reliable under Dutch weatherconditions. Direct harvesting can be done by field choppersequipped with a row-independent header. Storage and preservationof the wet material on the farm is possible under acid andalkaline anaerobic conditions. No losses of cellulose weremeasured, but fibre strength was decreased. Bark and core caneasily be separated by water flotation of the preserved choppedstems. Decortication of the stems in the field was less effectiveand would be more expensive. Introduction In 1990, the Dutch government initiated a four year programmeto research the technical and economic feasibility of cultivatingfibre hemp for paper pulp. Both bast and core had to be processedand the objective was to cultivate a crop with a maximum fibreyield. This meant that harvest could not start before Septemberand that traditional harvesting methods might not be suitable. Available harvesting systems for tall fibre crops Fibre hemp is usually grown for textile fibres. For thisapplication, the strength, colour, softness and fineness of thebast fibres are very important and harvesting technique focuseson these aspects (for example, a retting process is necessary).Because of the decreased demand for bast fibres, in most areasthe mechanization of bast fibre crops is not advanced. In theUkraine, hemp is mown and laid down in swaths to ret (van derWerf 1994). In the USA, an experimental machine was developed tocut kenaf. The stems were also laid down in a swath to ret or todry (USDA 1988). In Australia, sugar cane harvesters and fieldchoppers have been used to harvest kenaf for paper pulp (Wilkes etal. 1969, Wood et al. 1978). Both types of machinestechnically functioned well, but the harvest costs of a sugarcane harvester were found to be much higher than those of a fieldchopper. In the USA and Australia, initial attempts to start akenaf-processing industry failed. In France, 6000 ha of fibre hemp is grown for processing intopaper pulp. Two harvesting systems are used, depending on whetherthe seed is to be harvested or not (FNPC 1985). For the best andhighest fibre yield, the hemp is cut with a mower conditioner forfield drying in the third week of August. In about 4 days, themoisture content is under 15% and the hemp is baled with a roundbaler. However, if the seed is also to be harvested, the stemtops are cut and threshed with a combine in the first week ofSeptember. Subsequently, the crop is mown and laid down in aswath to dry. With this second harvesting system the fibre yieldis much lower (depending on the cutting height of the combine)and because of poor weather conditions in September, the fibrequality can be lower. Research objectives From the beginning of the Dutch Hemp Research Programme, twospecific research topics were formulated. First, a system forpreservation and storage of the harvest was needed so as toenable supply of pulp processing plants with fibres for the wholeyear. Because hemp may not be harvested dry, many experimentswere performed concerning the preservation and storage of wethemp. Secondly, the processing of hemp into paper pulp demands aseparation of bark and core because these fractions differphysically (fibre length and diameter) and chemically (celluloseand lignin content) (Zomers et al. 1991). The separationmay be done as a harvest operation in the field or as apreprocessing step of the pulping. The Institute of Agriculturaland Environmental Engineering (IMAG-DLO), together with theDepartment of Agricultural Engineering and Physics of theWageningen Agricultural University, investigated these aspects todetermine the best processing chain in which harvest,preservation, storage and bark/core separation are integrated. Materials and methods Harvesting technique and preservation Field tests were carried out with a cutter bar, a mowerconditioner, balers, field choppers and a decorticator. Allmachines, except the decorticator, are commonly used in othercrops. When relevant and necessary, minor adaptions were made tomake them suitable for hemp. The main objective of the fieldtests was to learn and solve the difficulties in handling a fibrehemp crop utilizing different techniques. We investigated the possibility of wet preservation byanaerobic storage. The hemp stems were cut in short pieces (1 cm)and preserved in bottles of 1.5 l capacity. After flushingwith nitrogen, the bottles were closed air tight. To createdifferent environments, we used the following additives: Foraform (BarenbrugHolland BV), a silage additive consisting primarily (92%) offormic acid; kitchen salt; sodium hydroxide; and Silageinoculant 1188 (Pioneer Hi-bred Nederland BV), a silageadditive containing Lactobacillus plantarum and Streptococcusfacium. After preservation, pH was measured of a 1:10 aquaticextract. The cellulose and hemicellulose sugars and the ligninwere determined using an analysis derived from TAPPI-249 andTAPPI-222 (de Maeyer and Huisman 1994). Bast fibres were cookedfor 1 hour in a 2% sodium hydroxide solution and the strength wasmeasured in a controlled environment (23o C, relativehumidity 50%) with a stelometer according to ASTM D-1445 (ASTM1967). Separation of bark and core We used 3 methods to separate bark and core: decortication ofgreen stems in the field, sieving of chopped stems, and flotationof chopped stems. The decorticator broke the core of whole stemsand beat the core pieces from the bark. The sieving and flotationof chopped stems were done after a 6 month wet preservationperiod. The sieve dimensions were 2 x 4 cm. With flotation, thehemp was thrown into a bath of slow moving water in which part ofthe pieces floated and the rest sank. By measuring bark and coremasses, we determined the efficiency of each operation. Results and discussion Harvesting technique and preservation For storage of dry hemp, the moisture content must be lessthan 15% to avoid fibre decay by micro-organisms. In France,field drying takes at least 4 days for the crop to reach thenecessary dry matter (dm) content of 85%. Comparing weather datafrom two Dutch and two French weather stations, we estimate thatin the Netherlands, on average, 6 days of dry weather insuccession are needed to have the hemp sufficiently dried. Basedupon data of the workability of the grain harvest (Portiek 1975),in September for 9 out of 10 years, only 3.5 days are availableto harvest winter wheat with a moisture content below 24%. If themoisture content of wheat is higher than 23%, it is not expectedthat a mown hemp crop, lying on the ground, will reach thenecessary moisture content of less than 15%. So, in September,the field drying period would be longer than 6 days for many ofthe years and the crop would start dew retting. This woulddecrease bast fibre strength (Hessler 1945, Robinson 1946). Ifthe crop stays wet, retting can even become rotting. So, weconcluded that field drying is not reliable in the Netherlands inSeptember. Chopping of the standing crop is less weather dependent and afield chopper with a row independent header can mow the cropeasily. Fewer problems occurred with a drum type chopper thanwith a flywheel type chopper. To avoid blockages, the crop chutemust be smooth and without any augers or blind areas. The knivesmust be sharp and the chopping length set short (6 mm). Tohandle hemp, great attention has to be paid to avoid barkwrapping around rotating machine parts. After chopping, the hemp has a dm content of 33%. Artificialdrying is too expensive, so we tried to preserve the hemp byensiling (wet anaerobic preservation). In corn or grass silages,lactic acid bacteria consume available sugars and produce lacticacid to yield a pH of 4.2. Then the product is preserved and nofurther losses occur (McDonald et al. 1991). In hempsilage, the pH did not drop to 4.2, even after addition of lacticacid bacteria. The reason for this was lack of the necessarysugars. Only 4 g of sugars per kg of stem dm were available andbased upon grass silage, about 75 g are needed for a sufficientfermentation (Wieringa 1961). Despite the inadequatefermentation, no cellulose or hemicellulose was lost in silage(Table 1). Only with the addition of sodium hydroxide did somehemicellulose and lignin dissolve. This was also shown by deGroot et al. (1994). Impregnation of hemp core, during 30minutes with 1 M sodium hydroxide at 20o C, removedsome xylan (the main component of the hemicellulose) and somelignin. It is important to maintain fibre strength when processingthe bast for paper pulp. Paper tensile strength is positivelycorrelated with the quantity and the quality of the bast fibres.The bast fibre strength was best preserved in an acidic(pH<4.5) or alkaline (pH>12) environment (Table 2).However, even under these circumstances fibre strength decreased.Because the control fibres, after 3 and 6 months, were not thesame (dry compared to frozen fibres), no clear results can begiven on the decrease of fibre stength in time. However, the bigdifference between the data after 3 and 6 months' storageindicate that fibre strength may be slowly decreasing, even in astable acidic or alkaline environment. More research is necessaryto determine how much this strength decreases and whether thisdecrease can be stopped.  Table 1. pH of ensiled hemp and composition of dry stored and ensiled hemp Preservation  Additive                Dosage             pH    Cellulose   Hemicellulose   Lignin                                       [g.kg-1 of fresh            [%]           [%]          [%]                                       cut hemp] Dry                                                            47.1a1      14.0a           15.3a Silage        None                                       5.6   49.0a       13.4a           15.4a               Foraform                20                 3.7   48.7a       13.6a           15.2a               Kitchen salt            30                 5.4   47.2a       13.3a           14.8a               Sodium hydroxide        30                 12.6  49.6a       11.2b           11.8b               Silage inoculant 1188   106 bacteria       5.1   48.1a       12.8ab          14.6a 1 Within each column, means with the same letter are not significantly different at P<0.05 by theLSD test.  Table 2. Fibre strength [g/tex] of dry, frozen and wet anaerobically preserved bark. Preservation          Preservation period environment                       3 months      6 months Dry                   54.1a1 Frozen                              44.7a Silage   3.5<pH<4.5   43.7b         29.9c          4.5<pH<5.5   38.1c         28.1cd          5.5<pH<6.5   39.0c         25.8d          pH>12        45.1b         35.1b 1Within each column, means with the same letterare not significantly different at P<0.05 bythe LSD test. Figure 1. Hemp component cross-contamination (as % mass of core dm in bast or bast dm in core), according to separation technique. Separation of bark and core Figure 1 presents the results of decortication in the field and the separation of bark and core after chopping and ensiling, by sieving or by flotation. With decortication, the bark could not be cleaned well enough and still contained more than 40% of the core. About two thirds of this core was not attached to the bark. Bark and loose core should be easily separable by sieving since the size of the bark and of the loose core pieces greatly differ. The length of the core pieces ranged from 1 to 8 cm and the length of the bark from 0.5 to 2.5 m. The quantity of the remaining fixed core would be very difficult to reduce. It was clear that the quantity of fixed core mainly depended on stem diameter: the smaller the diameter, the higher the quantity of fixed core. With field chopping, the bark was not cut as short as thecore. The bark was very tough and the knives stripped some of thebark from the core. So after chopping, about 90% of the mixtureconsisted of clean bark and core pieces. This made it possible toseparate bark and core by sieving or flotation. Sieving ofchopped hemp resulted in a 'contamination rate' of both bark andcore of about 25%, since the size difference between the choppedbark and core was not big enough to separate them by sieving.With flotation, very clean bast could be collected, although somebark floated because it stuck to a piece of core, resulting inits collection with the core. A disadvantage of decortication is the low processingcapacity. The costs would be high, approximately 110 Dfl per tonof dm, especially because the machine only can be used in hemp.Flotation seems most satisfactory and would cost approximately 5Dfl per ton of dm. It is expected that a simple choppingoperation of the floating material can reduce the mass of bark inthe core. Conclusions Field choppers equipped with a row-independent header can harvest fibre hemp, but the sharpness of the knives and the throughput of the chopped fibres need special attention to prevent wrapping or blocking. The chopping operation loosens about 90% of the bark and core. Because the bark sinks in water and the core floats, flotation is an easy and effective separation method. This operation perfectly fits into a harvesting system with chopping and ensiling. In a system of cultivation, harvest and storage of fibre hemp, wet anaerobic preservation is the most uncertain factor for the supply of consistent good-quality fibres throughout the year. Acidic and alkaline preservation techniques seem to be the best methods, but more research is needed on these processes, with special attention paid to the observed decrease in fibre strength. Acknowledgements The test execution assistance of Franken BV (Goes, the Netherlands), New Holland (Zedelgem, Belgium) and Greenland Zweegers (Geldrop, the Netherlands) is appreciated. The authors also wish to thank R.J.A. Gosselink and S.J. Lips of ATO-DLO in Wageningen for their contribution of analysing wet-preserved hemp and W.J. Middelhoven of the Wageningen Agricultural University for his helpfullcomments as a microbiologist. References ASTM 1967. Standard method of test for breaking strength and elogation of cotton fibers (flat bundle method), ASTM designation: D1445-67. In: Book of ASTM standards part 25; textile materials - fibers and zippers, Philadelphia, 662 pp. de Groot B., J.E.G. van Dam, R.P. van der Zwan and K. van 't Riet, 1994. Simplified kinetic modelling of alkaline delignification of hemp woody core, Holzforschung, 48 (3): 207-214. de Maeyer E.A.A. and W. Huisman, 1994. Oogst- en conserveringstechniek van vezelhennep (Techniques for harvesting and storage of fibre hemp), IMAG-DLO, Wageningen (in print) FNPC, 1985. Le chanvre monoque; la rcolte, Fdration Nationale des Producteurs de Chanvre, Le Mans, 11 pp. Hessler L.E., 1945. Chemical and strength differences in dew-retted hemp-fibre, Journal of the American Society of Agronomy, 37(2): 146-155. McDonald P., N. Henderson and S. Heron, 1991. The biochemistry of silage, 2nd ed., Chalcombe Publications, Marlow, 340 pp. Portiek J.J., 1975. Werkbare uren voor de graanoogst (Workable time for harvesting grain), report 34, IMAG, Wageningen, 32 pp. Robinson B.B., 1946. Dew retting of hemp uncertain west of longitude 95o, Journal of the American Society of Agronomy, 38(12): 1106-1109. USDA, 1988. New harvester a big step toward commercial kenaf production, USDA photo feature No. 322, Cooperative State Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Washington D.C., November 1988, 4 pp. Van der Werf H.M.G., 1994. Fibre hemp in the Ukraine 1994. Pages 279-288 in: E. Rosenthal, (ed.), Hemp Today, Quick American Archives, Oakland, California. Wieringa G.W. en S. de Haan, 1961. Inkuilen (Ensiling), IBVL, Wageningen, 49 pp. Wilkes L.H., P. Hobgood and E.L. Whitely, 1969. Evaluating systems of harvesting and handling kenaf as a source of paper pulp, Transactions of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers, 12: 34-38. Wood I.M., D.J. Quick, R.A. Stiff and N.H. Adams, 1978. Harvesting kenaf with sugarcane harvesters, World Crops, 30: 200-205. Zomers F.H.A., B. de Groot, J.E. Harsveld van der Veen, S.J. Lips, F.P. de Vries and G.J. van Roekel, 1991. Hennepvezels (Hemp fibres). Pages 18-26 in: Agrificatie-onderzoek in Nederland (Research on non-food crops in the Netherlands), Misset, Doetinchem, Netherlands. NextWT01-B20-134IA087-000631-B008-129http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01205.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074607 text/html 20438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:45:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:00 GMTContent-length: 20222 Microbiological contaminants of marijuana Microbiological contaminants of marijuana J. M. McPartland Vermont Alternative Medicine, 53 Washington Street,Middlebury, VT 05753, USA. McPartland, J.M., 1994. Microbiological contaminants ofmarijuana. Journal of the International Hemp Association 1:41-44. Use of marijuana as a medicament is on the rise. Many medicalmarijuana users have a suppressed immune system, owing to theirdisease or treatment. Herbal marijuana, whether field grown orhydroponically cultivated, contains many microorganisms. Many ofthese organisms may pose a threat to immunosuppressedindividuals. The microflora of marijuana is well described in theliterature. Similarly, the microflora that cause opportunisticinfections in AIDS patients is well documented. These separateliteratures are correlated with commentary, and methods fordetecting and eliminating microbial contaminants are discussed. Introduction Marijuana is classified as a Schedule I drug "having nomedical use, with a high potential for abuse" by the US DrugEnforcement Administration. Nevertheless, a handful of UScitizens are permitted use of government-supplied "medicalmarijuana" for a variety of ailments (Bowersox 1992).Additionally, a large clinical trial utilizing marijuana in AIDSpatients has been approved in San Francisco (Doblin 1994). Doblin and Kleiman (1991) document the widespread illicit useof marijuana for medical purposes. Nearly half of the oncologistspolled by Doblin and Kleiman recommended that their patientsexperiment with marijuana as a medicine. Many of these patients,however, are immuno-suppressed, making them very susceptible toopportunistic bacteria and fungi. Since hundreds of bacteria andfungi are associated with the cultivation of marijuana(McPartland 1991), possible microbiological hazards need to beassessed. A majority of the organisms associated with marijuana arestrictly plant pathogens. They cannot infect healthy humans. Buta subset of opportunistic plant pathogens are associated with"post-harvest" or "storage" decay ofmarijuana. These organisms may infect immuno-compromisedindividuals and become opportunistic human pathogens.Additionally, many opportunist organisms on plants producedangerous toxins and/or elicit allergenic reactions when inhaled. Lastly, a handful of strictly human pathogens have beenisolated from marijuana, as contaminants. These agents are highlyinfectious, and some also exude toxins. AIDS and opportunistic infections People with AIDS are immunosuppressed, and very susceptible toinfections. According to Bossche et al. (1990), the mostcommon infectious agents include viruses (cytomegalovirus,hepatitis A & B, herpes simplex), bacteria (Mycobacteriumspp., Salmonella spp.), fungi (Cryptococcus neoformans,Coccidiodies immitis, Histoplasma capsu-atum, Candida spp.),and protozoans (Pneumocystis carinii, Toxoplasma gondii,Cryptosporidium sp.). Bossche et al. (1990) also describe rare infections inAIDS patients caused by opportunistic fungi  Aspergillusfumigatus, Penicillium marneffei, Fusarium proliferatum,Alternaria alternata, Mucor sp., Rhizopus sp., Curvulariasp., and Bipolaris sp. Most of these organisms infect people via therespiratory tract, or by oral-mucosal contact with contaminatedmaterial. Inhaling a marijuana cigarette contaminated with any ofthese organisms poses a risk. Microflora of marijuana Viruses and protozoans Cates & Warren (1975) associated marijuana use with anepidemic of hepatitis B in Germany, but did not isolate the virusfrom plant material. An outbreak of Hepatitis A in Washingtonstate was linked to consumption of Mexican marijuana, fertilizedwith human excrement (Alexander 1987). No protozoans are reportedfrom marijuana in the literature. Bacteria Several bacteria species cited as present on marijuana arehuman pathogens, and produce toxins: Taylor et al. (1982)isolated Salmonella muenchen from illicit marijuana.Ungerlerder et al. (1982) cultivated Klebsiellapneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae, E. agglomerans,group D Streptococcus, and Bacillus sp. frommarijuana supplied by the National Institute on Drug Abuse(NIDA). Kurup et al. (1983) isolated several thermophilicactinomycetes from marijuana cigarettes, including Thermoactinomycescandidus, T. vulgaris, and Micropolyspora faeni.These organisms, while not infectious, cause allergic pneumonitisin hypersensitive individuals. Storage moldsassociated with marijuana. Left to right: Rhizopusnigrans, Mucor hiemalis, Penicillin chrysogenum, P. italicum,Aspergillus flavus, A. fumigatus, A. niger. Top row:sporangia and conidial heads cross-sectioned to reveal internalstructures, with M. hiemalis demonstrating spore releaseafter sporangium dehiscence (400 x). Bottom row: natural habit ofthese fungi (25 x). From Bush Doctor (1987). Fungi In the popular press, Margolis and Clorfene (1975) and DuToit(1980) describe molds colonizing marijuana in the United Statesand South Africa, respectively. Surprisingly, both accountsreport the mold enhancing psychotropic effects of marijuana.These publications initiated a fad among marijuana users, whoexposed their marijuana to molds in the hope of increasing thepotency of their crop. The "black weblike fungus" described by Margolis& Clorfene (1975) suggests an Aspergillus species.Chusid et al. (1975) cite A. fumigatus causingpneumonitis in a patient who buried his marijuana in the groundfor "aging." Llamas et al. (1978)recovered A. fumigatus from marijuana owned by a patientsuffering allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Kagen (1981)isolated several Aspergillus species from moldy marijuana,including A. fumigatus, A. niger and A. flavus. Babu etal. (1977) cultured A. niger, A. flavus, A. tamarii, A.sulphureus, and A. repens from seeds in marijuana.Schwartz (1985) isolated A. niger from the sinuses of amarijuana smoker who suffered severe headaches. Llewellyn &O'Rear (1977) demonstrated aflatoxin production in marijuanacontaminated with A. flavus and A. parasiticus. Penicillium species have been isolated from marijuanacigarettes by Kagen et al. (1983) and Kurup et al. (1983). Babu et al. (1977) cultured P. chrysogenumfrom Cannabis seeds. Bush Doctor (1993) reports isolating P.italicum from marijuana stored with an orange peel at 0o C. Mucor species have been recovered from marijuana byKagen et al. (1983) and Kurup et al. (1983). Arelated zygomycete, Rhizopus stolonifer, was isolated fromdamp marijuana by Bush Doctor (1993). Babu et al. (1977) cultured several other fungi from Cannabisseeds that, according to Bossche et al. (1990), may causeopportunistic infections in AIDS patients. These include Alternariaalternata and Curvularia lunata. McPartland (1983,1991, 1992) recovered these fungi from Cannabis in thefield, plus a Fusarium spp. All these fungi producetoxins. Ramrez (1990) reports four policeman contractinghistoplasmosis, caused by Histoplasma capsulatum, afterdestroying a Cannabis field in Puerto Rico. Detecting contaminants in marijuana Cultivators and consumers of illicit marijuana identifymicrobiological contaminants by several crude, but seeminglyeffective, screening techniques (Bush Doctor 1993). Their methodsmimic those used by tobacco growers (Lucas 1975). Visual screen Contaminated marijuana often darkens in color and exhibitschanges in surface texture. Strands of white to pale-gray fungalhyphae become visible in moldy material. Exposed to light, thefungi sporulate, providing a "fuzzy" appearance.Generally, Rhizopus and Mucor species producegrey-black spores, Penicillium conidia are lightblue-green, and Aspergillus conidia are dark green-black. Olfactory screen Uncontaminated marijuana produces a minty or aromatic odor.Once infested, the smell changes to a "stale" or"musty" odor. Bush Doctor (1993) reports P. italicum producinga lavender or lilac odor, and A. flavus "smells likea locker room." Temperature screen Contaminated marijuana undergoing rapid decay may feel warm totouch. Fluorescence screen Bush Doctor (1993) screened marijuana for aflatoxin-producing A.flavus with a UV-A lamp. Contaminated material fluoresces alight green color. This screening method has not been tested byother researchers (Llewellyn & O'Rear 1977). Identification If any of the above screening tests is positive, the suspectmarijuana is discarded, without identifying the contaminant. Ifidentification is desired, the marijuana is either cultured orbioassayed. Kurup et al. (1983) and Kagen et al.(1983) provide the description of culture methods used toidentify microbiological contaminants. Marijuana can also be tested with bioassay kits, to detectspecific organisms. These assays utilize ELISA (enzyme linkedimmunoabsorbent assay) biotechnology. They are more sensitivethan cultures and much quicker, but also much more expensive.Positive identification of microbiological toxins may require gaschromatography (Rood et al. 1988) Eliminating contaminants Kurup et al. (1983) demonstrated that spores of Aspergillusfumigatus and Mucor species survive in smoke drawnfrom pyrolyzed marijuana cigarettes. Also, some microbiologicaltoxins are not degraded by combustion (Llewellyn & O'Rear1977). Moody et al. (1982) evaluated waterpipes for smoking Aspergillus-contaminated marijuana. They found only a 15% reduction intransmission of fungal spores. Levitz and Diamond (1991) suggested baking marijuana in homeovens at 150o C, for five minutes beforesmoking. Oven treatment killed conidia of A. fumigatus, A.flavus and A. niger, and did not degrade the activecomponent of marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Ungerlerder et al. (1982) gas-sterilized marijuanawith a mix of 12% ethylene oxide and 88% dichlorodifluoromethane,at 8.5-10 psi, for 4.5-5 hours. They report no loss of THC fromfumigation. But residues remain in air pockets of fumigatedmaterial, posing another health hazard. They also sterilizedmarijuana with high-dose Cobalt 60 irradiation (20,000 Gray Unitsor less), again without THC reduction. None of these methods, however, degrade microbial antigens.Sensitized patients may still develop bronchospasm after smokingtreated material. Nor do these methods decompose microbialtoxins. The best method of eliminating microbial antigens and toxinsis by exclusion. This requires careful attention by bothcultivators and consumers. Proper cultivation techniques shouldeliminate human pathogens. Careful cultivation also excludes mostopportunistic plant pathogens. Particular attention is requiredat harvest, to avoid damaging marijuana before it completelydries. Flue-cured marijuana contains fewer opportunistic fungithan air or sweat-cured crops. Sweat-cured Cannabis (common in illicit marijuana from Colombia) maintains a"tradition" of Aspergillus contamination (BushDoctor 1993). Bush Doctor (1975) states that infestation by opportunisticfungi cannot occur in plant material below 15% moisture content(MC). Properly dried marijuana contains about 10% MC (materialbelow 10% MC becomes excessively brittle). The dried, unmanicuredmarijuana, in small aliquots, can then be vacuum-sealed inplastic pouches. This packaging differs from the marijuanacurrently supplied by NIDA. NIDA supplies marijuana as manicured,pre-rolled cigarettes, in tin cans (Chait and Pierri 1989). Opening sealed pouches of marijuana reexposes the material tocontamination. Consumers must prevent marijuana from resorbingmoisture above 15% MC. Storage at freezer temperatures will notprotect marijuana above 15% MC. Placing a lemon or orange peel instored marijuana (to impart a "pleasant bouquet,"according to Frank and Rosenthal, 1978) is discouraged, becausethe peel may introduce Penicillium or Aspergillusspp. into the stored marijuana. Contaminated material should bediscarded. Conclusions Many publications have described a variety of microorganismsresident on marijuana. Nevertheless, most researchers remainunaware of these hazards. Schwartz (1987) wonders if the sourceof a young patient's Curvularia lunata sinusitis could befrom contaminated marijuana. Brummund et al. (1987) replythat this is possible, but no Curvularia species have beencited in the Cannabis literature. However, this was indeedreported by Babu et al. (1977). More recently, anotherSchwartz (1992) states, "I am unaware of any report of non-Aspergillus fungalcontamination of marijuana cigarettes." The publicationscited herein, provide such reports. Carefully cultivated and harvested marijuana harbors aminimum of hazardous microorganisms. For added protection,material must be screened for contamination before it is packagedfor use as medical marijuana. Since opportunistic infections posethe greatest danger to immunosuppressed consumers, marijuanashould be sterilized, preferably by gamma irradiation. Lastly,consumers must be given careful instructions to ensure theirmarijuana does not become contaminated prior to use. References Alexander T., 1987. Hepatitis outbreak linked to imported pot. Sinsemilla Tips 7(3): 22. Babu R., A. Roy, Y. Gupta and M. Gupta, 1977. Fungi associated with deteriorating seeds of Cannabis sativa. Current Science 46 (20): 719-720. Bossche H.V., et al., 1990. Mycoses in AIDS patients. Plenum Press, NY. 337 pp. Bowersox J, 1992. PHS cancels availability of medical marijuana. Journal of the National Cancer Institute 84 (7): 475-476. Brummund W., V.P. Kurup, G.J. Harris, J.A. Duncavage, & J.A. Arkins. 1987. Fungal sinusitis and marijuana: reply. JAMA 257: 2915. Bush Doctor, 1987. Storage diseases and pests. Sensimilla Tips 6 (3): 41-46. Bush Doctor, 1993. How to preserve pot potency. High Times No. 213: 75+77-78. Cates W. & J.W. Warren. 1975. Hepatitis B in Nurenberg, Germany. JAMA 234: 930-934. Chait L.D. & J. Pierri. 1989. Some physical characteristics of NIDA marijuana cigarettes. Addictive Behaviours 14: 61-67. Chusid M.J., J.A. Gelfand, C. Nutter & A.S. Fauci. 1975. Pulmonary aspergillosis, inhalation of contaminated marijuana smoke, and chronic granulomatous disease. Ann. Intern. Med. 82: 61-64 Doblin R., 1994. National medical marijuana day. High Times # 40, p. 30. Doblin R. & M.A. Kleiman. 1991. Medical use of marijuana. Annals of Internal Medicine 114: 809-810. DuToit B.M. 1980. Cannabis in Africa. A.A. Balkema Press, Rotterdam. 512 pp. Frank M. & E. Rosenthal, 1978. Marijuana grower's guide. And/Or Press, Berkeley. 330 pp. Kagen S. 1981. Aspergillus: an inhalable contaminant of marijuana. New England J. Med. 304: 483-484. Kagen S., V.P. Kurup, P.G. Sohnle and J. N. Fink. 1983. Marijuana smoking and fungal sensitization. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 71: 389-393. Kurup,V.P., A. Resnick, S.L. Kagen, S. H. Cohen and J. N. Fink. 1983. Allergenic fungi and actinomycetes in smoking materials and their health implications. Mycopathologia 82: 61-64. Levitz S.M. and R. D. Diamond. 1991. Aspergillosis and marijuana. Annals of Internal Medicine 115: 578-579. Llamas R., D.R. Hart and N. S. Schneider, 1978. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis associated with smoking moldy marijuana. Chest 73: 871-872. Llewellyn G.C. and C.O. O'Rear. 1977. Examination of fungal growth and aflatoxin production on marijuana. Mycopathologia 62: 109-112. Lucas G.B. 1975. Diseases of Tobacco, 3rd Ed. Biological Consulting Associates, Raleigh, NC, USA, 621 pp. Margolis J.S. and R. Clorfene. 1975. A child's garden of grass. Ballantine Books, NY, 151 pp. McPartland J.M. 1992. The Cannabis pathogen project: report of the second five-year plan. Mycological Society of America Newsletter 43(1): 43. McPartland J.M. 1991. Common names for diseases of Cannabis sativa L. Plant Disease 75: 226-227. McPartland J.M. 1983. Fungal pathogens of Cannabis sativa in Illinois. Phytopathology 72: 797. Moody M.M., R.C. Wharton, N. Schnaper and S.C. Schimpff, 1982. Do water pipes prevent transmission of fungi from contaminated marijuana? New England J. Med. 306: 1492-1493. Ramrez J. 1990. Acute pulmonary histoplasmosis: newly recognized hazard of marijuana hunters. American Journal Medicine 88 (Supplement 5): 60N-62N. Rood H.S., W.B. Buck and S.P. Swanson, 1988. Gas chromatographic screening method for T-2 toxin, diacetoxyscirpenol, deoxynivalenol and related trichothecenes in feeds. J. Assoc. Official Analytical Chem 71: 493-498. Schwartz I.R., 1987. Fungal sinusitis and marijuana. JAMA 257: 2914-2915. Schwartz I.S., 1992. Non-Aspergillus sinusitus and marijuana use. Am. J. Clin. Path. 97: 601. Schwartz I.S., 1985. Marijuana and fungal infection. Am. J. Clin. Path. 84: 256. Taylor D.N. et al. 1982. Salmonellosis associated with marijuana. New England J. Med 306: 1249-1253. Ungerlerder J.T., T. Andrysiak, D.P. Tashkin and R.P. Gale, 1982. Contamination of marijuana cigarettes with pathogenic bacteria. Cancer Treatment Reports 66 (3): 589-590. Next WT01-B20-135IA087-000631-B008-159http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01206.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074630 text/html 28002HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:46:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:52 GMTContent-length: 27786 Marijuana use and driving Marijuana use and driving Hindrik W.J. Robbe Institute for Human Psychopharmacology, University of Limburg, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands Robbe, Hindrik W.J. , 1994. Marijuana use and driving. Journal of the International Hemp Association 1: 44-48. This article concerns the effects of marijuana smoking on actual driving performance. It presents the major results of one laboratory and three on-road driving studies. The latter were conducted on a closed section of a primary highway, on a highway in the presence of other traffic and in urban traffic, respectively. This program of research has shown that marijuana produces only a moderate degree of driving impairment which is related to the consumed THC dose. The impairment manifests itself mainly in the ability to maintain a steady lateral position on the road, but its magnitude is not exceptional in comparison with changes produced by many medicinal drugs and alcohol. Drivers under the influence of marijuana retain insight into their performance and will compensate where they can (e.g., by increasing distance between vehicles or increasing effort). As a consequence, THC's adverse effects on driving performance appeared relatively small in the tests employed in this program. Introduction After alcohol, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), marijuana's major psychoactive constituent, is the drug which is found most often in the blood of drivers involved in road accidents. With some exceptions, epidemiological studies indicate the presence of THC in roughly 4-12% of drivers injured or killed in traffic accidents: for example, 10% in New York (Terhune 1982), 7% in New South Wales (Chesher and Starmer 1983), 8% in North Carolina (Mason and McBay 1984), 11% in Dsseldorf (Daldrup et al. 1987), 10% in Tasmania (McLean 1987) and 11% in Ontario (Cimbura et al. 1990). The most recent data regarding the incidence of drugs in fatally injured drivers in the United States are available from a nationwide study conducted in 1990 and 1991 (Terhune et al. 1992): THC was found in only 4% of the drivers. This relatively low percentage may indicate a declining trend in the incidence rate of THC in fatally injured drivers in the United States, explainable by the declining prevalence of marijuana use throughout the 1980s (Johnston et al. 1992). These numbers are, however, inconclusive regarding THC's contribution to accidents because alcohol has been a severe confounding factor in all surveys of injured or killed drivers: generally 60-80% of drivers who were found positive for THC also showed the presence of alcohol. Another problem of these surveys is the common lack of sound control groups. To determine whether drivers under the influence of THC are overrepresented in accidents, the THC incidence in accident victims should be compared to the THC incidence in randomly selected drivers passing the same accident site at the same times and days of the week. This has been done for alcohol (Borkenstein et al. 1974), but not for THC. The lack of separate control groups has been circumvented by the use of a 'culpability index'. This index is the ratio of the percentage of drivers with detectable drug levels and deemed responsible for a traffic accident to that of drug-free drivers from the same sample who were likewise culpable. But results from this approach have not been consistent: three studies yielded a culpability index of about 1.7 (Warren et al. 1981, Terhune 1982, Donelson et al. 1985), two other studies failed to find a significantly elevated culpability index for marijuana users (Williams et al. 1985, Terhune et al. 1992). For this and other reasons given above, the independent contribution of THC to accidents remains exceedingly obscure. Several literature reviews, the most recent by Robbe (1994), have shown that the results from driving simulator and closed-course tests indicate that THC in inhaled doses up to 250 g/kg has relatively minor effects on driving performance, certainly less than blood alcohol concentrations (BACs) in the range 0.08-0.10 g%. In contrast to this, laboratory studies have repeatedly shown performance impairment occurring after inhaled doses as low as about 40 g/kg. These became large and persistent after 100-200 g/kg doses. Tracking, divided attention and vigilance test performance were particularly vulnerable to THC's effects. Assuming that both sets of results are valid for the particular circumstances under which they were obtained, they demonstrate that performance decrements obtained under the artificial and non-life threatening conditions in the laboratory do not automatically predict similar decrements in driving simulations that are closer to real-world driving. These conflicting results led, however, to opposing opinions regarding marijuana's effects on driving performance. Real-world driving studies were therefore warranted. Only one study (Klonoff 1974) had been conducted in actual traffic before the present research program started. In a city driving study, Klonoff assessed the effects of two THC doses, 4.9 and 8.4 mg, which are equivalent to 70 and 120 g/kg for a 70 kg person. Aspects of subjects' driving performance were scored by a professional examiner. The results showed that subjects performed less competently when under the influence of the highest, but not the lowest dose. In particular, they scored lower on judgment and concentration scales. Several investigators, however, criticized the method used by Klonoff for measuring driving performance on the grounds that the examiners' reliability was never determined and that the scoring instrument had never been shown to provide measures related to driving safety (Moskowitz 1985, Smiley 1986). Furthermore, Klonoff administered relatively low THC doses to his subjects. The effects of high doses of THC on driving in real traffic still needed to be determined. The studies reported in this article were conducted to escape these limitations. First, the effects of low, moderate and high THC doses on highway driving were determined, both in the absence and presence of other traffic. Second, Klonoff's city driving study was replicated, with some modifications with regards to the employed procedures and with the addition of another group of subjects who undertook the same driving test but then under the influence of a low dose of alcohol. An important practical objective of the program was to determine whether degrees of driving impairment can be accurately predicted from either measured concentrations of THC in plasma or performance measured in potential roadside 'sobriety' tests of tracking ability or hand and posture stability. The results (Robbe 1994), like many reported before, indicate that none of these measures accurately predicts changes in actual driving performance under the influence of THC. General procedures Subjects in all studies were recreational users of marijuana or hashish, i.e., smoking the drug more than once a month, but not daily. They were all healthy, between 21 and 40 years of age, had normal weight and binocular acuity, and were licensed to drive an automobile. Furthermore, law enforcement authorities were contacted, with the volunteers' consent, to verify that they had no previous arrests or convictions for drunken driving or drug trafficking. Each subject was required to submit a urine sample immediately upon arrival at the test site. Samples were assayed qualitatively for the following common 'street drugs' (or metabolites): cannabinoids, benzodiazepines, opiates, cocaine, amphetamines and barbiturates. In addition, a breath sample was analyzed for the presence of alcohol using a Lion-SD3 breath-analyzer. Subjects were accompanied during every driving test by an licensed driving instructor. A redundant control system in the test vehicle was available for controlling the car, should emergency situations arise. Marijuana and placebo marijuana cigarettes were supplied by the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse. The lowest and highest THC concentrations in the marijuana cigarettes used in the studies were 1.75% and 3.57%, respectively. Pilot study Methods The pilot study was conducted in a hospital under strict medical supervision to identify THC doses that recreational marijuana users were likely to consume before driving. Twenty-four subjects, twelve males and twelve females, participated. They were allowed to smoke part or all of the THC content in three cigarettes until achieving the desired psychological effect. Cigarettes were smoked through a plastic holder in a manner determined by the subjects. The only requirement was to smoke for a period not exceeding 15 minutes. When subjects voluntarily stopped smoking, cigarettes were carefully extinguished and retained for subsequent gravimetric estimation of the amount of THC consumed. Results Six subjects consumed one cigarette, thirteen smoked two and four smoked three. The average amount of THC consumed was 20.8 mg, after adjustment for body weight, 308 g/kg. It should be noted that the amounts of THC consumed represent both the inhaled dose and the portion that was lost through pyrolysis and side-stream smoke during the smoking process. There were no significant differences between males and females, nor between frequent and infrequent users, with respect to the weight adjusted preferred dose. It was decided that the maximum dose for subsequent driving studies would be 300 g/kg. This is considerably higher than doses that have usually been administered to subjects in experimental studies (typically, 100200 g/kg THC). Study 1: Driving on a restricted highway Methods The first driving study was conducted on a highway closed to other traffic. One objective of this study was to determine whether it would be safe to repeat the study on a normal highway in the presence of other traffic. The second objective was to define the dose-effect relationship between inhaled THC dose and driving performance. The same twelve men and twelve women who participated in the laboratory study served again as the subjects. They were treated on separate occasions with marijuana cigarettes containing THC doses of 0 (placebo), 100, 200, and 300 g/kg. Treatments were administered double-blind and in a counterbalanced order. On each occasion, subjects performed a road-tracking test beginning 40 minutes after initiation of smoking and repeated one hour later. The test, developed and standardized by O'Hanlon et al. (1982, 1986), involved maintaining a constant speed at 90 km/h and a steady lateral position between the delineated boundaries of the traffic lane. Subjects drove 22 km on a primary highway and were accompanied by a licensed driving instructor. The primary dependent variable was the standard deviation of lateral position (SDLP), which has been shown to be both highly reliable and very sensitive to the influence of sedative drugs and alcohol. Other dependent variables were mean speed, and standard deviation of speed and steering wheel angle. Results All subjects were willing and able to finish the driving tests without great difficulty. The study demonstrated that marijuana impairs driving performance as measured by an increase in SDLP; all three THC doses significantly affected SDLP relative to placebo. The driving performance decrement after smoking marijuana persisted almost undiminished for two hours after smoking. Marijuana's effects on SDLP were compared to those of alcohol obtained in a very similar study by Louwerens et al. (1985, 1987). It appeared that the effects of the various administered doses of THC (100300 g/kg) on SDLP were equivalent to those associated with BACs in the range of 0.03-0.07 g%. Other driving performance measures were not significantly affected by THC. Both the observed degree of driving impairment, and what subjects said and did, indicated that normal safeguards would be sufficient for ensuring safety in further testing. Hence, the final conclusion was to repeat this study on a normal highway in the presence of other traffic. Study 2: Driving on a normal highway in traffic Methods The second driving study was conducted on a highway in the presence of other traffic and involved both a road-tracking and a car-following test. A new group of sixteen subjects, equally comprised of men and women, participated in this study. A conservative approach was chosen in designing the present study in order to satisfy the strictest safety requirements. That is, the study was conducted according to an ascending dose series design where both active drug and placebo conditions were administered, double-blind, at each of three THC dose levels. THC doses were the same as those used in the previous study, namely 100, 200, and 300 g/kg. Cigarettes appeared identical at each level of treatment conditions. If any subject had reacted in an unacceptable manner to a lower dose, he/she would not have been permitted to receive a higher dose. The subjects began the car-following test 45 minutes after smoking. The test was performed on a 16km stretch of the highway and lasted about 15 minutes. After the conclusion of this test, subjects performed a 64-km road-tracking test on the same highway which lasted about 50 minutes. At the conclusion of this test, they participated again in the car-following test. The road-tracking test was the same as in the previous study except for its duration and the presence of other traffic. Subjects were instructed to maintain a constant speed of 95km/h and a steady lateral position between lane boundaries in the right traffic lane. They were allowed to deviate from this only if it became necessary to pass a slower vehicle in the same lane. Data from the standard test were analyzed to yield the same performance measures as in the previous study. The car-following test involved attempting to match velocity with, and maintain a constant distance from a preceding vehicle as it executed a series of deceleration/acceleration maneuvers. The preceding vehicle's speed would vary between 80 and 100 km/h and the subject was instructed to maintain a 50 m distance however the preceding vehicle's speed might vary. The duration of one deceleration and acceleration maneuver was approximately 50 seconds and six to eight of these maneuvers were executed during one test, depending upon traffic density. The subject's average reaction time to the movements of the preceding vehicle, mean distance and coefficient of variation of distance during maneuvers were taken as the dependent variables from this. Results All subjects were able to complete the series without suffering any untoward reaction while driving. Road-tracking performance in the standard test was impaired in a dose-related manner by THC and confirmed the results obtained in the previous closed highway study. The 100 g/kg dose produced a slight elevation in mean SDLP, albeit not statistically significant. The 200 g/kg dose produced a significant elevation, of dubious practical relevance. The 300 g/kg dose produced a highly significant elevation which may be viewed as practically relevant but unexceptional in comparison with similarly measured effects of many medicinal drugs. After marijuana smoking, subjects drove with an average speed that was only slightly lower than after a placebo and very close to the prescribed level. In the car-following test, subjects maintained a distance of 4550 m while driving in the successive placebo conditions. They lengthened mean distance by 8, 6 and 2 m in the corresponding THC conditions after 100, 200 and 300 g/kg, respectively. The initially large drug-placebo difference and its subsequent decline is a surprising result. Our explanation for this observation is that the subjects' caution was greatest the first time they undertook the test under the influence of THC and progressively less thereafter. The reaction time of the subjects to changes in the preceding vehicle's speed increased following THC treatment, relative to placebo. The administered THC dose was inversely related to the change in reaction time, as it was to distance. However, increased reaction times were partly due to longer distance. Statistical adjustment for this confounding variable resulted in smaller and non-significant increases in reaction time following marijuana treatment, the greatest impairment (0.32 s) being observed in the first test following the lowest THC dose. Distance variability followed a similar pattern as mean distance and reaction time; the greatest impairment was found following the lowest dose. Study 3: Driving in urban traffic Methods The program proceeded to the third driving study, which involved tests conducted in high-density urban traffic. There were logical and safety reasons for restricting the THC dose to 100 g/kg. It was given to a group of regular marijuana (or hashish) users, along with a placebo. For comparative purposes, another group of regular alcohol users was treated with a modest dose of its members' preferred recreational drug, ethanol, or a placebo, before undertaking the same city driving test. Two groups participated, each composed of sixteen new subjects comprising equal numbers of men and women. Subjects in the alcohol group were regular users of alcohol, but not marijuana. Both groups were treated on separate occasions with the active drug and a placebo. Marijuana was administered to deliver 100g/kg THC. The driving test commenced 30 minutes after smoking. The alcohol dose was chosen to yield a BAC approaching 0.05 g% when the driving test commenced 45 minutes after onset of drinking. Active drug and placebo conditions were administered double-blind and in a counterbalanced order in each group. Driving tests were conducted in daylight over a constant 17.5 km route within the city limits of Maastricht. Subjects drove their placebo and active-drug rides through heavy, medium and low density traffic on the same day of the week, and at the same time of day. Two scoring methods were employed in the present study. The first, a 'molar' approach, required the driving instructor acting as the safety controller during the tests to rate the driver's performance retrospectively using a standard scale. The second, a more 'molecular' approach, involved the employment of a specially trained observer who applied simple and strict criteria for recording when the driver made or failed to make each in a series of observable responses at predetermined points along a chosen route. Results The study showed that a modest dose of alcohol (BAC = 0.034 g%) produced a significant impairment in city driving, as measured by the molar approach, relative to a placebo. More specifically, alcohol impaired both vehicle handling and traffic maneuvers. Marijuana, administered in a dose of 100g/kg THC, on the other hand, did not significantly change mean driving performance as measured by this approach. Neither alcohol nor marijuana significantly affected driving performance measures obtained by the molecular approach, indicating that it may be relatively insensitive to drug-induced changes. Driving quality, as rated by the subjects, contrasted with observer ratings. Alcohol impaired driving performance according to the driving instructor, but subjects did not perceive it; marijuana did not impair driving performance, but the subjects themselves perceived their driving performance as such. Both groups reported about the same amount of effort in accomplishing the driving test following a placebo. Yet only subjects in the marijuana group reported significantly higher levels of invested effort following the active drug. Thus there is evidence that subjects in the marijuana group were not only aware of their intoxicated condition, but were also attempting to compensate for it. These seem to be important findings. They support both the common belief that drivers become overconfident after drinking alcohol and investigators' suspicions that they become more cautious and self-critical after consuming low doses of THC, as smoked marijuana. Discussion The results of the studies corroborate those of previous driving simulator and closed-course tests by indicating that THC in inhaled doses up to 300 g/kg has significant, yet not dramatic, dose-related impairing effects on driving performance. Standard deviation of lateral position in the road-tracking test was the most sensitive measure for revealing THC's adverse effects. This is because road-tracking is primarily controlled by an automatic information processing system which operates outside of conscious control. The process is relatively impervious to environmental changes, but highly vulnerable to internal factors that retard the flow of information through the system. THC and many other drugs are among these factors. When they interfere with the process that restricts SDLP, there is little the afflicted individual can do by way of compensation to restore the situation. Car-following and, to a greater extent, city driving performance depend more on controlled information processing and are therefore more accessible for compensatory mechanisms that reduce the decrements or abolish them entirely. THC's effects after doses up to 300 g/kg never exceeded alcohol's at BACs of 0.08 g% and were in no way unusual compared to many medicinal drugs (Robbe 1994). Yet THC's effects differ qualitatively from many other drugs, especially alcohol. Evidence from the present and previous studies strongly suggests that alcohol encourages risky driving whereas THC encourages greater caution, at least in experiments. Another way THC seems to differ qualitatively from many other drugs is that the former's users seem better able to compensate for its adverse effects while driving under the influence. Although THC's adverse effects on driving performance appeared relatively small in the tests employed in this program, one can still easily imagine situations where the influence of marijuana smoking might have a dangerous effect; i.e., emergency situations which put high demands on the driver's information processing capacity, prolonged monotonous driving, and after THC has been taken with other drugs, especially alcohol. Because these possibilities are real, the results of the present studies should not be considered as the final word. They should, however, serve as the point of departure for subsequent studies that will ultimately complete the picture of THC's effects on driving performance. References Borkenstein R.F., R.F. Crowther, R.P. Schumate, W.B. Ziel and R. Zylman , 1974. The Role of the Drinking Driver in Traffic Accidents (The Grand Rapids Study). Blutalkohol 11(Suppl 1): 1-131. Chesher G.B. and G.A. Starmer, 1983. Cannabis and Human Performance Skills. Drug and Alcohol Authority Research, Grant Report Series, Sydney. Cimbura G., D.M. Lucas, R.C. Bennett and A.C. Donelson, 1990. Incidence and toxicological aspects of cannabis and ethanol detected in 1394 fatally injured drivers and pedestrians in Ontario (1982-1984). Journal of Forensic Sciences 35: 1035-1041. Daldrup T., G. Reudenbach and K. Kimm, 1987. Cannabis und Alkohol im Strassenverkehr. Blutalkohol 24: 144-156. Donelson A.C., G. Cimbura, R.C. Bennett and D.M. Lucas, 1985. The Ontario monitoring project: Cannabis and alcohol use among drivers and pedestrians fatally injured in motor vehicle accidents from March 1982 through July 1984. Traffic Injury Research Foundation of Canada, Ottawa. Johnston L.D., P.M. O'Malley and J.G. Bachman, 1992. Smoking, Drinking, and Illicit Drug Use among American Secondary School Students, College Students, and Young Adults, 1975-1991. Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, Michigan. Klonoff H., 1974. Marijuana and driving in real-life situations. Science 186: 317-323. Louwerens J.W., A.B.M. Gloerich, G. de Vries, K.A. Brookhuis and J.F. O'Hanlon, 1985. De Invloed van Verschillende Bloedalcoholspiegels op Objectief Meetbare Aspekten van Feitelijk Rijgedrag. Technical Report No. VK 85-03, Traffic Research Centre, University of Groningen, Groningen. Louwerens J.W., A.B.M. Gloerich, G. de Vries, K.A. Brookhuis and J.F. O'Hanlon, 1987. The relationship between drivers' blood alcohol concentration (BAC) and actual driving performance during high speed travel. Pages 183-192 in P.C. Noordzij and R. Roszbach, eds., Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. Excerpta Medica, Amsterdam. Mason A.P. A.J. and McBay, 1984. Ethanol, Marijuana, and other drug use in 600 drivers killed in single-vehicle crashes in North Carolina, 1978-1981. Journal of Forensic Sciences 29: 987-1026. McLean S., R.S. Parsons, R.B. Chesterman, R. Dineen, M.G. Johnson and N.W. Davies, 1987. Drugs, alcohol and road accidents in Tasmania. The Medical Journal of Australia 147: 6-11. Moskowitz H., 1985. Marijuana and driving. Accident Analysis and Prevention 17: 323-346. O'Hanlon J.F., T.W. Haak, G.J. Blaauw and J.B.J. Riemersma, 1982. Diazepam impairs lateral position control in highway driving. Science 217: 79-81. O'Hanlon J.F., K.A. Brookhuis, J.W. Louwerens and E.R. Volkerts, 1986. Performance testing as part of drug registration. Pages 311-330 in J.F. O'Hanlon and J.J. de Gier, eds., Drugs and Driving. Taylor and Francis, London. Robbe H.W.J., 1994. Influence of Marijuana on Driving. Doctoral thesis, Institute for Human Psychopharmacology, University of Limburg, Maastricht. Smiley A.M., 1986. Marijuana: On-road and driving simulator studies. Alcohol, Drugs and Driving: Abstracts and Reviews 2: 121-134. Terhune K.W., 1982. The Role of Alcohol, Marijuana and Other Drugs in the Accidents of Injured Drivers. Technical Report to US Department of Transportation, Calspan Field Services, Inc. Terhune K.W., C.A. Ippolito, D.L. Hendricks, J.G. Michalovic, S.C. Bogema, P. Santinga, R. Blomberg and D.F. Dreusser, 1992. The Incidence and Role of Drugs in Fatally Injured Drivers. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC. Warren R.A., H.M. Simpson HM, J. Hilchie, G. Cimbura, D. Lucas and R. Bennett, 1981. Drugs detected in fatally injured drivers in the Province of Ontario. Pages 203-217 in L. Goldberg, ed., Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. Proceedings, 8th International Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. Almqvist and Wiksell International, Stockholm. Williams A.F., M.A. Peat, D.J. Crouch, J.K. Wells and B.S. Finkle, 1985. Drugs in fatally injured young male drivers. Public Health Reports 100: 19-25. NextWT01-B20-136IA087-000631-B008-186http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01207.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074659 text/html 957HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:46:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:45 GMTContent-length: 743 In Memoriam In Memoriam We deeply regret to announce that Nikolai K. Lemeshev passed away on January 25, 1995, while working in his office. Dr. Lemeshev was Head of the Department of Industrial Crops and Curator of the germplasm collections of fiber and oil crops at the N.I. Vavilov Institute of Plant Industry in St. Petersburg, Russia. Nikolai will be sorely missed by his family, friends, and colleagues, including all of us at the IHA. His commitment to preservation of the VIR Cannabis collection was ardent and unwavering. NextWT01-B20-137IA087-000631-B008-211http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01208.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074716 text/html 10299HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:47:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:43 GMTContent-length: 10083 Current state of hemp breeding in C.I.S. 49 Current state of hemp breeding in C.I.S. L. G. Rumyantseva and N. K. Lemeshev Vavilov Institute of Plant Industry (VIR), 42 B. Morskaya St., St Petersburg 190000, Russia In the course of the last 30 years, the amount of land used in hemp production area in the former USSR as well as present-day Russia has been incessantly decreasing. Prior to the disintegration of the USSR, hemp was produced on 50-60 thousand hectares. However, the reduction in crop acreage was basically due to a mistaken government economic strategy, in which they preferred to purchase hemp fibre abroad, spending the equivalent of over US $200 million per year instead of developing domestic production. This policy resulted in the absence of complex harvest and post-harvest mechanized procedures and in insufficient funding of hemp breeding programmes. Despite these constraints, a number of regions (Poltava, Oryol, Krasnodar, etc.) produced good yields of fibre (1.0-1.2 tons/hectare) and seed (0.6-0.8 tons/hectare). Fiber varieties Breeding also progressed. Conventional breeding techniques were applied: hybridization, followed by continuous family/group selection. In later stages of seed production, mass selection methods were used. The unceasing 20 year systematic selection for higher fiber content, performed at the All-Union Research Institute of Bast Crops (in Glukhov, Ukraine), increased this parameter by 13.8%, achieving a total plant fiber content of 35-37% in a number of varieties. These breeding programmes were based on the accessions of the plant genetic resources collection of the Vavilov Institute (VIR). For instance, cv. Yuzhnosozrevayushchaya Odnodomnaya 14 (YUSO-14) produced by the Institute was bred by family/group selection methods on progeny from crosses of female YUSO-1 (VIR Cat. no. 429*) and pollen from the monoecious Bernburg hemp of the former East Germany. This resulting cultivar now covers nearly half of the present hemp production area of Russia and is fairly uniform in its sexual expression, monoecious pistillate hemp accounting for up to 90% of the plants. Agricultural production of this strain yielded 1.0-1.2 tons of fiber and 1.3-1.5 tons of seed per hectare. Cv. YUSO-16 has been bred from the French monoecious hemp cultivar Fibrimon 56 (VIR 537*). This cultivar is notable for a low cannabinoid content and a long vegetative period. Average fibre yield is 2.0 tons/hectare and seed yield is 1.0-1.2 tons/hectare. Cv. Dneprovskaya Odnodomnaya 6, a southern hemp cultivar, has been obtained by hybridization of the Hungarian cultivar Szegedy 9 (VIR 437) with Fibrimon 56 (VIR 537*), followed by family/group selection. This cultivar has high fibre yield (31.5%) and a seed yield of 0.55 ton/hectare. Plant height is up to 2.5 meters. Low-THC varieties One of the priorities for the next few years of hemp breeding may be to obtain cultivars without active drug substances. In the initial breeding phase, the recommended cultivars with low cannabinoid content will be YUSO-14, YUSO-16 and Dnepropetrovskaya Odnodomnaya 6. The next phase will be marked by developing the cultivar Yuzhnosozrevayushchaya Odnodomnaya (YUSO-31), which contains half the THC content and ripens 5-6 days earlier than YUSO-14, but gives the same yields. An even lower cannabinoid content has been noticed in cv. Zolotonozhskaya YUSO-11. In recent years, the Krasnodar Research Institute of Agriculture has accomplished a series of experiments on breeding southern hemp with an absence of active cannabinoids. Selection of southern hemp without cannabinoids has been closely linked to breeding for higher fibre content and yield. This breeding was based on the families identified by means of multiphase family/group selection in the hybrid Szegedy 9 (VIR 437) X Krasnodarskaya 56 with individual analysis of each plant for its seed weight, stem fibre content and flower cannabinoid content, followed by testing of the identified families. Ten phases of selection resulted in a dioecious cultivar of southern hemp, Kuban, having a vegetative period of 160 days, only 20% of the THC content of the Krasnodarskaya 35 standard, a fibre content of 28.3%, a seed yield of 0.35 ton/hectare and a plant height of 260 cm. This cultivar is being produced commercialy on an area of 3,000 hectares. Hemp breeders mastered a method which made it possible to identify cannabinoid content by thin-layer chromatography of selected leaves from each crop during the period from budding to flowering. This led to the establishment of the Transpollination Direction Nurseries (TDN) where plants were discarded or selected in accordance with precise data on their THC contents. In 1990, application of this method resulted in such new cultivars as YUSO-42 and YUSO-45, with THC contents of 0.004 and 0.007%, respectively. Recently, a rapid method for plant cannabinoid content analysis has been developed on the basis of a qualitative reaction, and this has now been introduced into practice. It takes just 10-13 seconds to analyze each plant in the field before budding. Thus it is now possible to discard cannabinoid-containing plants before budding, greatly increasing the efficiency of selection against this trait and allowing a wider range of initial breeding stock. It should be noted that breeding for the absence of cannabinoids is accompanied by strict control over commercially valuable traits, despite the fact that practically no interrelationship between yield and cannabinoid content has been established. Seed varieties Hemp is cultivated primarily for fibre production, but hemp seed is also important. Seeds contain approximately 30-35% oil, which is used widely for industrial purposes and in food production. Optimum ratios of the fatty acids depend on the purpose of the oil. Industrial utilization requires a quick-drying oil with a high content of polyunsaturated linoleic and linolenic fatty acids. These fatty acids are also highly desirable for human nutrition, but their chemical lability causes them to spoil easily in the presence of air and light. This imparts an unpleasant flavor to mishandled oils and requires special precautions to preserve oil freshness. The Department of Industrial Crops of the VIR in cooperation with the Biochemistry Laboratory have analyzed 100 hemp accessions of different origins, including 48 domestic and 52 foreign varieties acquired by the VIR which are characterized by good fibre quality and low drug content. Plantings were performed in the fields of the Ustimovka Experimental Station of the VIR (Poltava Province, 1983-1985). In spite of the plant varieties being from widely diverse origins, the variability in their seed fatty acid content was not large. Average data reported for three years revealed that palmitic content varied from 5.8 to 7.4%, stearic acid from 1.6 to 3.0%, oleic acid from 10.6 to 15.3%, linoleic acid from 55.6 to 59.5%, and linolenic acid from 16.2-24.3%. Relatively high in linoleic acid (over 22%) were the accessions from Uzbekistan (VIR 455*), Armenia (VIR 482), Hungary (VIR 548*), and the cultivars Maikopskaya 1 (VIR 491*), Dneprovskaya 4 (VIR 510), Dneprovskaya 5 (VIR 511). High oil content (over 35%) was identified in the accessions from Daghestan (VIR 524), Karachaevo-Cherkessia (VIR 525), Hungary (VIR 481, VIR 535), Yugoslavia (VIR 479*) and cv. Maikopskaya 1 (VIR 491*). Conclusions Hemp breeding faces a series of complex problems which may be solved by wide utilisation of the global hemp germplasm collection stored at VIR. For this purpose, it would be necessary to perform in depth and complex studies of the accessions in this collection, especially of the monoecious drug-free varieties identified for their earliness. Research should aim to identify sources of flexibility, firmness and other fibre quality traits, including disease and pest resistance, and sources of variation in oil yield and quality. It is necessary to create varieties with more economically valuable traits by individual selection, applying the express method of cannabinoid content evaluation, and to perform hybridization with the purpose of uniting all required parameters in a single genotype. This would result in obtaining early ripening monoecious materials for breeding, which would also possess high productivity and high quality of fiber and oil. It is necessary to conduct research on the genetics of sexual, technological and biochemical characteristics, lack of which impedes the efficiency of hemp breeding. * = Accessions no longer maintained in the VIR collection. The remainder of the accessions noted in this article are threatened with extinction. A concerted effort must be made to preserve these valuable accessions for future breeders. References Davidyan G. G., 1972. Hemp (Biology and initial materials for breeding). In: Works on applied botany, genetics and breeding. VIR, Vol. 48, issue 3. Kaplunova R. I., 1971. Hemp breeding techniques at Sinelnikovskaya experiment station. In: Issues of hemp and kenaf breeding and seed production. "UROZHAY", Kiev. Khrennikova G. A., 1971. Peculiarities of monoecious hemp breeding. In: Issues of hemp breeding. "UROZHAY", Kiev. Nevinnykh V. N., 1971. Hemp breeding techniques in Krasnodar region. In: Issues of hemp and kenaf breeding and seed production. "UROZHAY", Kiev. Rumyantseva L. T., V. G. Virovets and L. N. Gorshkova, 1991. Production, genetics and breeding of industrial crops. In: Compiled works on applied botany, genetics and breeding. Vol 144. NextWT01-B20-138IA087-000631-B008-233http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01209.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074726 text/html 7168HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:47:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:38 GMTContent-length: 6953 Building with hemp 50 Building with hemp A report from France Michka 1 rue Ption, 75011 Paris, France Houses have always been built out of what was around  mostly stones and lumber. But where stones and trees were scarce, chopped straw mixed with a soil, rich in clay, was a common material. Modern building with hemp is very different from this old technique, yet it too allows for building with what grows around you. (At least in a country like France, where hemp is a legal crop). Hemp, when grown for fiber, is sown very densely, so as to grow into branchless slender stalks that so resemble straw that French farmers call them hemp straw ("paille de chanvre"). After harvest, the long fibers that make up to about 25% of the hemp stalks are removed. In some parts of the world, like China, these fibers are still spun and woven into cloth. In France, the machinery presently used to remove the fibers from the stalk does not allow processing of the fibers into a thread strong enough to be woven into cloth. Hemp is still grown for its fiber but today, in France, these are entirely bought by paper making companies (mostly by de Mauduy, a French company now belonging to Kimberley Clarke). Added to ordinary wood pulp, hemp fibers make "specialty paper" particularly pliable and resistant, for banknotes or cigarette paper. For cats and horses, too The strong fibers are what hemp has always been grown for. Yetafter the fibers have been removed from the stalk, there remainsabout 75% of the plant. This bulky by-product, known as hurd ("chnevotte"in French) looks like fine wood chips, only much lighter. Hemphurds are extremely absorbent: they will soak up about five timestheir own weight in moisture. They are commercialised in Franceby the hemp growers co-op "La Chanvrire de l'Aube",as bedding for livestock under the brand name "Aubiose".Aubiose is used, in particular, for race horses, who will havenothing but the best. The most minute hurd particles are moldedinto pellets and commercialized as cat litter. These were firstmade by La Chanvrire de l'Aube, who commercializes themas "Biochat" in France, or "All Hugro" inGermany. Since hemp growing became legal in England in 1993, catsthere can enjoy the same product, made out of British hemp, knownas "Posh Paws". Hemp hurds are not only very absorbent,they are also uncommonly rich in silica, a chemical compound naturallyoccurring as sand or flint. The high mineral content of hemp hurdsbrings us naturally to one of their most interesting applications:building. Hemp hurds mixed with lime undergo a process of mineralisation,sometimes referred to as "petrification" (changing intostone). Midway between mineral and vegetable kingdoms In France, where houses have been built with hemp hurds as themain material (apart from the wooden structure), there are slightdifferences in technique. But the basic process is the same: hemphurds are mixed with natural lime (not cement !) and water. Sometimesplaster of Paris (pure gypsum) or sand is added. The mixing canbe done in a cement mixer and at this stage the resulting mixdoes look a bit like cement. It can be poured like cement, likewiseit hardens and becomes mold and insect resistant. And yet it retainssome of the virtues proper to plant matter: the resulting material,which becomes a lighter, tawny color when dry, has a texture vaguelyreminiscent of cork. It is many times lighter than cement (whichworkers fully appreciate) and it offers both thermal and sonicinsulation. The mixture sets in a matter of hours, while the processof "petrification" continues. The mix can be poured as a floor, or between sheets of plywood(which will be removed a few hours later) for walls. Here onematerial replaces several layers of conventional building materials:bricks or cement, vapor barrier, insulation, and plaster board.All that is needed, inside as well as outside, is a whitewashfinish (with or without pigments added). Alternatively, for interioruse, the look of the material can be preserved with a simple waxingor varnishing, which brings out the cork-like structure of thematerial. Different schools of thought Can the basic process of petrification of hemp hurds be improved?This is where people working in this field disagree. The hempfarmers co-op that initially perfected this technique (La Chanvrirede l'Aube) registered a patent for a process that coats the hurdswith silica. The prepared hurds, meant for building, are commercializedunder the brand name "Canobiote". "Isochanvre"is another brand name for a similar product, prepared in anotherhemp-growing area (near Le Mans). Canobiote and Isochanvre lookidentical, though the latter is almost twice as expensive. Isochanvrecosts about 800 FF per cubic meter, Canobiote about 500 FF. FrancePrier, the woman who developed Isochanvre, initially workedfor La Chanvrire de l'Aube, promoting Canobiote (and thenleft to start her own business). She insists that Isochanvre isa better product, though it is not clear exactly in what way. Finally there are those like Yves Khn who think that regularhemp hurds, untreated, just as nature made them, are as perfectas can be for the petrification process to best take place provided the right kind of lime or plaster of Paris, is used.He calls this technique "Canosmose". This former solo dancer with the prestigious Bjart company,now an entrepreneur who works with his architect wife, maintainsthat coating the hurds with silica makes them less absorbent,which in turn interferes with the petrification process. He thereforeprefers to use the hurds as they are, and points out that theyare also much cheaper that way (only 270 FF per cubic meter). Whatever form of hurd is used, it certainly provides a very attractivebuilding material, one that is both healthy for people to livein and environmentally friendly.  1994 Michka Some useful addresses in France: La Chanvrire de l'Aube(Canobiote) Rue du Gnral de Gaulle, 10200 Bar-sur-Aube Phone: 25271274, Fax: 25273548 Isochanvre Le Verger, 72260 Ren Phone: 43974518, Fax: 43976544 Yves Khn (Canosmose) Ferme La Thuilire, 25560 Monfroc Phone: 92620074 NextWT01-B20-139IA087-000631-B009-20http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01210.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074734 text/html 869HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:47:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:35 GMTContent-length: 655 Erratum 51 Erratum Clarke R.C. and D.W. Pate, 1994. Medical marijuana. JIHA 1: 9-12. The labeling letters for CBD and CBC were inadvertently reversed on Fig. 1, page 10. Therefore, the caption should read: Figure 1. Some cannabinoids, a) THC, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabi-nol; b) CBD, cannabidiol; c) CBC, cannabichromene; d) CBG, cannabigerol. NextWT01-B20-140IA087-000631-B009-52http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01211.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074754 text/html 29733HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:47:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:33 GMTContent-length: 29517 Hemp research and market development in Germany 52 Hemp research and market development in Germany Astatus report for 1994 Michael Karus1 and Gero Leson2 1. nova - Institute for Political andEcological Innovation, Thielstrasse 35, 50354 Hrth/Cologne,Germany 2. nova - Institute for Political and Ecological Innovation,Santa Monica, USA Historical overview The cultivation and use of hemp in Germany has a long history(Krber-Grohne 1988). The earliest findings of hemp-based ropesand fabrics in Europe were made in the Stuttgart area and can bedated back to the pre-Roman period (800-400 BC). Fabrics were notyet made from processed hemp fibers, but from the bast strippedfrom the plant's stem. During the early Middle Ages, retting, abiological process for the separation of plant fibers which hadbeen used for flax, was transferred to hemp. The nutritious hempseeds have been used as a food staple since the Middle Ages andearly descriptions of the plant's medical applications date backto the 16th century. To this day, traditional hemp dishes areprepared in some of the former German provinces, such as theSilesian hemp soup made from hemp seeds and millet (Pelz andKretschmer 1977). In the 14th century, the traditional Chinese art of makingpaper arrived in Germany via Italy. Exclusively used asraw material were rags from flax and hemp textiles. Wood basedpaper came into use only after mechanical and chemical pulpingwas developed in the mid eighteen hundreds in Germany andEngland, respectively. Because of the significantly lower costsof wood, often obtained by clear-cutting, flax and hemp asresources for the pulping industry were rapidly displaced. Hemp experienced its heyday in Germany in the 17th century.Because of the high tensile strength of its fibers and theirtolerance of moisture, essentially all sails, tows, nets, flags,and uniforms for the growing fleet of sailing ships were madefrom hemp. Within the boundaries of what later became Germany,hemp was grown on an area of approximately 150,000 hectares (ha). The decline of hemp in Germany began in the 18th century,when technical improvements simplified the processing of cotton.This subsequently displaced flax and hemp from the textile marketbecause their processing remained labor intensive. The concurrentdecline in sailing caused the loss of yet another importantmarket for hemp fibers. Figure 1. Hectares of hemp grown in Germany from 1880until the present day; DDR = German Democratic Republic (EastGermany), BRD = Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany). In the 19th century, jute and sisal, novel fiber plants fromthe colonies, were introduced to Germany. Jute in particularcompeted with hemp in its traditional domains at only half theprice because of the pittance paid to workers in the colonies. Atthe same time, German hemp came under pressure from cheaper hempimports from Russia. The already mentioned displacement by woodin the pulping sector resulted in the loss of yet another marketfor hemp fibers. Figure 1 demonstrates the steady decrease inacreage used for hemp cultivation in Germany during the 19th and20th century, before it essentially ceased in 1915. During the world wars Hemp became a war profiteer during the two world wars. Cut offfrom its overseas supplies of cotton, jute, sisal and ramie, theGerman governments reconsidered hemp and supported improvementsto cultivation, harvesting and processing technologies. Forexample, the development of the so-called cottonization processallowed production of a short-fiber, high-quality cottonsubstitute from hemp fiber. During the 1920s, the substitution ofall cotton imports by cottonized domestic hemp was seriouslydiscussed. It would have required an area of approximately onemillion hectares (Gminder 1924). While these considerations weredriven mainly by a desire for self-sufficiency, they stilldemonstrate the potential which was attributed to hemp fiber.Towards the end of World War II, hemp was grown in Germany onabout 21,000 ha, which supplied approximately 20% of the demandfor hemp fiber. Most of the balance was imported from Italy. Of high relevance today are the various fiber separation andprocessing technologies, which were intensively developed andtested in Germany after the turn of the century in order toexpand the range of applications for hemp fiber and to lowerproduction costs. A comprehensive summary of these developmentscan be found in the book Hemp and Hard Fiber by Herzog etal. (1927). Post war developments After World War II, the cultivation of hemp in Germany rapidlyshrank to insignificant levels, mainly due to the competitionfrom imported natural fibers and the newly developed syntheticfibers. In the former GDR (East Germany) the cultivation of hempsurvived through the late 1960s. Despite the concurrent declineof German hemp research, researchers were able to breed severalvarieties which combined a high fiber yield with a low content of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol(THC), the main psychoactive ingredient of hemp (Bredemann 1952,Bredemann et al. 1961). These varieties are now consideredlost in Germany, but their existence elsewhere (e.g., Russiangene banks) is conceivable. The final blow to the cultivation of fiber hemp in WestGermany was dealt by the 1982 amendments to the federal narcoticsact (BtMG) which outlawed the cultivation of hemp, regardless ofits THC content. Exemptions may only be granted for scientificpurposes or in the case of public interest. To this day, theseamendments effectively ban the commercial cultivation of hemp inGermany. In 1981, they also forced the last West German hempfarmer, Martin Butter, to give up his production (Karus et al.1994). At the time, he employed 15 persons involved in thecultivation of hemp on 150 ha of land. Fibers were sold tomanufacturers of ropes, textiles and cigarette paper. The woodycore (shives or hurds) of the stems was used locally to producebuilding materials, such as particle board and pellets forthermal insulation. The leaves were used as litter in stables.Instead of taking his case to the European Court (the EuropeanCommunity had already permitted the cultivation of low-THCvarieties at that time) Butter accepted a DM 800,000 settlementfrom the German government. Subsequently, agricultural research on hemp essentiallyceased. One of the few exceptions is the work of Prof. Megnet whoinvestigated, in the early 1980s, whether hemp could be grown onsoils contaminated with heavy metals. Initial results indicatedthat the fibers remain virtually free of heavy metals. However,Megnet soon had to abandon his work because of governmentalrequirements he could not comply with. When renewable bioresources, such as flax, were rediscoveredin Germany in the 1980s, hemp was simply ignored. The knowledgeof its potential uses had largely been lost within just a fewdecades. Younger agricultural scientists and engineers knew hempmerely as an exotic drug plant, not as a traditional, domesticfiber resource. At this point, only one agricultural use of hemp in Germanyhas been exempted from this general prohibition: as a polleninsulator in the commercial breeding of beets. No other plantforms such impermeable hedges and minimizes undesirable outsidepollination. Current research In the early 1990s, even this remaining application came underattack from a Bavarian politician. In this context, the lateProf. Dambroth at the Agricultural Research Laboratory (FAL) inBraunschweig was asked to investigate the variability in the THCcontent of low- THC varieties and the development of the THCcontent during the plant's growth period. Hemp has been grown atthe FAL for research purposes since 1992. Dambroth added to thisprogram the investigation of the impact of chemical (nitrogen)fertilizer and plant density on fiber quality, and fiber and seedyield. Delayed by his death in 1993, the results are nowscheduled for publication in early 1995. Preliminary findingsindicate hemp's comparatively low nitrogen demand and the highfiber yield of the Hungarian Kompolt variety. Rediscovery of the "new " bioresource, hemp The rediscovery of hemp in Germany as a promising,ecologically benign resource was largely triggered by thepublication of The Rediscovery of the Resource Hemp CannabisMarihuana in September 1993 (Herer, Brckers, KATALYSE1993). The book became an immediate bestseller. It contains, inaddition to the German translation of Jack Herer's popular book TheEmperor Wears no Clothes, a historical review of the use ofhemp in Europe by Mathias Brckers and a current scientificevaluation of the industrial crop hemp by the KATALYSE Institute,Cologne (Karus et al. 1993, 1994a). The book was well received by the German media and generalpublic and caused a downright hemp "avalanche".Following a decade-long period of neglect, numerous dissertationscovering a broad range of subjects in the areas of cultivation,processing and use of hemp are now under way or have already beenpublished. At the same time, numerous domestic firms aredeveloping technologies and product lines based on imported hemp.A number of professionally manufactured products entered themarket in 1994 with good initial success. Total sales in 1994 ofthese products are estimated at DM 20-40 million, up fromessentially zero in 1993. Much of the enthusiasm of these firmsis due to hemp's positive marketing image. It results from theecological advantages of the bioresource hemp, as well as fromits modern, fresh image caused by the association with its sisterplant, marihuana. In January 1994, "Die Hanfgesellschaft" (The HempSociety) was founded in Berlin as an association of hempprotagonists in the areas of agriculture, processing, industryand marketing. Its goal is to promote the reintegration of hempinto the economic cycle by creating a network of major players,providing public education and supporting specific projects. Thesociety's most visible venture is the "Hanfhaus" (HempHouse) chain. In addition to its Berlin headquarters, it operatesretail outlets in six major German cities which market, underconsiderable attention by the media, a wide range of hemp-basedproducts. This rapid development in the areas of research, developmentand marketing had to manage essentially without public funding.The federal agencies in charge, the Ministry of Agriculture (BML)and the Agency for Renewable Bioresources (FNR) are not willingto fund hemp projects for the time being. Their main objectionsare that the cultivation of hemp is still illegal in Germany andthat they do not want to sponsor a plant which would compete withflax, the promotion of which has received DM 60 million of publicfunding to date, without the hoped-for breakthrough. Meanwhile, the general ban on the cultivation of hemp and itsmain supporter, the newly created federal drug administration,Bundesinstitut fr Arzneimittel und Medizin-produkte (BAM),have come under intense public criticism. The debate centersaround the question of whether even low-THC varieties may somehowbe used for the production of marihuana and can therefore not betolerated. In this context, the validity of the EU-wide acceptedlimit of 0.3% THC content in the upper one third of the leaves isquestioned by BAM. A publication which demonstrates theirrelevance of the arguments used by the supporters of the ban isbeing prepared by the nova-Institute. Results from another recentstudy (Karus et al., 1994b) also suggest that low-THCvarieties cannot be misused as a drug and that the EU limit of0.3% is sufficient. Prior to presenting potential solutions for this somewhatmuddled situation, the major ongoing R&D activities inGermany in the various sectors will be summarized in thefollowing. Cultivation tests In addition to the already mentioned tests at the FALBraunschweig, several cultivation tests have been approved in1994 by the authorities as scientifically useful, and are nowbeing carried out at various universities. Worth mentioning aretests at the Humboldt University, Berlin aimed at the cultivationof low-THC varieties, and an investigation of the suitability ofhemp as boiler fuel at the Gesamthochschule Kassel. Harvesting and fiber separation Innovative harvesting and fiber separation processes for flaxplants have been researched and developed on a laboratory scalein Germany for the last decade. Various public and privateinstitutions were involved in this program, supported byconsiderable amounts of public funding (approximately DM 60million). The primary goal of this program is the development ofecologically benign processes which produce fiber material withhigh yields and standardized quality, particularly for industrialfiber use, at a competitive price. A detailed understanding ofthe product characteristics demanded by industry, and theidentification and quantification of their respective fiberparameters are essential for the achievement of this goal. Thisapproach was based on the desire to eliminate the dependence offlax sales on short-lived trends in textile fashion and to createstable markets in the industrial sector. Studies carried outunder this program suggest that market potentials for short flaxfibers exist, particularly as substitute for glass and mineralfibers and in the production of press-molded parts. Various fiber separation processes, based on the use of steamexplosion, detergents, or ultrasound have now been developed onthe laboratory scale. While the quality of the produced fibershas been met with keen interest from industry, these technologiesstill lack demonstration on the pilot and production scales. Mostadvanced at this point are purely mechanical methods whichcombine harvest and separation. They provide a limited range ofproduct qualities or serve as preprocessing step for the alreadymentioned biochemical or physical processes. Despite this favorable starting position, the implementationof innovative flax technologies has been slowed down considerablydue to the virtual elimination of public funding. These initial results from the R&D program for flax arehighly relevant for the use of hemp as well. For a fraction ofthe funds spent to date on flax, the results could also beapplied to the use of hemp fiber. These favorable startingconditions raise the hope that hemp, with its players being freshand not yet involved in quarrels, and its modern marketing image,may bring about the breakthrough for both domestic fiberresources, flax and hemp. Consequently, major players in the flaxdomain, most notably the Institute for Applied Research (IAF) atthe Fachhochschule Reutlingen, have begun in 1994 to apply thesenewly developed technologies to hemp. This includes a detailedanalysis of the fiber's characteristics. However, to get off theground at a pace that could satisfy the rapidly growing demand,demonstration projects are essential. Obtaining adequate publicor private funding of such projects is difficult as a result ofthe recent funding priorities in post-reunification Germany. Theimplementation of a modern facility for the separation andprocessing of hemp and flax fibers should be the natural focus ofthese efforts. Pulp and paper In 1993, Schneidershne, Germany's largest papermanufacturer, introduced its first hemp-based paper products, andpresently markets a complete line of hemp paper. The collectionincludes basic paper for the production of books, as well as fourdifferent varieties of graphical papers under the namesSativaprint (stationery) and Luxosativa (art paper). The papersare based on mixtures of bleached hemp pulp and de-inked recycledpaper, most commonly 50/50 blends. Since the fall of 1994, paperbased on 100% hemp pulp is also available. Sales of 500 (metric)tons are anticipated for 1994, corresponding to revenues of DM4-5.5 million. The hemp pulp is provided by the Spanish firm Celesa,currently the sole supplier in Western Europe. The comparativelyhigh prices for hemp pulp, approximately DM 4,000/ton, are due inpart to its monopoly position. However, ongoing developments inthe pulp supply will soon break this monopoly, resulting in lowerprices and improving the cost competitiveness of hemp pulp. A remodeled pulp mill is scheduled for startup near Dresdenin early 1995. It will be capable of producing 6,000 tons peryear of pulp based on hemp, flax and linseed. Both unbleached andhydrogen peroxide bleached pulp will be offered. Hemp tow,initially imported from Eastern Europe, will be the raw materialfor the hemp pulp. Prior to pulping it will be cut to a fiberlength of 2-6 millimeters. Schneidershne will not remainthe sole buyer of hemp pulp produced in Germany. Several Germanfirms are also interested in the use of hemp pulp formanufacturing technical and household filters. Their mainmotivation is the development of product lines which provideecological benefits compared to wood pulp based products. Forexample, hemp-based filter papers are more resistant to moistureand can meet quality requirements without the addition ofsynthetic resins. The first of these products will likely beintroduced in early 1995. The major German producer of cigarette paper, EFKA-Werke,introduced 100% hemp based paper for the first time in the summerof 1994. These Cauma hemp papers were introduced successfullyby a smart marketing campaign. The paper is manufactured inFrance where all of the hemp pulp produced is converteddomestically to paper. Textiles The market for hemp-based textiles has grown much faster thanwas expected based on the results from previous studies. Sinceearly 1994, the Hemp House chain has successfully marketedvarious kinds of hemp textiles, such as denim-type jackets andpants. The textiles are predominantly manufactured in Hungary.Over the last several months, ecologically minded textilecompanies have shown an increased interest in the bioresourcehemp. It can be expected that fabrics and garments, some of themprobably produced in Germany, will soon be available on themarket, sold not only by outlets specializing in hemp productsbut also by ecologically oriented mail-order businesses andboutiques. Apparently, the German market is particularly open fornatural hemp fiber because the ecological aspects are taken moreseriously in the textile sector there, and because naturalfiber-based textiles, well suited for a strict eco-labeling, arerare and expensive. The positive marketing image of hemp willfurther contribute to the development of markets which are not asaccessible to flax. A frequently heard argument is that hemp fiber is not wellsuited for the production of soft and easy-care textiles, whichprovide the familiar cotton comfort. However, initial tests inthe textile industry have shown that certain environmentallyfriendly, predominantly mechanical processes allow improvementsin the everyday-wear characteristics of hemp textiles. Additionalprocesses are currently being developed. The already mentioneduse of cottonized short fibers, instead of the traditional longfiber, will create further opportunities for hemp, once theprocess is established on the full-scale level. This may allowhemp to make inroads into the market now held by cotton-basedtextiles in the not too distant future. Building materials Following publication of the "Hanf" book in Germany,the already strong domestic ecologically-oriented buildingmovement developed a high level of interest in the use of hempshives as a material for construction. Most popular to date hasbeen the French product ISOCHANVRE which is used as a buildingand thermal insulation material. In 1994, ISOCHANVRE was firstused in Germany, in combination with lime, as an insulatingplaster in the remodeling of older buildings. A German companyhas been using hemp shives for the construction of floors since1957. Current efforts to use shives in the production ofecological particle boards and building blocks are alsopromising. In the long-term, the use of hemp fiber may become moreimportant for the building industry. Potential products includelight-weight construction boards, fiber-cement boards andfiber-reinforced plaster. Earlier this year, a German firmintroduced flax fiber-based insulating mats which substitute forrock wool mats and provide the same level of thermal insulation.The company is also developing hemp tow based mats but willsuspend their release until domestic hemp is available, sincethey deem the necessary long-distance transport of the towecologically unacceptable. Hemp oil The characteristics and potential uses of hemp seed oil arethe subject of several ongoing studies in academia and industry.Initial results show that hemp oil is one of the most valuablevegetable oils, both for food and technical applications. Theresearch focuses on various aspects which had been investigatedpreviously for oil seeds other than hemp. This includes, forexample, the composition of the fatty acid spectrum of hemp oilfrom various sources, shifts in this spectrum during plantgrowth, the biodegradability of hemp oil based detergents, andtaste and durability of hemp oil. It can be expected that the application for registration ofhemp oil as an edible oil will be initiated in early 1995. In1994, an Austrian firm surprised the public with the presentationof a complete line of hemp oil-based personal care products, suchas soap, shampoo, bubble bath etc. A German firm recentlyintroduced a hemp oil perfume which is based on a 19th centuryrecipe. Medical uses The potential medical applications of hemp, or rathercannabinoids, have been under a taboo in Germany for a long timeand cannabinoid research is virtually non-existent. Thissituation is now changing, due in part to the translation of thewell-known book "Marihuana - the forbidden medicine" byGrinspoon and Bakalar (1993), which was complemented by a reviewof the results from recent medical research and a summary of thelegal and medical situation in Germany (Grotenhermen and Karus1994). This and a concurrent modification of the federalnarcotics act (BtMG) which simplified clinical tests with delta-9-THCare likely to result in an increase in the research ofcannabinoids in the near future. Forecast At this point, it can only be speculated how the currentGerman prohibition on the cultivation of low-THC hemp willeventually be overcome. Ongoing legal activities include a lawsuit filed by the agricultural association GAIA against BAM witha Berlin court. The subject is permission to cultivate hemp on a110 ha plot near Berlin. While filing a suit with the EuropeanCourt is another promising strategy, this route has not beentaken because of the costs and time involved. Administrativelythe easiest way to eliminate the prohibition is a modification ofthe BtMG to EU guidelines as part of its routine adjustment, aprocess which is carried out almost annually without muchpublicity. The fact that a majority of political players in theagricultural and environmental arenas, such as the GermanAssociation of Farmers, have already come out in support of there-admission of hemp for cultivation suggests that such a changewill probably occur once the cultivation and use of fiber hempbecome more established in other European countries. Until such time, it is advisable to press forward with thedevelopment of hemp technologies and products and to benefit fromthe current favorable technological and marketing conditions inGermany. Such a strategy would allow hemp to be processed bymodern and ecologically sound technologies and turned intoinnovative products as soon as the prohibition on cultivation isended. This would effectively close the value-adding chainbetween cultivation and marketable product. Thus, the primarytasks ahead are to overcome the existing lack of funding for hempR&D through the use of scientifically founded arguments, andthen to integrate the numerous ongoing activities, undertakenwith much enthusiasm and little financial support, intoprofessionally coordinated, interdisciplinary projects. The first steps in this direction are currently being taken.Only a few examples can be mentioned here. The Hanfgesellschaftis currently in the planning stages for a large scaleGerman-Polish hemp cultivation and processing project. Co-fundingfrom the EU's Eastern Europe Incentive program will be appliedfor. The nova-Institute, Cologne, is coordinating the planningfor a major technology project which would focus on research,development and pilot-scale implementation of innovative,ecological product lines based on hemp. Finally, the BIOROHSTOFFHANF (Bioresource Hemp) trade fair and conference will be held inMarch 1995 in Frankfurt. BIOROHSTOFF HANF combines the firstinternational product and technology exhibit with the firsttechnological-scientific symposium on the subject of hemp as abioresource. Scientists, farmers, and developers and vendors oftechnology and products from around the world will present thestatus of their research, concepts and products. For moreinformation on this event refer to the announcement on page 64. References Bredemann G., K. Garber, W. Huhnke and R. von Sengbusch, 1961. Die Zchtung von monzischen und dizischen, faserertragsreichen Hanfsorten (Fibrimon und Fibridia). Zeitschrift fr Pflanzenzchtung 46: 235-245. Bredemann G., 1952. Weitere Beobachtungen bei Zchtung des Hanfes auf Fasergehalt. Der Zchter 22 (9): 257-269. Gminder E., 1924. Die Kotonisierung deutscher Bastfasern und ihre Auswirkungen auf Ackerbau, Technik und Volkswirtschaft. Die Technik in der Landwirtschaft 5: 64-68. Grinspoon L. and J. B. Bakalar, 1993. Marihuana, the forbidden medicine. Yale University Press, New Haven/London. Grotenhermen F. and M. Karus, 1994. Marihuana. Die rechtliche Situation in Deutschland. Der Stand der medizinischen Forschung. Pages 211-271 in: Marihuana. Die verbotene Medizin, L. Grinspoon and J. B. Bakalar, Verlag Zweitausendeins, Frankfurt. Herer J., M. Brckers, KATALYSE, 1993. Die Wiederentdeckung der Nutzpflanze Hanf. Verlag Zweitausendeins, Frankfurt. Herzog R. O. et al., 1927. Hanf und Hartfasern, Julius Springer Verlag, Berlin. Karus M., W. Linden, Ch. Murr and F. Waskow, 1994a. ber die universelle Nutzpflanze Hanf. Pages 297-372 in: Die Wiederentdeckung der Nutzpflanze Hanf, J. Herer, M. Brckers, KATALYSE (from the 21st Edition), Verlag Zweitausendeins, Frankfurt. Karus M., F. Grotenhermen and H. Schaaf, 1994b. Mibrauchspotential THC-armer Faserhanfsorten als Rauschdroge, KATALYSE-Institut, Kln. Krber-Grohne U., 1988. Nutzpflanzen in Deutschland, Konrad Theiss Verlag, Stuttgart. Pelz H. and D. L. Kretschmer, 1977. Schlesisches Kochbuch - Schlesisches Himmelreich, Bergstadtverlag, Mnchen. Sandermann W., 1992. Papier, eine spannende Kulturgeschichte, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Male Cannabis. Illustration taken from: N. Ceapoiu, 1958. Cnepa. StudiuMonografic. Academia Republicii Populare Romne, Institutul deCercetari Agronomice, Editura Academiei Republii PopulareRom"ne, Bucuresti, 734 p. Next WT01-B20-141IA087-000631-B009-71http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01212.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074802 text/html 6209HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:47:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:25 GMTContent-length: 5994 1000 tonnes of Dutch hemp produced by Hemp-Flax B.V. 57 1000 tonnes of Dutch hemp produced by Hemp-Flax B.V. F.P. de Vries, M.J.F. Hendriks, A.B. Dronkers, and E. Dronkers Hemp-Flax B.V., Stationsweg 22, 6684 DG Ressen, The Netherlands. Phone. +3188181794, Fax +3188182463 The Dutch hemp-for-paper project In February 1994, the final report of the Dutch hemp research programme was presented. It took Dfl 17 million to evaluate several alternatives for a hemp paper production sequence from seed to final product. The most viable sequence was transformed into a business concept (Van Berlo 1993). The developed methods should have provoked a major breakthrough in large-scale hemp processing in the Netherlands. However, the paper industry was not interested in risking an investment in a pilot plant. Hemp-Flax, a new initiative Contrary to the paper industry, some people believe that the time is ripe for reintroduction of hemp for fibre. In early 1994, one of the authors (E.D.) founded Hemp-Flax B.V. for the production and processing of hemp and flax. These annual fibre crops may provide a solution to problems in agriculture and industry (and thus the economy). A modern flax processing factory in Nagele, the Netherlands, was purchased and in this facility a new hemp processing line is being installed next to the existing one for flax, which will remain operational. Hemp cultivation Several farmers were contracted to cultivate 140 hectares (ha) of hemp in the Veenkolonin (N.E. Netherlands) during the summer of 1994. This was the largest hemp cultivation area in the Netherlands in sixty years. The objective of this first season was to explore the agronomy, the logistics, and Dutch markets for hemp. Paper-based products and textile markets were not primary targets for strategic reasons. The farmers did the soil preparation and sowing according to their own views. Seed from the French monoecious hemp varieties Fdora, Flina, Fibrimon, and Fdrina were supplied by Hemp-Flax. The crop was harvested by Hemp-Flax in cooperation with the farmers. This way, the farmers gained experience and developed various practical methods. The influence of soil structure and water regime on hemp growth were surveyed. Furthermore, liquid manure was demonstrated to be a good fertilizer. The farmers applied for a larger hemp growing area for 1995 because they were enthusiastic about hemp's effect on the soil structure, its cultivation, and its performance. Local youths, who had taken some plants, were probably less enthusiastic about its performance. Hemp harvesting Although fungicides or pesticides were not used, the losses from Botrytis cinerea and other pathogens were insignificant. Self-thinning, as described by van der Werf (1994), was observed, but the level was unclear. Plant numbers of 50-200 per m2 have been counted with a sowing density of 30-90 kg/ha. The harvested yield was 6-9 tonnes/ha of air-dried matter. The yield was not expected to be optimal, since farmers had no previous experience with hemp cultivation and harvesting. Several harvesting methods were tested and the most practical method proved to be swath mowing, followed by dew retting and turning of the swath. The air-dried crop was pressed in large bales and transported to a storage place. This harvesting method resulted in clean fibre during the dry period in August and a nicely retted fibre after the wet periods in September, 1994. Hemp processing In the factory, hemp bast fibres are separated from the core by a special process developed by Hemp-Flax. Several applications of the bast and core have been optimized. These products include a planting substrate, a building material, non-wovens, bio-filters and adsorbants. Industries that want to explore applications with hemp are welcome to contact Hemp-Flax for consultation and sample material. Future developments Hemp is a strong natural fibre with great endurance.The agronomic advantages of hemp over other fibre crops include:a high yield, reduction of agro-chemical requirements, soil improvementand weed control. Hemp fibre can replace other natural fibres,wood, asbestos, glass fibre, steel, polypropylene and polyethylene(Brouwer 1991). Prices of current artificial and mineral fibreshave increased, which makes substitution by natural fibres possible.So, sooner or later, hemp will become more attractive as a sustainablesource of fibre produced in the western world. Governmental andagricultural organizations can help to bring about regulationswhich will make it easier for farmers to grow this crop. Regulationsand public acceptance will determine the rate of introduction.Hemp-Flax B.V. will encourage all parties to grow more hemp, whichwill contribute to a more healthy, natural environment. References Brouwer W.G.J., 1991. Produkten uit planten: vezels [Products from plants: fibres]. Pages 45-70 in: Plantaardige grondstoffen voor de industrie [Plant-based raw materials for industry]. W.G.J. Brouwer ed., Samson, Alphen aan de Rijn, Netherlands. Van Berlo J.M., 1993. Papier uit hennep van Nederlandse grond. Eindrapportage van vier jaar henneponderzoek: Business concept en onderbouwingen. [Paper from hemp grown in the Netherlands. Final report of four years of research on hemp: Business concept and foundations]. ATO-DLO, Wageningen, the Netherlands. Van der Werf H.M.G., 1993. Crop physiology of fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). Doctoral thesis, Wageningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, the Netherlands. NextWT01-B20-142IA087-000631-B009-95http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01213.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074813 text/html 6218HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:48:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:21 GMTContent-length: 6003 Hemp facts and hemp fiction 58 Hemp facts and hemp fiction Hayo M.G. van der Werf International Hemp Association, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, the Netherlands Jack Herer's book, The Emperor Wears No Clothes, edited by Chris Conrad, Lynn Osburn and Judy Osburn, provides fascinating reading. It was one of the major causes of the enormous increase in interest in fibre hemp in recent years. Although most of the information contained in the book is valid, some of its claims are clearly incorrect. Like Jack Herer and his editorial team, I am convinced that hemp has real potential as a 'new' crop and that it deserves more attention from farmers and agronomists. We are currently witnessing the renaissance of fibre hemp, but I think this renaissance is not well served by making unrealistic claims regarding the potential of hemp. Some quotes from The Emperor Wears No Clothes : "Hemp [...] uses the sun more efficiently than virtually any other plant on our planet" (page 2). "Depending on which U.S. agricultural report is correct, an acre of full grown hemp plants can sustainably provide from four to 50 or even 100 times the cellulose found in cornstalks, kenaf or sugar cane - the planet's next highest annual cellulose plants" (page 44). "Hemp hurds are 77 % cellulose" (page 44). Herer and his editorial team claim that hemp produces higher yields than other crops and that hemp hurds, which make up 60 to 80 % of the stem dry weight, contain 77 % cellulose. These claims are repeated in other books: Energy Farming in America (by Osburn), Hemp, Lifeline to the Future (by Conrad). Both claims are simply wrong. For a start, cellulose content of hemp hurds has been found to vary between 32 and 38 % (Bedetti and Ciaralli 1976, van der Werf 1994). Possibly, Herer confuses the hurds, which form the woody core of the hemp stem, with the bark, which forms the outer layer of the hemp stem. The bark contains the long bast fibres which are used in textile manufacturing. The cellulose content of the bark is much higher than that of the core. It has been found to lie between 53 and 74 % (Bedetti and Ciaralli 1976, van der Werf 1994). One of the objectives of the research I conducted over the last four years was to investigate the yield of hemp relative to that of other crops. Essentially, all agricultural crops do the same thing: they intercept light with their canopy and, in the leaves, sugars are formed as a result of photosynthesis. Most of the sugars move out of the leaves to other parts of the plant and are transformed into other organic substances, e.g., cellulose and lignin in the stem, and starch, protein and oil in the seed. When growing conditions are optimal, that is, in the absence of limitations due to lack of water or nutrients, or due to pests, diseases, or other stresses the yield of any crop will depend on: a) the total amount of light (L) intercepted by the crop canopy during the growing season; b) the radiation use efficiency (RUE): the amount of dry plant material produced per unit of light intercepted by the canopy; c) the harvest index (HI): the fraction of the plant parts of economic value in the total plant dry matter produced. This can be summarized in a simple formula: Yield = L x RUE x HI Grown side by side under favourable growing conditions, different crops may have different yields. Relative to most other crops grown in the Netherlands, fibre hemp intercepts quite a lot of light (L is high) because the crop can be sown early and it grows well at low temperatures, so the canopy is established rapidly. The radiation use efficiency of fibre hemp is relatively low, probably as the result of the structure of the canopy and the relatively high lignin content in the stem. As with other annual fibre crops, such as flax or kenaf, the harvest index of fibre hemp is relatively high. In the most favourable growing conditions, we obtained yields of up to 15,000 kg of stem dry matter per hectare (6,070 kg per acre). Under simular conditions, other crops such as maize, sugar beet or potato produced similar dry matter yields. All results indicate that as far its yield is concerned, fibre hemp is in no way exceptional. These results have been detailed in my thesis, Crop Physiology of Fibre Hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). From these results I cannot help but conclude that the claim that hemp produces higher yields than other crops, simply is not true. This, of course, does not necessarily mean that hemp is not an interesting crop for farmers. I think that hemp is an excellent candidate to fill the niche for an annual fibre crop in temperate climates. Hemp seems to be an attractive crop for a sustainable agricultural system, as it has moderate fertilizer requirements, needs little or no pesticides and suppresses weeds and some major soil-borne pathogens. Cannabis is certainly a valuable crop plant, and its future succes will depend in part on the responsible dissemination of accurate information concerning its benefits. References Bedetti R. and Ciaralli N., 1976. Variazione del contenuto della cellulose durante il periodo vegetativo della canapa. [Variation of the cellulose content during the vegetative period of hemp.] Cellulosa e Carta 3: 72-30. Herer, J., 1992. Hemp & the Marijuana Conspiracy: The Emperor wears no clothes. HEMP publishing, Van Nuys, California, 198 pp. Van der Werf H.M.G., 1994. Crop physiology of fibre hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). Doctoral thesis, Wageningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, the Netherlands. NextWT01-B20-143IA087-000631-B009-120http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01214.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074828 text/html 12196HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:48:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:18 GMTContent-length: 11980 Book Review 59 Book Review Re-discovery of the Crop Plant Cannabis Marihuana Hemp (Die Wiederentdeckung der Nutzplanze Cannabis Marihuana Hanf). By Jack Herer, Mathias Brckers and Katalyse. Zweitausend-eins, Frankfurt am main, Germany. Nineteenth printing, 463 pp. Judging by its length and the broad spectrum covered, this book could be regarded as a monograph if the style, contents and presentation were not of such a popular nature. It will still fill a definite need, however, since over the past 40-50 years not only has the production and processing of this crop been discontinued in Western Europe, but the plant itself has almost faded into oblivion. One reason for this was the craze for synthetic fiber materials in the late fifties and early sixties (e.g., nylon) which supplanted not only hemp, but flax as well, though they were also unable to compete with cotton. The other reason was the hysterical attitude towards drugs, which started in the USA and had such an influence on other governments. They were poorly informed on this subject, but committed to this campaign for other reasons and even fibre hemp, which is not classified as a drug, was banned from cultivation (as in Germany, for instance). The only exceptions to this were France, where 4,000-5,000 hectares of hemp have always been grown for paper manufacturing purposes, and Holland, with its liberal drug policy, where the sale and consumption of hashish was tolerated in the justified hope that this would distract the attention of the population from harder drugs (e.g. heroin, cocaine etc.). This concept has been a success. Returning to a criticism of the book itself, it is a pity that the title includes the word marihuana, which is compromised throughout the world. This is hardly the way to popularise hemp. To date, only specialists are aware of the medical effects of THC, while marihuana still has a disreputable sound for society in general. The book is characterised throughout by an enthusiasm and bias in favour of a good cause that sometimes goes to extremes, leading to material errors and illusory lines of argument. Nevertheless, the book does good service towards the enlightenment of the relevant authorities, organisations and governments in the hope that this propaganda on behalf of hemp will be a success. The book is a "hybrid": chapters II and III were written by Germans on the European and specifically German aspects of the plant. While the first chapter, written by the American author Herer, deals mainly with the many-sided practical utilisation of hemp, the German sections attempt to give a certain amount of scientific background: botany, ecological requirements, production technology, etc. Of particular interest are the detailed discussion of the process which finally led, in 1937, to the prohibition of hemp production in the USA and to the banning of research into THC, again in the USA, in 1978, and the description of the road which led to synthetic THC. The struggle being wrought in the USA by marihuana lobbyists at all levels right up to the president also makes fascinating reading, while the arguments and factual information presented on the medicinal action of THC are convincing, as are references to the collusion between the pharmaceutics industry and the government, aimed at maintaining the ban on THC. Finally, there is a unique summary of the history of hemp cultivation, the like of which, as regards both the extent and richness of data, has never previously been published. The Americans have every right to complain about the prohibition of hemp production and to lobby for its reauthorisation since the ban was actually lifted for a few years during the war ("Hemp for Victory"), but Western Europeans have no cause to complain about the disappearance of hemp, because they have undeservedly forgotten about it over the last 40 years. In Western Europe, nobody banned the cultivation of hemp. It was simply ousted by artificial fibres. The largest hemp producing state was Italy, where cultivation also ceased in the sixties, so the statement that hemp is still grown commercially in Italy (p. 269) is incorrect. On the other hand, French hemp production is mentioned as if it had begun again in 1990, although it was never abandoned there, an area of 4,000 - 5,000 hectares having been constantly sown to hemp for paper manufacturing purposes. It was also the French who produced the first low THC monoecious varieties. In Eastern Europe, the production of hemp was never discontinued, though the situation differed considerably from one country to the other. Large-scale production was only carried out in the Soviet Union, Romania, and Hungary, which is not mentioned at all in the book, but where the highest yield averages were produced (9 t stems/ha on 6,000 ha in 1989). Hungary was also the biggest exporter of hemp cloth to the Soviet Union (5 million m2/year), since it provided the best quality. I do not know where the author found his data on the highly developed hemp production of Romania, because the average yields in this country were actually extremely low. Regarding the Bulgarian hemp production, it was never of great importance and there has been no breeding for the last 30 years. It is true that no books on hemp have been published in Germany over the last 40 years, but there was no call for such books, as nobody was interested in the subject. It is only now that the time is ripe for this venture. It is also true, however, that in 1961 Prof. Hoffmann devoted a full chapter to hemp breeding in the monumental work by Roemer and Rudorf Handbuch der Pflanzen-zchtung in which he made frequent references to the author of this review. A decade later, the book by Hoffmann, Mudra and Plarre, Lehrbuch der Zchtung landw. Kulturpflanzen, also discussed hemp breeding at far greater length than was justified by its importance in Germany, and this was repeated in the 2nd edition published in 1980. Finally, in 1988, Prof. Geisler included a brief but correct chapter on hemp production in his book entitled Pflanzenbau. So there was no shortage of literature, just a lack of interest. It is disappointing to note that both the American and the German authors betray a great deficiency in knowledge on hemp production and research in Eastern Europe, though a book of this calibre deserves to have been supported by more accurate data. Instead, the authors plead the difficulty of not understanding the language (though the publications always have a German or English summary). I myself, for example, have written four articles in German, published in various German journals, reporting on the results of Hungarian hemp breeding. If the authors had read these articles they would not have written the erroneous statement that monoecious hemp varieties have a 50% higher fibre content than dioecious varieties. The variety with the highest fibre content in the world is, in fact, the Hungarian dioecious variety KOMPOLTI, which was used to improve the fibre content of French varieties and which has a considerably greater stem yield than any monoecious variety. It was also in Hungary that the first hybrid varieties were produced and the first unisexual forms consisting solely of females. Dutch researchers from Wageningen set up the experiments needed for their paper project (p. 344) using the Hungarian variety Kompolti hybrid TC, which proved to have the greatest stem yield. Romania is often mentioned in the book, though it has only two varieties with moderate yield potential (Fibramulta and Secueni 1). A number of dioecious varieties are available in Italy, but these are not cultivated now. Many monoecious varieties are available at Gluchov in the Ukraine, and many types of harvesters have been developed in Gluchov, but yield averages are very low. It is strange that the book makes no mention of French monoecious hemp varieties (Futura, Fdrina, Flina, etc.), although these are grown on the greatest area in EU countries at present. As already indicated above, over- enthusiasm, sometimes without good groundings, often leads the authors into the dead-end of objective errors and illusory lines of argument. For instance, it is a great exaggeration to calculate that hemp could be grown on 6 million hectares in the EU countries. This would require an enormous infrastructure, for which the funds are simply not available. Several dozen hemp factories, oil plants, spinning and weaving mills and panel-making factories would be needed within the production area, since it is not worth transporting hemp more than 40-50 km even in bales. It is a great error to expect an oil yield of 24 million tons: this is obviously based on the data in Table 12 (p. 452), which have been incorrectly understood from Romanian literature, suggesting that hemp gives a seed yield of 4000 kg/ha (pp. 314, 347, 349). This is a biological absurdity. Present knowledge puts the yield potential of the best seed-producing varieties (mid-Russian) as 1000 kg/ha, which is far lower than that of sunflower, and on average only 600-800 kg can be expected. It follows from this that in Germany rapeseed far surpasses hemp in seed-yielding ability and thus in oil yield. It can thus be seen that hemp is not, and never will be, a mass oil-producing plant, as it produces few seeds. For this reason, its excellent but expensive oil will remain the foodstuff of the rich. Herer's speculation on the conversion of hemp into methanol is equally illusory (p. 105). If even 10% of the many hundreds of millions of tonnes of oil used in the USA each year were to be replaced by hemp methanol, hemp would have to be sown on 5-10 million hectares: the cost of infrastructure and technology would exceed even the capital potential of the USA. In addition, due to transportation problems, thousands of decentralised methanol plants would be required. This belongs to the world of fantasy. I think it is also unrealistic to expect a dry stem yield of 10-12 t/ha in Germany. This can only be achieved in more southern-lying countries and only with southern (late) varieties. It is an exaggeration to suggest that hemp fibre could be used without mixing with other fibres to weave the finest cloths (shirts), since it is common knowledge that with the present technology, threads of at most Nm 10-12 can be spun from hemp, compared to Nm 40-50 for flax. The difference in fineness between the two plants requires no explanation. We do know that very fine hemp yarn is made in China using various half-manual technologies. However these processes can not be directly applied in Europe. In summary, the publication of this book was very timely and provides interesting, convincing and useful reading for all those who wish to work with or perhaps invest in this crop, or who have to teach or study it. Although it is a popular account rather than a scientific work, it will nevertheless prove informative for researchers, since it contains many data which are only otherwise available after long searching in libraries. The errors and exaggerations listed above do not detract from the usefulness of the book or from the burning desire of the authors to see hemp reinstated to its rightful place among the valuable crops, for the good of humanity. The criticism is not intended to deter the authors, but to encourage them to eliminate the exaggerations and errors from later editions of the book. Dr. Ivn Bcsa, GATE Agricultural Research Institute, Kompolt - Hungary NextWT01-B20-144IA087-000631-B009-143http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01215.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074841 text/html 13932HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:48:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:46 GMTContent-length: 13716 Interview 61 Interview Professor Dr. Ivn Bcsa, the breeder of Kompolti hemp Ivn Bcsa is the eldest and one of the most successful active hemp breeders of Europe. For 40 years, he improved eight state-registered fibre hemp varieties, four of which are still cultivated. The improvement of the first unisex hybrids (pure female F1 originating from a monoecious x dioecious crossing) and the development of Bredemann's idea and method are linked with his name. During his career he bred only dioecious and unisex hybrids. He used monoecious varieties only as crossing partners because he was convinced (later proven by experimental evidence) that the monoecious varieties produce lower yields than the dioecious ones due to a 20 % inbreeding depression. He also improved the chlorophyll-deficient yellow-stemmed and the spherical ornamental varieties that characterise the extensiveness of his breeding work. We introduce here a part of this multifarious and rich life-work via interview (12 October 1994). Journal of the IHA: When was hemp introduced to Hungary? Ivn Bcsa: We don't know exactly. The Slavic people, who inhabited what is now Hungary up 'till about 900 AD, probably cultivated hemp. The first written reference to hemp is found in a royal customs bill of Esztergom from 1198 AD (At the time Esztergom was the capital of Hungary, where the kings of the first dynasty ruled). In this 800-year old customs document written in Latin, hemp was mentioned together with flax. At the time, hemp was not imported into Hungary but was an age-old native crop. Until 1860-1870 hemp was grown and processed solely by peasants. After that time, Italian hemp cultivars, which were grown and processed on an industrial scale, were introduced into Hungary. Until 1960, peasant and industrial hemp production coexisted. The forced collectivisation of agriculture in 1960 caused the disappearance of hemp production by peasants. JIHA: How did you get interested in hemp breeding? IB: In 1949, at the beginning of my career, I was appointed as the assistant of Dr. Rudolf Fleischmann, who founded the Kompolt Research Institute in 1918 and who started working with hemp in 1920. His cultivar "Fleischmann" was very famous in all of Eastern and Central Europe. It replaced the Italian cultivars Carmagnola and Bolognese which were grown until then. Our cultivar "Kompolti" initially originated from "Fleischmann". After Fleischmann's death in 1951 his 'inheritance' was divided between the three breeders working at Kompolt. As I was the youngest of the three, I got the two crops the others did not want: hemp and alfalfa. Hemp was not an easy crop to do breeding work on, as there was not much literature available. At that time only German and Russian literature was available. JIHA: Why have you bred dioecious cultivars while many other hemp breeders have developed monoecious cultivars? Ivn Bcsa (Photo R.C. Clarke.) IB: The natural state in which hemp appears was and is dioecious. Monoeciousness is artificial in hemp, it can only exist with the help of man, and without selection, the dioecious state will return in two or three generations. It is therefore very hard and demanding to keep 90 to 95 % monoeciousness during seed multiplications. Apart from that, however, monoecious hemp is appropriate only when the crop is grown for so-called double use, i.e. when both stem and seed are harvested. This is the case in France and in the former Soviet Union, where most crops are grown for double use. In a dioecious crop, the male plants will be strongly deteriorated when the crop is harvested at seed ripeness, so in this case one needs monoecious cultivars. In Hungary and its neighbouring countries, like formerly in Italy, this double use is unknown. Here fibre hemp is grown as a dense crop which is harvested at the time of male flowering ("green hemp"), while seed production takes place in crops grown at a low plant density and with completely different growing techniques. For this 'classic' use monoecious cultivars are of no use, so we never bred a monoecious cultivar. Furthermore, monoeciousness has two large disadvantages. In the first place, all monoecious cultivars which I tested over the last 20 to 25 years yielded 10 to 20 % less than dioecious cultivars. This is caused by the possibility of self-pollination and the resulting inbreeding. With model experiments and with biometric determinations we have established that 20-25 % of self-pollination takes place in monoecious hemp, and this is the cause of the lower stem yield. In the second place, in monoecious hemp, the genetic progress for fibre content is slow, because the so-called Bredemann principle can not be used. The Bredemann principle consists of the rapid determination of fibre content in male plants before they flower, so that only the males with the highest fibre content are allowed to pollinate the female plants. In a breeding garden (nursery) of one hectare, I have 15,000 to 20,000 plants and I need only the very best 50 to 100 males for the pollination. (This can be compared to breeding of dairy cows, where a few hundred extremely good bulls inseminate all the cows of an entire country.) In monoecious hemp this approach can not be used, so the rate of genetic progress is only 50 % or less of that in dioecious hemp. In spite of these disadvantages, we use a monoecious hemp cultivar in breeding, but only as a parent for unisexual hemp. JIHA: Which brings up the next question: why did you develop a unisex cultivar? IB: After the collectivization of agriculture in Hungary in the early sixties, the farmers were no longer interested in producing hemp seed, an activity which has not been mechanized until the present day. As a result of this, seed for sowing became scarce and the hemp industry had to import poor-quality land races from Turkey. From the research conducted by McPhee, von Sengbusch and Hoffmann we know that when a monoecious hemp plant pollinates a dioecious female the offspring (F1) consists for over 90 % of females, for 3-5 % of monoecious plants bearing mainly female flowers and for only 2-3 % of true males. This small number of males however is sufficient to ensure adequate pollination of the crop. As the stand consists mainly of seed-bearing (female + monoecious) plants, with the same habit, we called it unisexual hemp. Such a stand yields 60 - 80 % more seed than a dioecious cultivar. The seed produced on this stand (F2) is used as sowing seed for fibre production. We called this cultivar "UNIKO-B". It is, in fact, a "single-cross" between Kompolti and Fibrimon, but it is the F2 generation which is commercialized. Von Sengbusch and Hoffmann described the phenomenon, but they did not think of its practical use. In Kompolt we make the cross between Kompolti and Fibrimon on a surface of 5 hectare (ha), this yields 2,500 kg of F1 seed. The F1 seed is sown on a surface of 500 ha, yielding 400,000 kg of F2 seed, which is used to sow 3,000-3,500 ha of fibre hemp. Unisexuality also can be used to exploit the effect of heterosis which occurs when Chinese and European (Kompolti) cultivars are crossed. This heterosis can increase stem yield by 8-15 %. To be able to cross two cultivars we have to construct a female parent which is "male sterile", a unisexual F1 can be used as such. In order to obtain a unisexual chinese line we used Fibrimon as the donor, which was backcrossed many times until we obtained a monoecious line with a Chinese habit. We crossed this line with the original dioecious Chinese cultivar to obtain a unisexual Chinese F1. This F1 was crossed with Kompolti hemp to obtain Kompolti Hybrid TC. The stem yield of Kompolti Hybrid TC is 5-8 % higher than that of Kompolti. The unisexual Chinese F1 has an unsurpassed seed yield potential of up to 1,500-1,600 kg per ha. JIHA: You made Kompolti Hybrid TC by crossing populations. Do you think much can be gained by using inbred lines to make hybrids? IB: I can not answer this question because I never made inbred lines. It takes too long to make inbred lines and it is technically very difficult. JIHA: What techniques did you use to develop your cultivars which have the highest fibre content of all existing hemp cultivars? IB: As I explained in response to an earlier question, I used the Bredemann principle, which consists of the rapid determination of fibre content in male plants before they flower, so that only the males with the highest fibre content are allowed to pollinate the female plants. In some of my cultivars bark content is 38 - 40 %, this corresponds to a bast fibre content of 32 - 34 %. If the bark content is higher than 40 % the crop may lodge. JIHA: How important is fibre quality relative to fibre content? IB: Fibre quality is negatively related to fibre content. As we continue to select for fibre content we unwillingly increase the proportion of secondary fibre, which has a negative effect on fibre quality. JIHA: Do cultivars differ in fibre fineness?IB: In a study comparing several cultivars on a number of locations, we found that the differences in fibre fineness between the locations were bigger than the differences between the cultivars. JIHA: How did you develop Panorama, the world's only ornamental hemp cultivar? IB: In a grow out of hemp from Lebanon we found two or three short and strongly branched plants. This character was lost in the F1, it reappeared in the F2. Through breeding I obtained a pure variety. We also made a monoecious version, because for an ornamental cultivar it is preferable if there are no male plants which die early. Panorama was commercialized in Hungary in the 1980s, but it was not much sold. JIHA: How did you develop Kompolti Srgaszr, the yellow stem hemp cultivar? IB: Yellow stem was a mutation from professor Hoffmann, it was very early and very short. I crossed and backcrossed it often with the normal Kompolti to improve its stem yield and fibre content. In the end, we reached a very high fibre content, but its stem yield remained 15 % inferior to that of Kompolti. The textile factory liked the yellow stem very much, because in poor weather conditions the yellow stems can be dried in sheafs instead of being dried on the field. If this is done with normal hemp it causes problems because the stems in the middle of the sheaf do not lose their green colour, which eventually has a negative effect on the fibre colour. JIHA: Current hemp cultivars were developed for textile fibre production. Do you think it will be feasible to develop special cultivars for seed production or for paper production? IB: For textile production, new cultivars are not needed, because we have maximum stem yield and maximum fibre content. For paper production the high-fibre cultivars are very suitable, the presence of secondary bast fibre is no problem in this case. For seed production we have unisex, the single cross mother of Hybrid TC. It can yield up to 1,600 kg/ha of seed. JIHA: What is the present status of your hemp cultivars, which can be bought in commercial quantities and through whom? IB: Currently available are Kompolti, UNIKO-B, Kompolti Hybrid TC (but this cultivar contains too much THC for growing it in the EU) and Fibriko, which is like Kompolti Hybrid TC but with Kompolti Srgaszr instead of Kompolti as the father. Fibriko is not yellow but its fibre quality is better than that of Kompolti Hybrid TC. The cultivars belong to the GATE Agricultural Research Institute, but the institute is not allowed to do business, so a company called Fibroseed was founded. Fibroseed sells seed and pays the royalties to the GATE Institute. JIHA: What was the most important discovery or technique in the history of hemp breeding? IB: The use of the Bredemann principle was the most important innovation, the second most important contribution to hemp breeding was the development of monoecious hemp and in the third place I would list the making of unisexual hemp. JIHA: What would be the most important developments to help make hemp a main-stream agricultural crop? IB: First the laws which forbid hemp growing in a large number of countries will have to be changed. In the second place technical innovation is needed, we need better machines for harvesting and for the entire processing chain. NextWT01-B20-145IA087-000631-B009-164http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01216.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074906 text/html 5664HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:48:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:41 GMTContent-length: 5449 The 1994 TAPPI pulping conference 63 The 1994 TAPPI pulping conference Ir. Gertjan van Roekel, Jr. ATO-DLO Agrotechnology, P.O. Box 17, 6700 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands. Phone: +31 8370 75327, Fax: +31 8370 12260. E-mail: g.j.van.roekel@ato.agro.nl The scenic San Diego (California, USA) bay was this year's setting for the annual pulping conference of the Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry of the USA. Eleven hundred engineers, managers, consultants, equipment manufacturers, suppliers and researchers presented and discussed almost 150 papers on various aspects of pulping wood and non-wood fibre sources. Papers covered the whole range of raw material supply, up to the quality of pulps for papermaking, with a clear emphasis on raw material supply and on advances in bleaching technology. A number of countries are experiencing shortages in wood supply: western Canada, northwest USA, Japan, China, and India. The US and Canada import trees from, for instance, Chile to keep a major economic activity (pulping) going, and Japan is importing Eucalypts from Australia. Especially for Asia, the importance of nonwood fibres to meet the rapidly increasing demand for paper was widely recognised. Bleaching operations and research for advanced bleaching technology were widely discussed, since the industry is in the process of changing from open bleaching systems using chlorine to closed systems using peroxide, oxygen and ozone with reduced emissions to the environment. Also, the recently developed use of microbial enzymes in the so-called biobleaching process has actually been implemented in large scale pulpmills. Non-wood pulp In the non-wood sessions, papers were presented on cultivation, harvest, storage, preprocessing, pulping and papermaking properties of kenaf, bagasse, bamboo, reed canary grass, wheat straw, seedflax and hemp. The heavily crowded non-wood room gave the impression that non-wood fibres have gained increased interest. New technologies Several research institutions had come up with new systems and ideas for more efficient pulping methods, with higher yields and less environmental impact. The process of treating hemp and kenaf fibre with fungi prior to mechanical pulping showed that such a method can prove useful in reducing energy consumption without losing pulp quality. The fungal treatment may be combined with the storage between harvest and processing. A paper by J.E. Harsveld van der Veen from ATO-DLO in the Netherlands disputed one of the most firm beliefs in fibre pulping: the idea that fibres are held together only by lignin. The paper suggests that not only lignin, but also pectin plays an active role in fibre bonding in plants and trees. Therefore, pulping methods designed for removing lignin are inefficient, and should be modified to remove the complex of both lignin and pectin. Hemp The use of hemp as a papermaking fibre was mentioned a few times in relation to very special and technical applications. Delegates tended to opt for kenaf and seedflax for bulk non-wood papermaking in the US. Seedflax is a fibre very much comparable to hemp, and actually in use as a specific cigarette paper. It is available in huge quantities in Canada, virtually for free, since it is a byproduct of linseed oil production. Kenaf is grown in the southern US states, and seems to do very well. It is preferred over hemp for non-wood tree-free paper production in the US, because of the prohibition of hemp cultivation. General impression The pulping industry is running short of trees. As a result, woodpulp prices have gone sky-high (+130% in one year). Even with this in mind, the majority of delegates still feel that it will take another thirty years before fibre crops will be grown on a large scale in the western world. The reason is the low cost of bulk transport, and the often government-supported exploitation of wood plantations all over the world. It is still cheaper to ship wood from Chile to Canada than to grow hemp there (although the situation is changing rapidly). When the cost of bulk transportation increases, certain areas will be better off growing their own fibre crops. Until then, the use of agricultural wastes such as seedflax straw and cereal straw will be encouraged. These materials are available free, and will probably attain a negative cost as they become more and more difficult to dispose of by incineration. Asian countries like China and India will see continued and increased use of non-wood fibre, but with improved and environmentally cleaner technology. It may well be that the technologies developed in the West will be applied and fine-tuned in the East, until the West starts using nonwood fibre. The only exception in the western world is the market where consumers insist on paper made without cutting trees. The tree-free paper market is expected to grow further, since cutting of primary forests is still going on, even for papermaking, and many consumers are not willing to support deforestation. For additional information please contact the author. NextWT01-B20-146IA087-000631-B009-188http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01217.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074921 text/html 3854HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:49:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:38 GMTContent-length: 3639 Bioresource Hemp 64 Bioresource Hemp Product and Technology Exhibition & Technological-ScientificSymposium March 2-5, 1995, Frankfurt, Germany, as part of the BIO FACH '95 The nova-Institute for Political and Ecological Innovationin Cologne and the marketing firm TriTec, Bochum, have organizedthe first international product and technology exhibition on hempas a bioresource, to be held from March 2-5, 1995.in Frankfurt.The first international scientific-technological symposium onthe subject of hemp will be held concurrently. Product and Technology Exhibition The aim of the BIORESOURCE HEMP is to support the realizationof innovative ecological products based on hemp; to bring togetherscientists, companies and institutions involved in hemp technologyand hemp product development. Further synergistic effects resultfrom its proximity to BIO FACH '95, which is the largest tradefair of ecological consumer goods world-wide. In March 1994, morethan 675 BIO FACH exhibitors displayed their products. At thesame time, the BIO FACH Congress also takes place. There, expertsreport on current topics relevant to the eco-industry. Owing to the proximity to BIO FACH, the exhibitors of BIORESOURCEHEMP have the opportunity to present their new product linesand innovative technologies to a great number of ecologicallyinterested visitors. Approximately 30 companies and institutesfrom various countries will present their technologies and productsin a projected exhibition area of 1,000 square meters. Technological-Scientific Symposium A four-day hemp symposium will also be held. Conference languagesare German and English and the admission fee for 4 days is DM600 (students DM 300). For one day it is DM 250 (students DM 125).For IHA members, a 20% reduction applies if the registration feeis paid before February 28. The symposium will cover the entire spectrum of current international hemp research and technology development. The scientific level of the symposium is intended to allow a realistic assessment of the unquestionably attractive biological resource, hemp. Preliminary program: First day, March 2: Introduction The rediscovery of hemp: status reports from selected countries. Second day, March 3: The hemp plant, breeding, cultivation and harvesting. Third day, March 4: Hemp fibre, processing and products: paper, textiles and building and other materials. Fourth day, March 5: Non-fibre uses of hemp: oil, shives, cannabinoids and others Panel discussion: the future of hemp Currently over 30 scientists from more than 12 countries are expected. Speakers were selected by the nova-Institute in cooperation with the International Hemp Association (IHA). A detailed preliminary program can be obtained from the nova-Institute or contact the IHA. For more information:Product and Technology Exhibition TriTec GmbH Bochum, Frnk Zander, Hermannshhe 7a, 44789Bochum, Germany. Phone: 49 234 309080, Fax: 49 234 37330. Technological-Scientific Symposiumnova-Institute for Political and Ecological Innovation, Cologne,Office Michael Karus, Thielstr. 35, 50354 Hrth, Germany. Phone and Fax: 49 2233 72625 Fax: 49 234 37330 NextWT01-B20-147IA087-000631-B009-209http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01218.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074931 text/html 5828HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:49:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:35 GMTContent-length: 5613 Guide for authors 65 Guide for authors The Journal of the International Hemp Association publishes original research, literature reviews and news items on hemp. Contributions concern fibre, seed and resin, and can come from a wide range of disciplines such as agronomy, chemistry, ecology, economy and markets, genetic resources and breeding, history, medicine, physiology, phytopathology, products and applications, and technology. Since the readership of the IHA Journal is much broader than for a single-discipline journal, highly specialized terminology should be defined or avoided. The significance of a statement, or the reasoning behind a conclusion, may have to be more fully explained than in a more specialized journal. Contributions should be written in English and not exceed 10 double-spaced typed pages (ca. 4000 words), longer contributions may be accepted if they can be serialized in two consecutive issues. Authors not fluent in English must have their paper reviewed and checked by a colleague who is fluent. Manuscripts can be submitted to: IHA Journal, Editorial Office, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, The Netherlands. The preferred medium of submission is on disk with accompanying manuscript in triplicate. Units. Research papers and literature reviews should use the International (SI, or metric) system throughout. Title page. The title page should give the following information: 1) title of the paper; 2) names and addresses of the authors. Abstract. The abstract should be 100 to 250 words suitable for readers from a broad range of disciplines. The abstract should summarize the aim of the work, the methods used, and give the main results and conclusions. Structure. Research papers should be subdivided into four main sections: Introduction, Materials and Methods, Results and Discussion. The last three sections may be subdivided to improve clarity; a Conclusions section may be added if appropriate. The section on Materials and Methods should be succinct, but should contain sufficient detail to enable the reader to deduce what exactly was done. All abreviations and acronyms must be fully defined when first used. Numerical results should be shown in tables or figures. References. Publications are cited in the text by author(s) and date e.g. (Smith 1980). For publications by more than two authors use (first author et al. date). Under references, papers should be cited as follows: Journal articles: Pate D. W., 1983. Possible role of ultraviolet radiationin evolution of Cannabis chemotypes. Economic Botany37: 396-405. Bedetti R., R. Ciarrocca and N. Ciaralli, 1979. Caratteristiche chimiche di sette cultivar di canapa. [Chemical characteristics of seven hemp cultivars.] Cellulosa e Carta 29: 25-34. Book: Clarke R. C., 1980. Marijuana Botany. And/Or Press,Inc., Berkeley, California. Part of a book: Adler M. W. and E. B. Geller, 1986. Ocular effectsof cannabinoids. Pages 51-70 in R. Mechoulam, ed., Cannabinoidsas therapeutic agents. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida. Manuscript preparation. The entire manuscript, including abstract and references, should be typed on one side of standard-size paper, double spaced with all margins 2.5 cm. Starting with the title page, label all pages in the upper righthand corner with the first author's last name and the page number. Do not use hyphens unless the hyphen is part of the word. Tables should fit on one page, be numbered consecutively, and each table should be on a separate sheet. Every figure and table should have an explanatory title, so that it can be understood without reference to the text. For both tables and figures, authors should indicate on the manuscript the preferred position of insertion in the text of the paper. Every table and figure should be mentioned at least once in the text. Manuscript submission. Manuscripts should be submitted in triplicate to: Editorial Office, IHA Journal, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, The Netherlands. All research papers and literature reviews will be carefully refereed for international relevance and quality. Submission of an article is understood to imply that the article is an original contribution that has not been published elsewhere in substantially the same form, and that it is not being considered for publication elsewhere. Electronic manuscripts. Once a paper is accepted, the preferred medium of submission is on 3.5 inch disk (Macintosh or MS-DOS format), preferably MS word 5.0 or later, with accompanying manuscript. It is important that the file on disk and the printout are identical. Do not allow the word processor to introduce word splits and do not use a 'justified' layout. It is very important that files are saved in the word processor format. If the word processor features the option to save files "in flat ASCII", please do not use it. Please ensure that only the relevant file (one complete article) is on the disk. Also, specify the type of computer and word processing package used and label the disk with the first author's name and the name of the file on the disk. NextWT01-B20-148IA087-000631-B009-236http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01219.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074943 text/html 770HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:49:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:32 GMTContent-length: 556 CannabAds 66 CannabAds CannabAds Information. Size : 4 cm high and 8 cm wide. US $100. Give ad location preferences. Ad must be delivered camera ready to the JIHA 60 days before printing (1 June and 1 December). The JIHA reserves the right to refuse any ad we find untruthful, deceptive or objectionable. NextWT01-B20-149IA087-000631-B009-257http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01220.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074958 text/html 1748HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:49:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:30 GMTContent-length: 1533 VIR germplasm preservation project VIR germplasm preservation project In 1994, the Vavilov Research Institute/International Hemp Association Cannabis Germplasm Preservation Project had its second successful year of growing out endangered seed accessions. The project was expanded in 1994 to include facilities in the Ukraine and Italy. However, additional grow out locations must be arranged for 1995 and 1996. A progress report will be presented by the IHA at the Bioresource Hemp symposium to be held in Frankfurt, Germany, March 2-5, 1995 and will also be published in the third issue of the Journal of the International Hemp Association. The most important obstacle the VIR/IHA project faces is funding for the 1995 grow outs. A concerted effort will be made to canvas the symposium participants for both IHA membership and public/private grants to support the Cannabis Germplasm Preservation Project. The IHA will also present several other talks at Bioresource Hemp concerning various aspects of Cannabis, its production and utilization. We anticipate that this symposium will bring together many interesting members of the Cannabis community and it should be very worthwhile for those interested in the advancement of Cannabis as an environmentally friendly crop (see announcement on pg. 64). NextWT01-B20-150IA087-000631-B009-286http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01221.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075010 text/html 2689HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:50:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:27 GMTContent-length: 2474 Diversity in <I>Cannabis></I> Diversity in Cannabis The PhD thesis, "Diversity in Cannabis" (available through the IHA), which Etienne de Meijer defended on 22 December 1994, reports on the evaluation of a collection of Cannabis germplasm at the Centre for Plant Breeding and Reproduction Research, at Wageningen, in the Netherlands. About 160 accessions were evaluated for traits related to stem production, stem quality, psychoactive potency and resistance to soil pathogens. Prospects for the breeding of improved cultivars for paper pulp production were based on the diversity for these traits, their stability, and mutual relations. Variation in stem production could be attributed largely to differences in phenological development, which again was related to the latitude of origin of the accessions. Large variation was found for the fraction of bark tissue, woody core and primary and secondary bark fibre in the stem. Since woody core fibres of Cannabis are on average too short to produce high quality paper, the evaluation was directed at variation for core fibre dimensions as well. This variation proved to be very limited and breeding for improved core quality was not considered promising. Accessions were classified into the phenotypes 'drug', 'intermediate' and 'non-drug' on the basis of their contents of the cannabinoids delta-9-tetra-hydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. There were no strict relationships between the cannabinoid profiles and other traits. Significant variation was further revealed in host reactions to the root-knot nematode Meloidogyne hapla. The study indicated that many combinations of character states can be established through breeding. An a priori grouping of accessions based on the purpose and status of domestication (fibre cultivars, fibre landraces, drug strains, and wild or naturalized populations) was validated by the experimental observations. Contents of bark fibre and cannabinoids discriminated most between groups. A genetic characterization on the basis of electrophoretic patterns of seed proteins was unsatisfactory as it neither reflected common ancestry, nor showed a relation with groupings based on origin or agronomic and morphological traits. NextWT01-B20-151IA087-000631-B010-10http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01222.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075024 text/html 2275HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:50:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:24 GMTContent-length: 2060 Membership Application Membership Application Form Send this form to: International Hemp Association, Postbus 75007, 1070 AA Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Please enclose the annual dues, preferably as an International Postal Money Order, American Express credit card authorization or Eurocheque. For 1995, annual membership fees are: Student -NLG 45/US$ 25; Individual -NLG 90/US$ 50; Sustaining -NLG 180/US$ 100 or more (PLEASE PRINT BLOCK LETTERS): Name/Organisation..........................................................................................Street address..............................................................................................City............................................State/Province.............................................Postal code...........................  Country...........................................................Tel................................  fax.............................  e-mail................................Membership:     O Student     O Individual      O Sustaining       Main field of interest or expertise............................................................... Can we include your name, address and field of interest or expertise in a membership list to be made available to our members?      O Yes  O NoDate.............................  Signature O Charge my American Express card #___________________________________                             Expiration date______________________ NextWT01-B20-152IA087-000631-B010-32http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01223.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075039 text/html 670HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:50:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:24:21 GMTContent-length: 456 In our next issue: In our next issue:Vol. 2 No. 1,  June 1995VIR germplasm 1994New processing technologyfor short fibreHemp pulp technologyHemp in ChinaAgronomic research onhemp in GermanyInterview: Dr. Mahlberg    PLUS   MORE ! Return to table of contentsWT01-B20-153IA087-000631-B011-143http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/list1.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075508 text/html 10175HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:55:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:24 GMTContent-length: 9960 Candidate Responses - First List Drug PolicyForum of Iowa 1996 Survey of Candidates' Views on Drug Policy Arnold, Richard - IA House 91 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 16, 1996 Aumer, Pat - IA House 7 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Austin, Chuck - IA Senate 34 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Barry, Donna - IA House 82 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 17, 1996 Bartz, Merlin - IA Senate 10 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 16, 1996 Behn, Jerry - IA Senate 40 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Blodgett, Gary - IA House 19 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 19, 1996 Boddicker, Dan - IA House 39 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Bradley, Clyde - IA House 37 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Brauns, Barry - IA House 47 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Brunkhorst, Bob - IA House 22 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Bukta, Polly - IA House 38 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Carroll, Michael - IA Senate 12 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 18, 1996 Chapman, Kay - IA House 53 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 19, 1996 Cirivello, Jill - IA Senate 20 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Corbett, Ron - IA House 52 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Cuddehe, Michael - US House 1 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Dennler, Christine - IA House 59 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Diehl, Fred - IA House 91 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 9, 1996 Dimick, Michael - US House 5 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 30, 1996 Dix, Bill - IA House 21 - Republican - No Opponent - Oct. 25, 1996 Dolecheck, Cecil - IA House 88 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Drake, Richard - IA Senate 24 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Drees, Jim - IA House 80 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Dresher, Dale - IA House 85 - Reform Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Freeman, Mary Lou - IA Senate 5 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Friedrich, James - IA House 29 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Gratzon, Fred - US Senate - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 16, 1996 Gries, Don - IA House 12 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Gustafson, Jim - IA House 10 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Halvorson, Roger - IA House 32 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Holmes, George - IA House 53 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Holst, Eric - IA House 48 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 21, 1996 Jantz, Clifford - IA House 69 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Jensen, John - IA Senate 11 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Jolly, Robert - IA House 22 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Juhl, Charles - IA House 60 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Kibbie, John - IA Senate 4 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 King, Steve - IA Senate 6 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Kinzer, Ron - IA House 44 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Klemme, Ralph - IA House 4 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Kruse, Dick - US House 3 - Libertarian Challenger - Nov. 4, 1996 Lehman, Douglas - IA House 2 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Lord, David - IA House 77 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Marcus, Jay - US House 3 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Meyer, Jim - IA House 11 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Moses, Edward - IA House 90 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Neill, Claude - IA Senate 46 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 11, 1996 Nelson, Linda - IA House 83 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 24, 1996 Olsen, Carl - US House 4 - Libertarian Challenger - Oct. 28, 1996 Ortega, Dave - IA House 67 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 16, 1996 Osterhaus, Robert - IA House 34 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Palmer, William - IA Senate 33 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 21, 1996 Payne, Dan - IA Senate 4 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Perry, Robert - IA Senate 10 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Peterson, John - IA Senate 48 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Rayhons, Henry - IA House 16 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Redwine, John - IA Senate 2 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Rehberg, Kitty - IA Senate 14 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Richardson, Steve - IA House 89 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Schmidt, Mark - IA House 96 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Schoeman, Albert - US House 2 - Libertarian Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Schurer, Neal - IA Senate 30 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Seemuth, Stephanie - IA House 20 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Semprini, Ted - IA House 14 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Siders, Donald - IA House 17 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Smith, Robert - IA House 25 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Sparr, Fred - IA Senate 2 - Independent Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Stewart, Phyllis - IA House 14 - Independent Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Sulentic, Joe - US Senate - Independent Challenger - Oct. 23, 1996 Sullivan, Dan - IA House 98 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Swim, Dave - IA House 43 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 18, 1996 Teut, Eldon - IA House 12 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 26, 1996 Tyrrell, Phil - IA House 59 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Vande Hoef, Richard - IA House 6 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Veenstra, Kenneth - IA House 5 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Young, Ronn - IA Senate 32 - Reform Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Zeigler, Wayne - IA House 18 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Zieman, Lyle - IA Senate 16 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996WT01-B20-154IA087-000631-B044-74http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/question1.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081637 text/html 12363HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:16:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:00 GMTContent-length: 12147 Question #1 - Are we winning? Question #1 -Are we winning? Who responded? Total Republicans Democrats Natural Law Libertarians Reform Party # 79 43 24 4 3 2 Are we winning the war ondrugs? YES 4 3 1 0 0 0 5% 7% 4% Tougher laws, more police,courts, prisons? YES 19 17 1 0 0 0 24% 40% 4% Shift to prevention andtreatment? YES 26 10 9 4 0 1 33% 23% 37% 100% 50% Combine tougher laws withprevention & treatment? YES 19 10 9 0 0 0 24% 23% 37% Should we legalize drugs? YES 7 0 3 0 3 1 9% 12% 100% 50% WT01-B20-155IA087-000631-B044-108http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/question2.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081652 text/html 10509HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:16:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:56 GMTContent-length: 10293 Question #2 - Medical marijuana? Question #2 -Medical marijuana? Who responded? Total Republicans Democrats Natural Law Libertarians Reform Party # 79 43 24 4 3 2 Yes. YES 35 13 13 1 3 2 44% 30% 54% 25% 100% 100% No. NO 22 17 4 1 0 0 28% 40% 17% 25% Not sure. ? 20 10 7 2 0 0 25% 23% 29% 50% Other. * 2 2 0 0 0 0 3% 5% WT01-B20-156IA087-000631-B044-137http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/question3.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081707 text/html 10541HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:16:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:51 GMTContent-length: 10325 Question #3 - Marijuana and drugs? Question #3 -Marijuana and drugs? Who responded? Total Republicans Democrats Natural Law Libertarians Reform Party # 79 43 24 4 3 2 Yes, marijuana should beseparated from hard drugs. YES 18 5 5 3 3 1 23% 12% 21% 75% 100% 50% No, marijuana should beclassified with hard drugs. NO 38 27 9 1 0 0 48% 63% 37% 25% Not sure. ? 22 11 10 0 0 0 28% 26% 42% Other. * 1 0 0 0 0 1 1% 50% WT01-B20-157IA087-000631-B044-170http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/question4.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081727 text/html 10410HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:17:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:47 GMTContent-length: 10194 Question #4 - Alcohol and tobacco? Question #4 -Alcohol & tobacco? Who responded? Total Republicans Democrats Natural Law Libertarians Reform Party # 79 43 24 4 3 2 Should alcohol and tobaccobe prohibited? YES 0 0 0 0 0 0 Should alcohol &tobacco be more tightly controlled? YES 13 8 5 0 0 0 16% 19% 21% Current policy isappropriate. YES 44 27 13 0 1 2 56% 63% 54% 33% 100% Other. * 22 8 6 4 2 0 28% 19% 25% 100% 67% WT01-B20-158IA087-000631-B044-198http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/question5.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081736 text/html 10599HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:17:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:43 GMTContent-length: 10383 Question #5 - Blue-ribbon commission? Question #5 -Commission? Who responded? Total Republicans Democrats Natural Law Libertarians Reform Party # 79 43 24 4 3 2 Should Congress create ablue-ribbon commission? YES 45 19 18 1 3 2 57% 44% 75% 25% 100% 100% No. NO 10 7 3 0 0 0 13% 16% 12% Not sure. ? 20 15 2 2 0 0 25% 35% 8% 50% Other. * 4 2 1 1 0 0 5% 5% 4% 25% WT01-B20-159IA087-000631-B044-227http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/question6.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081745 text/html 8797HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:17:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:38 GMTContent-length: 8582 Question #6 - Participate in discussion? Question #6 -More discussion? Who responded? Total Republicans Democrats Natural Law Libertarians Reform Party # 79 43 24 4 3 2 Would you like toparticipate in further discussion? YES 51 26 17 2 3 2 65% 60% 71% 50% 100% 100% No. NO 7 5 1 1 0 0 9% 12% 4% 25% Not sure. ? 21 12 6 1 0 0 27% 28% 25% 25% WT01-B20-160IA087-000631-B044-265http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/list2.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081759 text/html 11627HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:17:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:19 GMTContent-length: 11411 Candidate Responses - Second List Drug PolicyForum of Iowa 1996 Survey of Candidates' Views on Drug Policy Angelo, Jeff - IA Senate 44 - Republican Challenger - Nov. 20, 1996 Arnold, Richard - IA House 91 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 16, 1996 Aumer, Pat - IA House 7 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Austin, Chuck - IA Senate 34 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Barry, Donna - IA House 82 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 17, 1996 Bartz, Merlin - IA Senate 10 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 16, 1996 Behn, Jerry - IA Senate 40 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Blodgett, Gary - IA House 19 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 19, 1996 Boddicker, Dan - IA House 39 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Bradley, Clyde - IA House 37 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Brauns, Barry - IA House 47 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Brunkhorst, Bob - IA House 22 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Bukta, Polly - IA House 38 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Carroll, Michael - IA Senate 12 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 18, 1996 Chapman, Kay - IA House 53 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 19, 1996 Cirivello, Jill - IA Senate 20 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Corbett, Ron - IA House 52 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Cormack, Michael - IA House 13 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 27, 1996 Cuddehe, Michael - US House 1 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Dennler, Christine - IA House 59 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Diehl, Fred - IA House 91 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 9, 1996 Dimick, Michael - US House 5 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 30, 1996 Dix, Bill - IA House 21 - Republican - No Opponent - Oct. 25, 1996 Doderer, Minnette - IA House 45 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 25, 1996 Dolecheck, Cecil - IA House 88 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Drake, Richard - IA Senate 24 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Drees, Jim - IA House 80 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Dresher, Dale - IA House 85 - Reform Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Fallon, Ed - IA House 70 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 27, 1996 Foege, Ro - IA House 50 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 29, 1996 Freeman, Mary Lou - IA Senate 5 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Friedrich, James - IA House 29 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Gratzon, Fred - US Senate - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 16, 1996 Gries, Don - IA House 12 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Grundberg, Betty - IA House 73 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Gustafson, Jim - IA House 10 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Halvorson, Roger - IA House 32 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Holmes, George - IA House 53 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Holst, Eric - IA House 48 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 21, 1996 Jantz, Clifford - IA House 69 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Jensen, John - IA Senate 11 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Jolly, Robert - IA House 22 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Juhl, Charles - IA House 60 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Kibbie, John - IA Senate 4 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 King, Steve - IA Senate 6 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Kinzer, Ron - IA House 44 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Klemme, Ralph - IA House 4 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Kremer, Joseph - IA House 27 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Kruse, Dick - US House 3 - Libertarian Challenger - Nov. 4, 1996 Lehman, Douglas - IA House 2 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Lord, David - IA House 77 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Marcus, Jay - US House 3 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Mascher, Mary - IA House 46 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 20, 1996 Meyer, Jim - IA House 11 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Moses, Edward - IA House 90 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Neill, Claude - IA Senate 46 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 11, 1996 Nelson, Linda - IA House 83 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 24, 1996 Olsen, Carl - US House 4 - Libertarian Challenger - Oct. 28, 1996 Ortega, Dave - IA House 67 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 16, 1996 Osterhaus, Robert - IA House 34 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Palmer, William - IA Senate 33 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 21, 1996 Payne, Dan - IA Senate 4 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Perry, Robert - IA Senate 10 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Peterson, John - IA Senate 48 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Rayhons, Henry - IA House 16 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Redwine, John - IA Senate 2 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Rehberg, Kitty - IA Senate 14 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Reynolds-Knight, Rebecca - IA House 94 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 25, 1996 Richardson, Steve - IA House 89 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Scherrman, Paul - IA House 33 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 25, 1996 Schmidt, Mark - IA House 96 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Schoeman, Albert - US House 2 - Libertarian Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Schurer, Neal - IA Senate 30 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Seemuth, Stephanie - IA House 20 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Semprini, Ted - IA House 14 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Siders, Donald - IA House 17 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Smith, Robert - IA House 25 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Sparr, Fred - IA Senate 2 - Independent Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Stewart, Phyllis - IA House 14 - Independent Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Sulentic, Joe - US Senate - Independent Challenger - Oct. 23, 1996 Sullivan, Dan - IA House 98 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Swim, Dave - IA House 43 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 18, 1996 Szymoniak, Elaine - IA Senate 36 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 21, 1996 Teut, Eldon - IA House 12 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 26, 1996 Tyrrell, Phil - IA House 59 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Vande Hoef, Richard - IA House 6 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Van Maanen, Harold - IA House 95 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Veenstra, Kenneth - IA House 5 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Young, Ronn - IA Senate 32 - Reform Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Zeigler, Wayne - IA House 18 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Zieman, Lyle - IA Senate 16 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996WT01-B20-161IA087-000631-B046-103http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/list3.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082139 text/html 6535HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:21:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:14 GMTContent-length: 6320 Legislator Responses - Third List Drug PolicyForum of Iowa 1996 Survey of Legislators' Views on DrugPolicy Angelo, Jeff - IA Senate 44 - Republican Challenger - Nov. 20, 1996 Arnold, Richard - IA House 91 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 16, 1996 Barry, Donna - IA House 82 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 17, 1996 Bartz, Merlin - IA Senate 10 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 16, 1996 Behn, Jerry - IA Senate 40 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Blodgett, Gary - IA House 19 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 19, 1996 Boddicker, Dan - IA House 39 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Bradley, Clyde - IA House 37 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Brauns, Barry - IA House 47 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Brunkhorst, Bob - IA House 22 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Bukta, Polly - IA House 38 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Chapman, Kay - IA House 53 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 19, 1996 Corbett, Ron - IA House 52 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Cormack, Michael - IA House 13 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 27, 1996 Dix, Bill - IA House 21 - Republican - No Opponent - Oct. 25, 1996 Doderer, Minnette - IA House 45 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 25, 1996 Dolecheck, Cecil - IA House 88 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Drake, Richard - IA Senate 24 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Drees, Jim - IA House 80 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Fallon, Ed - IA House 70 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 27, 1996 Foege, Ro - IA House 50 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 29, 1996 Freeman, Mary Lou - IA Senate 5 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Gries, Don - IA House 12 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Grundberg, Betty - IA House 73 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Jensen, John - IA Senate 11 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Kibbie, John - IA Senate 4 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 King, Steve - IA Senate 6 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Kinzer, Ron - IA House 44 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Klemme, Ralph - IA House 4 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Kremer, Joseph - IA House 27 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Lord, David - IA House 77 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Mascher, Mary - IA House 46 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 20, 1996 Meyer, Jim - IA House 11 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Osterhaus, Robert - IA House 34 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Palmer, William - IA Senate 33 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 21, 1996 Rayhons, Henry - IA House 16 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Redwine, John - IA Senate 2 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Rehberg, Kitty - IA Senate 14 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Reynolds-Knight, Rebecca - IA House 94 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 25, 1996 Richardson, Steve - IA House 89 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Scherrman, Paul - IA House 33 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 25, 1996 Schurer, Neal - IA Senate 30 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Szymoniak, Elaine - IA Senate 36 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 21, 1996 Tyrrell, Phil - IA House 59 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Vande Hoef, Richard - IA House 6 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Van Maanen, Harold - IA House 95 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Veenstra, Kenneth - IA House 5 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Zieman, Lyle - IA Senate 16 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996WT01-B20-162IA087-000631-B011-169http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/arnoldr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075518 text/html 2847HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:55:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:49 GMTContent-length: 2632 Arnold, Richard - IA House 91 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 16, 1996 Richard Arnold Rt. 2, Box 149 Russell, IA 50238 515-535-6313 Iowa House District 91 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-163IA087-000631-B011-193http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/aumerp.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075534 text/html 3086HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:55:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:46 GMTContent-length: 2871 Aumer, Pat - IA House 7 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Pat Aumer 1402 6th St. Milford, IA 51351 712-338-4303 Iowa House District 7 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Other: We must make sure children can not purchase alcohol & tobacco. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-164IA087-000631-B011-217http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/austinc.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075549 text/html 2903HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:55:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:43 GMTContent-length: 2688 Austin, Chuck - IA Senate 34 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Chuck Austin 3136 SW 6th St. Des Moines, IA 50315 515-244-1319 Iowa Senate District 34 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-165IA087-000631-B011-248http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/barryd.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075622 text/html 2844HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:56:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:40 GMTContent-length: 2629 Barry, Donna - IA House 82 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 17, 1996 Donna H. Barry 3305 155th St. Dunlap, IA 51529 712-647-3237 Iowa House District 82 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-166IA087-000631-B011-277http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/bartzm.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075638 text/html 2920HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:56:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:37 GMTContent-length: 2705 Bartz, Merlin - IA Senate 10 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 16, 1996 Merlin E. Bartz 2081 410th St. Grafton, IA 50440 515-748-2724 Senate District 10 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate, with minor changes, specifically regarding youth access. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-167IA087-000631-B011-302http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/behnj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075659 text/html 3451HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:56:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:34 GMTContent-length: 3236 Behn, Jerry - IA Senate 40 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Jerry Behn 1313 Quill Ave. Boone, IA 50036 515-432-7327 Senate District 40 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. No, we're not winning, but I think it needs to be a combination of the above. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Drunken driving laws need to be stricter & better enforced. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-168IA087-000631-B011-320http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/blodgettg.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075709 text/html 3043HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:57:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:32 GMTContent-length: 2828 Blodgett, Gary - IA House 19 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 19, 1996 Gary B. Blodgett 1225 N. Shore Dr. Clear Lake, IA 50428 515-357-8915 Iowa House District 19 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to also emphasize prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes, under a doctor's supervision. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Policy should be adjusted re: tobacco. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-169IA087-000631-B012-13http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/boddickerd.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075718 text/html 2899HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:57:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:01 GMTContent-length: 2684 Boddicker, Dan - IA House 39 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Mary Lou Freeman 311 W. Lakeshore Dr Storm Lake, IA 50588 712-732-3781 Iowa Senate District 5 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Life without parole for smuggling or capitol punishment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Don't think it would do much good. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-170IA087-000631-B012-40http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/bradleyc.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075809 text/html 3188HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:57:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:58 GMTContent-length: 2973 Bradley, Clyde - IA House 37 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Clyde Bradley 835 Blackhawk Lane Camanche, IA 52730 319-259-1233 Iowa House District 37 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure, but see no problem if the doctor is supervising. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Probably, depending on what I am assigned in conjunction with the legislative session and the timing and location of your forum(s). WT01-B20-171IA087-000631-B012-65http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/braunsb.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075839 text/html 2978HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:58:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:55 GMTContent-length: 2763 Brauns, Barry - IA House 47 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Barry Brauns 2381 Blue Heron Ave. Conesville, IA 52739 319-725-6441 HOME 319-627-2414 OFFICE House District 47 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-172IA087-000631-B012-89http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/brunkhorstb.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075848 text/html 2977HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:58:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:52 GMTContent-length: 2762 Brunkhorst, Bob - IA House 22 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Bob Brunkhorst 419 3rd Ave. SW Waverly, IA 50677 319-352-1000 OFFICE 319-352-0065 HOME House District 22 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-173IA087-000631-B012-103http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/buktap.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075857 text/html 3301HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:58:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:50 GMTContent-length: 3086 Bukta, Polly - IA House 38 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Polly Bukta 604 S. 32nd St. Clinton, IA 52732 319-242-6603 Iowa House District 38 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes, under a doctor's strict supervision. I understand with certain illnesses and for relief of pain and nausea, marijuana can be very helpful. It should not, however, be prescribed for any other cause. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-174IA087-000631-B012-120http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/carrollm.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075904 text/html 2993HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:58:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:47 GMTContent-length: 2778 Carroll, Michael - IA Senate 12 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 18, 1996 Michael J. Carroll P.O. Box 665 Hudson, IA 50643 319-988-4323 Iowa Senate District 12 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: WE NEED TO EMPHASIZE BOTH ENFORCEMENT AND PREVENTION TO A GREATER DEGREE. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: CURRENT POLICY IS ADEQUATE EXCEPT IN THE CASE OF MINORS. HERE TIGHTER POLICIES SHOULD BE ENACTED AND ENFORCED. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-175IA087-000631-B012-140http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/chapmank.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075913 text/html 3039HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:59:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:44 GMTContent-length: 2824 Chapman, Kay - IA House 53 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 19, 1996 Kay Chapman 1721 5th Ave. SE Cedar Rapids, IA 52403 319-366-7795 Iowa House District 53 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus and add prevention and treatment to law enforcement. 3 legs of response. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Other: build concensus against use. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-176IA087-000631-B012-163http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/cirivelloj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075926 text/html 3185HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:59:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:41 GMTContent-length: 2970 Cirivello, Jill - IA Senate 20 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Jill Cirivello 6042 Oakbrook Rd. Davenport, IA 52806 PO Box 2296 Davenport, IA 52809 319-340-0907 Iowa Senate District 20 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Other: And possibly the legalization of some drugs in order to regulate them. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate, but they should be taxed equal to what they cost society. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-177IA087-000631-B012-184http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/corbettr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075938 text/html 2930HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:59:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:38 GMTContent-length: 2715 Corbett, Ron - IA House 52 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Ron Corbett 1517 D Ave., NE Cedar Rapids, IA 52402 319-390-2890 House District 52 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-178IA087-000631-B012-205http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/cuddehem.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075951 text/html 3069HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:59:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:31 GMTContent-length: 2854 Cuddehe, Michael - US House 1 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Michael J. Cuddehe 1870 Kelp Ave. Fairfield, IA 52556 515-472-7235 319-358-1280 U.S. House District 1 Natural Law Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Producers of these drugs should bear the cost of the damage they do to society. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-179IA087-000631-B012-219http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/dennlerc.html 206.61.184.43 19970122075959 text/html 3397HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:59:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:28 GMTContent-length: 3182 Dennler, Christine - IA House 59 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Christine Dennler 703 W. Hilton St. Marengo, IA 52301 319-642-7331 eves. House District 59 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Some combination of these two. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure: probably not. It's a drug. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate, with tighter control of cigarettes & alcohol for under 18!. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-180IA087-000631-B012-239http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/diehlf.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080007 text/html 3160HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:00:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:25 GMTContent-length: 2945 Diehl, Fred - IA House 91 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 9, 1996 Fred Diehl 629 S. Jackson Osceola, IA 50213 515-342-4852 House District 91 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? I think we need to go after the big boys - the main arteries & producers - & treat the addicts - so they don't go to black market & steal to satisfy habit. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? We tried prohibition - didn't work - we need to continue making it socially unacceptable to smoke, etc. - Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-181IA087-000631-B012-258http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/dimickm.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080019 text/html 2850HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:00:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:22 GMTContent-length: 2635 Dimick, Michael - US House 5 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 30, 1996 Michael Dimick 1683 Hwy. 1 Fairfield, IA 52556 U.S. House District 5 Natural Law Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-182IA087-000631-B012-279http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/dixb.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080048 text/html 3125HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:00:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:20 GMTContent-length: 2910 Dix, Bill - IA House 21 - Republican - No Opponent - Oct. 25, 1996 Bill Dix 325 S. Cherry St. Shell Rock, IA 50670 319-885-6790 Iowa House District 21 Republican - No Opponent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-183IA087-000631-B013-7http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/dolecheckc.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080104 text/html 2953HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:00:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:14 GMTContent-length: 2738 Dolecheck, Cecil - IA House 88 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Cecil Dolecheck 107 E. Madison St. Mt. Ayr, IA 50854 515-464-3152 House District 88 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-184IA087-000631-B013-33http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/draker.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080124 text/html 3069HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:01:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:11 GMTContent-length: 2854 Drake, Richard - IA Senate 24 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Richard F. Drake 420 Parkington Dr. Muscatine, IA 52761 319-263-2573 Iowa Senate District 24 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Yes, we should keep doing what we're doing. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. More effort on prevention & treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes, for certain treatments. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-185IA087-000631-B013-65http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/dreesj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080144 text/html 2868HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:01:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:08 GMTContent-length: 2653 Drees, Jim - IA House 80 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Jim Drees R 2, Box 111 Manning, IA 51455 712-669-3413 Iowa House District 80 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-186IA087-000631-B013-99http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/dresherd.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080159 text/html 2889HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:01:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:06 GMTContent-length: 2674 Dresher, Dale - IA House 85 - Reform Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Dale Dresher Rt 1 Thurman, IA 51654 712-629-4365 Iowa House District 85 Reform Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we should move toward legalization of drugs to eliminate the black market and its associated violence. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-187IA087-000631-B013-121http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/freemanm.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080211 text/html 3128HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:02:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:57 GMTContent-length: 2913 Freeman, Mary Lou - IA Senate 5 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Mary Lou Freeman 311 W. Lakeshore Dr Storm Lake, IA 50588 712-732-3781 Iowa Senate District 5 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? I have supported the resolution to encourage the feds to review their stand on use of medical marijuana. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-188IA087-000631-B013-144http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/friedrichj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080222 text/html 2950HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:02:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:55 GMTContent-length: 2735 Friedrich, James - IA House 29 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 James A. Friedrich 707 7th Ave. Charles City, IA 50616 515-228-1211 House District 29 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-189IA087-000631-B013-165http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/gratzonf.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080231 text/html 3578HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:02:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:19 GMTContent-length: 3363 Gratzon, Fred - US Senate - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 16, 1996 Fred Gratzon 809 S. 2nd St. Fairfield, IA 52556 515-472-1850 U.S. Senate Natural Law Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Other: THE NATURAL LAW PARTY HAS PROGRAMS THAT ARE SCIENTIFICALLY PROVEN TO REDUCE STRESS -- THE UNDERLYING CAUSE OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: EDUCATION, NOT LEGISLATION -- EDUCATION THAT UNFOLDS INNER GENIUS OF THE INDIVIDUAL SO HE OR SHE SPONTANEOUSLY LIVES IN ACCORDS WITH NATURAL LAW AND DOES NOT MAKE MISTAKES. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Other: IT DEPENDS ON WHO IS INCLUDED. IF THE NATURAL LAW PARTY IS NOT INCLUDED THEN IT WOULD BE A WASTE OF TIME. THE NLP HAS SCIENTIFICALLY PROVEN SOLUTIONS TO DRUG & SUBSTANCE ABUSE. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-190IA087-000631-B013-185http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/griesd.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080241 text/html 3146HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:02:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:16 GMTContent-length: 2931 Gries, Don - IA House 12 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Don Gries 412 Oak Ave. Charter Oak, IA 51439 712-678-3698 House District 12 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. We also need to increase efforts in the area of effective prevention & treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-191IA087-000631-B013-211http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/gustafsonj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080314 text/html 2977HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:02:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:11 GMTContent-length: 2762 Gustafson, Jim - IA House 10 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Jim Gustafson 885 550th St. Storm Lake, IA 50588 712-732-4791 House District 10 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-192IA087-000631-B013-235http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/halvorsonr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080328 text/html 3033HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:03:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:08 GMTContent-length: 2818 Halvorson, Roger - IA House 32 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Roger A. Halvorson P.O. Box 93 Marquette, IA 52158 319-539-2221 HOME 319-539-4931 OFFICE House District 32 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. TAX & REGULATE. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-193IA087-000631-B014-12http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/holmesg.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080355 text/html 5547HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:03:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:05 GMTContent-length: 5332 Holmes, George - IA House 53 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 George Holmes 4002 Sherman St NE #117 Cedar Rapids, IA 52402 319-393-4789 Iowa House District 53 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. LETTERS TO THE GAZETTE Strong families will help cope withdrug gangs The trend is for crack and meth gangs to cometo our city to distribute their drugs and violence. Juveniles join gangs to gain a sense of family,community and security. The break-down of the marriage-basedfamily has allowed gangs to flourish. To reverse this trend the State Legislatureneeds to: Stop the assault on the marriage-based two-parent family. Strengthen our communities. Require our judiciary system to respond quicker and keep violent and juvenile criminals off our streets. To stop the assault on the marriage-basedtwo-parent family, the Legislature should give the materialfoundation back to family through lower levels of taxation,review Iowa's no-fault divorce laws and restore parental rights, authorityand control over children. Fostering a sense of pride in community,encouraging home ownership and actually having police officerslive in at-risk neighborhoods would strengthen our inner city. The Cedar Rapids area is fortunate to havevibrant neighborhood associations that nuture a sense ofcommunity. Pride in the community rises in directproportion to home ownership. Balanced budgets combined withlower levels of taxation do more to encourage home ownership thanany government program. Down payment grants to police officers whopurchase a home in a high-risk area would make these communitiessafer. Quicker arrests and prosecution of suspects bythe county district attorney would go a long way to keep violentand juvenile criminals off our streets. In football, every defensive team has a frontline, a linebacking core and a secondary. If one part of the teamcan't do the job, the whole team suffers. So it is with ourfamilies, community and judiciary system. With stronger families, we will have safercommunities and less need for prisons. George Holmes Candidate for Iowa representative Cedar Rapids WT01-B20-194IA087-000631-B014-33http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/holste.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080405 text/html 3269HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:03:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:01 GMTContent-length: 3054 Holst, Eric - IA House 48 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 21, 1996 Eric Holst 106 Canon Ave. Muscatine, IA 52761 319-263-7278 Iowa House District 48 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, more police and a stronger focus on prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Other: I need to see more of not only the statistical data as well as speak to the folks it would benefit. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Other: I also see a need for stronger message of deterrance through education and the media. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-195IA087-000631-B014-55http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/jantzc.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080414 text/html 3096HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:04:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:55 GMTContent-length: 2881 Jantz, Clifford - IA House 69 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Clifford Jantz 4115 E. Garden Ave. Des Moines, IA 50317 515-266-2013 House District 69 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Other: greater and more forceful interdiction at the nation's borders!! Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-196IA087-000631-B014-79http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/jensenj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080428 text/html 3042HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:04:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:53 GMTContent-length: 2827 Jensen, John - IA Senate 11 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 John Jensen 1331 120th Street Plainfield, IA 50666 319-276-4445 Iowa Senate District 11 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-197IA087-000631-B014-107http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/jollyr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080444 text/html 2909HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:04:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:50 GMTContent-length: 2694 Jolly, Robert - IA House 22 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Robert R. Jolly 310 Longview St. Denver, IA 50622 319-984-5545 Iowa House District 22 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-198IA087-000631-B014-127http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/juhlc.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080455 text/html 2974HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:04:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:47 GMTContent-length: 2759 Juhl, Charles - IA House 60 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Charles L. Juhl 5724 22nd Ave. Dr. Vinton, IA 52349 319-472-5195 House District 60 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. & INCREASE TREATMENT Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-199IA087-000631-B014-159http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/kibbiej.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080528 text/html 3005HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:05:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:44 GMTContent-length: 2790 Kibbie, John - IA Senate 4 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 John P. Kibbie 4285 440th Avenue Emmetsburg, IA 50536 712-852-4140 Senate District 4 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-200IA087-000631-B014-192http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/kings.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080555 text/html 3203HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:05:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:41 GMTContent-length: 2988 King, Steve - IA Senate 6 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Steve King 3897 Esther Ave. Kiron, IA 51448 712-668-2404 OFFICE 712-675-4572 HOME Senate District 6 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? We are losing the war on drugs. We need strict enforcement & punishment for deterrent. Most importantly, we need EXTENSIVE TESTING to Cut Down on DEMAND! Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes - ABSOLUTELY! WT01-B20-201IA087-000631-B014-212http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/kinzerr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080606 text/html 2796HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:06:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:38 GMTContent-length: 2581 Kinzer, Ron - IA House 44 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Ron Kinzer 1516 W. 2nd St. Davenport, IA 52802 319-326-5719 Iowa House District 44 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Yes, we should keep doing what we're doing. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-202IA087-000631-B014-241http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/klemmer.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080620 text/html 2764HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:06:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:35 GMTContent-length: 2549 Klemme, Ralph - IA House 4 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Ralph F. Klemme 13191 Hickory Ave. LeMars, IA 51031 712-533-6364 Iowa House District 4 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: Make law tougher - on hard criminals pushing drugs. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-203IA087-000631-B014-265http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/krused.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080631 text/html 2904HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:06:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:30 GMTContent-length: 2689 Kruse, Dick - US House 3 - Libertarian Challenger - Nov. 4, 1996 Dick Kruse Post Office Box 2282 Ames, IA 50010 515-268-1962 U.S. House District 3 Libertarian Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we should move toward legalization of drugs to eliminate the black market and its associated violence. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes, if time permits. WT01-B20-204IA087-000631-B015-15http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/lehmand.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080640 text/html 2828HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:06:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:27 GMTContent-length: 2613 Lehman, Douglas - IA House 2 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Robert R. Jolly 310 Longview St. Denver, IA 50622 319-984-5545 Iowa House District 22 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-205IA087-000631-B015-47http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/lordd.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080652 text/html 3041HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:06:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:09 GMTContent-length: 2826 Lord, David - IA House 77 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 David G. Lord 1250 K Circle Perry, IA 50220 515-465-2960 Iowa House District 77 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. Short of Time! WT01-B20-206IA087-000631-B015-72http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/marcusj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080705 text/html 3638HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:06:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:06 GMTContent-length: 3423 Marcus, Jay - US House 3 - Natural Law Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Jay Marcus 1108 North B St. Fairfield, IA 52556 515-472-5945 U.S. House District 3 Natural Law Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Other: My book The Crime Vaccine devotes a chapter to what works in drug prevention. Research shows that most programs, including the DARE program, have little effect. They don't offer kids a healthy and enjoyable alternative to drug taking, but instead try to persuade kids to give up something they apparently enjoy. That is an uphill battle! Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. Other: should be a difference in penalties only. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Heavily taxed and not to be sold or used by those under 21. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Depends on who is organizing it and who is participating! WT01-B20-207IA087-000631-B015-104http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/meyerj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080730 text/html 3367HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:07:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:35 GMTContent-length: 3152 Meyer, Jim - IA House 11 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Jim Meyer 1854 280th St. Odebolt, IA 51458 712-668-4184 House District 11 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Yes, we should keep doing what we are doing. Adults need to recognize that alcohol is a drug. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? This is true now. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Over-consumption of alcohol should be discouraged by current law enforcement. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Elected officials should establish a drug & alcohol free attitude. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. I am concerned but have higher priorities at this time. WT01-B20-208IA087-000631-B015-126http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/mosese.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080744 text/html 2983HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:07:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:30 GMTContent-length: 2768 Moses, Edward - IA House 90 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Edward Moses 1407 N. Brobst Knoxville, IA 50138 515-842-3166 House District 90 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? BETTER ENFORCEMENT OF EXISTING LAWS WOULD BE APPROPRIATE. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-209IA087-000631-B015-148http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/neillc.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080800 text/html 2954HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:07:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:26 GMTContent-length: 2739 Neill, Claude - IA Senate 46 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 11, 1996 Claude R. Neill RR 1, Box 103 Clio, IA 50052 515-873-4335 515-873-6325 FAX Senate District 46 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-210IA087-000631-B015-174http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/nelsonl.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080820 text/html 2979HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:08:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:24 GMTContent-length: 2764 Nelson, Linda - IA House 83 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 24, 1996 Linda Nelson 231 Midland Dr. Council Bluffs, IA 51503 712-328-8837 Iowa House District 83 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-211IA087-000631-B015-202http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/olsenc.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080837 text/html 3359HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:08:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:21 GMTContent-length: 3144 Olsen, Carl - US House 4 - Libertarian Challenger - Oct. 28, 1996 Carl Olsen 1116 E. Seneca Ave., #3 Des Moines, IA 50316 515-262-6957 U.S. House District 4 Libertarian Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we should move toward legalization of drugs to eliminate the black market and its associated violence. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? I am opposed to the exclusion of alcohol and tobacco from the federal Conrolled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C.  801 et seq. Whatever criteria we use for setting alcohol and tobacco policy should be the same criteria we use for setting marijuana, cocaine and heroin policy. Alcohol is just as dangerous as cocaine and heroin, and far more dangerous than marijuana. In terms of toxicity, alcohol and tobacco are both more dangerous than marijuana. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-212IA087-000631-B015-232http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/ortegad.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080904 text/html 3012HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:08:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:18 GMTContent-length: 2797 Ortega, Dave - IA House 67 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 16, 1996 Dave Ortega 406 Wilmers Ave. Des Moines, IA 50315 515-285-8442 VOICE 515-285-8168 FAX Iowa House District 67 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Other: I THOUGHT THIS WAS ALREADY ALLOWED. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-213IA087-000631-B015-263http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/osterhausr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080920 text/html 2952HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:09:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:15 GMTContent-length: 2737 Osterhaus, Robert - IA House 34 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Robert J. Osterhaus 216 Austin Ave. Maquoketa, IA 52060 319-652-4784 HOME 319-652-5611 OFFICE Iowa House District 34 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. I might consider a change in the rules governing alcohol & tobacco use. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-214IA087-000631-B015-289http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/palmerw.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080940 text/html 2944HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:09:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:12 GMTContent-length: 2729 Palmer, William - IA Senate 33 - Democratic Incumbent - Oct. 21, 1996 William Palmer 1002 NE Lakeview Dr. Ankeny, IA 50021 515-965-0211 Iowa Senate District 33 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-215IA087-000631-B016-18http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/payned.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080951 text/html 3272HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:09:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:09 GMTContent-length: 3057 Payne, Dan - IA Senate 4 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Dan Payne 301 W. 2nd Street Spencer, IA 51301 712-262-7945 Iowa Senate District 4 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: Drugs have been around for more years than we realize. We just have to keep working. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes, if it is a fact that marijuana is a definite help for eye problems, parkinsons, etc. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. We do need to control distribution to children. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Commissions create other commissions. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. I feel this is a difficult subject - if there were clear answers / solutions, we would not be sending these questionnaires. WT01-B20-216IA087-000631-B016-44http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/perryr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122080959 text/html 3120HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:09:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:06 GMTContent-length: 2905 Perry, Robert - IA Senate 10 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Robert Perry 106 Shellrock Dr. Northwood, IA 50459 515-324-3054 Senate District 10 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Each of these are every bit as serious, if not more serious than our drug problems - yet I'm not sure that our society would accept their prohibition! Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-217IA087-000631-B016-62http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/petersonj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081006 text/html 3058HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:10:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:03 GMTContent-length: 2843 Peterson, John - IA Senate 48 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 John A. Peterson 513 15th Ave. E. Oskaloosa, IA 52577 515-673-9826 Iowa Senate District 48 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we should move toward legalization of drugs to eliminate the black market and its associated violence. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: The law officers, the prosecuting attorneys and the judges should enforce and uphold the laws on alcohol and tobacco. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Other: Not Congress! Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-218IA087-000631-B016-85http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/rayhonsh.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081016 text/html 3343HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:10:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:29 GMTContent-length: 3128 Rayhons, Henry - IA House 16 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Henry Rayhons 2820 Oak Ave. Garner, IA 50438 515-923-2979 Iowa House District 16 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: I have had information sent to me on both sides of this issue! Tougher laws or legalizing them and eliminating the Black Market! I want to study this more. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Current policy is appropriate. Other: I'm not sure if we can put any tighter controls on alcohol and tobacco! Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-219IA087-000631-B016-106http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/redwinej.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081026 text/html 2839HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:10:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:26 GMTContent-length: 2624 Redwine, John - IA Senate 2 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 John Redwine 33533 S. Ridge Rd. Sioux City, IA 51108 712-279-3633 Iowa Senate District 2 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other, we are not winning the war on drugs. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-220IA087-000631-B016-130http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/rehbergk.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081036 text/html 2826HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:10:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:22 GMTContent-length: 2611 Rehberg, Kitty - IA Senate 14 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 17, 1996 Kitty Rehberg 2279 310th Street Rowley, IA 52329 319-938-2659 Iowa Senate District 14 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Yes, we should keep doing what we're doing. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-221IA087-000631-B016-153http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/richardsons.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081048 text/html 3094HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:10:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:36 GMTContent-length: 2879 Richardson, Steve - IA House 89 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Steve Richardson 806 S. Howard Indianola, IA 50125 Iowa House District 89 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Tobacco needs to be more difficult for minors to purchase. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-222IA087-000631-B016-175http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/schmidtm.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081059 text/html 3418HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:10:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:30 GMTContent-length: 3203 Schmidt, Mark - IA House 96 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Mark Schmidt 315 S. West St. Sigourney, IA 52591 515-622-2769 email linnlinc@se-iowa.net House District 96 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. No, we should move toward legalization of drugs to eliminate the black market and its associated violence. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? We need to severely stomp on underage users, increase penalties for drunk driving, and raise taxes for a start. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-223IA087-000631-B016-200http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/schoemana.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081128 text/html 2946HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:11:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:27 GMTContent-length: 2731 Schoeman, Albert - US House 2 - Libertarian Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Albert Schoeman 1111 Bauch St. Waterloo, IA 50701 319-234-1020 U.S. House District 2 Libertarian Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we should move toward legalization of drugs to eliminate the black market and its associated violence. Other: Honest education is the key. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-224IA087-000631-B016-232http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/schurern.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081150 text/html 5024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:11:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:24 GMTContent-length: 4809 Schurer, Neal - IA Senate 30 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Neal Schurer P.O. Box 58 Amana, IA 52203 319-622-3214 WORK Iowa Senate District 30 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. Neal Schurer Iowa Senate District 30 Candidate Drug Policy Forum of Iowa We are a country without hope. We can see the effects ofhopelessness in our families, our schools, and our communities. Iam a firm believer that we as a people need to return to ourmoral and ethical roots. We would all like to live in a country where we care about oneanother. Not just saying so, but once again doing so. Our currentgovernment has grown to mammoth proportions and has virtually renderedthe neighborhood, the school, and the church ineffective andwithout authority. It is my belief and hope that our country's government will cometo see the error of its ways and reduce its size in short order.Government programs are not always the answer to our social problems. We, as individuals, hold the key to social healing. When I, as aSunday School teacher, see a child who is wandering from thepath, I have a moral and ethical obligation to take that child bythe hand and direct them back to their rightful place in society.When a teacher sees a student in need of love and guidance,he/she has a moral and ethical obligation to get involved in thatchild's life to make a difference. When the pastor of a churchsees a family without food, he/she has a moral and ethicalobligation to feed them. We have spent the past forty years or more abdicating our moraland ethical obligations to the Federal Government. Thoseobligations do not belong on the Federal Government's shoulders, theybelong on the citizen's shoulders, both collectively andindividually. I conclude by recommending a 're-teaching' of American minds.Teaching, once again, from the American classrooms and theAmerican pulpits, the glory of personal responsibility. The factthat there are moral and ethical absolutes which dare not beviolated because the consequences are dire. Until our hearts andminds change, we cannot hire enough policemen to keep thelawlessness in check. We cannot build enough prisons to house thecriminals in a licentious society.WT01-B20-225IA087-000631-B016-258http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/seemuths.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081202 text/html 3538HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:11:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:21 GMTContent-length: 3323 Seemuth, Stephanie - IA House 20 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 24, 1996 Stephanie Seemuth 4872 Mallard Ave. Northwood, IA 50459 515-324-1221 Iowa House District 20 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: Until we create a society which rewards and values self control and achievement without the use of drugs, until we place more value on individuals of all races & creeds, we will not win. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Other: I would need strict controls on the indication for useage medically. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Prohibition was tried & failed. Incentives in health insurance benefits & policies may be helpful. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? As a state, Iowa might establish their own task force - national commissions generally spout rhetoric with little substance resulting. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-226IA087-000631-B016-281http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/semprinit.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081213 text/html 2993HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:12:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:18 GMTContent-length: 2778 Semprini, Ted - IA House 14 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 22, 1996 Ted M. Semprini 206 1st Ave. SW Dayton, IA 50530 515-547-2824 Iowa House District 14 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: No. - We need tougher laws and also need to make it easier for people to get help and treatment, other than a friend of mine's cost of $6,000 for cure of alcoholism. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-227IA087-000631-B016-298http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/sidersd.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081222 text/html 2992HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:12:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:15 GMTContent-length: 2777 Siders, Donald - IA House 17 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Donald L. Siders 826 Boone St. Webster City, IA 50595 515-832-4733 Iowa House District 17 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: WE NEED STIFFER PENALTIES BUT ALSO WE NEED TO FOCUS ON PREVENTION & TREATMENT. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. PERHAPS SOME STIFFER CONTROL. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes, IF RECOMMENDATIONS ARE ACTED UPON. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-228IA087-000631-B016-320http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/smithr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081230 text/html 2956HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:12:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:13 GMTContent-length: 2741 Smith, Robert - IA House 25 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Robert Smith 123 Linwood Ave. Waterloo, IA 50702 319-233-3907 HOME 319-234-6819 WORK House District 25 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-229IA087-000631-B017-13http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/sparrf.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081245 text/html 2862HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:12:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:10 GMTContent-length: 2647 Sparr, Fred - IA Senate 2 - Independent Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Fred Sparr 25847 310th St. Hinton, IA 51024 712-947-4783 Iowa Senate District 2 Independent Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-230IA087-000631-B017-37http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/stewartp.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081342 text/html 3370HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:13:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:07 GMTContent-length: 3155 Stewart, Phyllis - IA House 14 - Independent Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Phyllis Stewart 2552 230th St. Duncombe, IA 50532 515-972-4804 House District 14 Independent Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes, if it is the only medication that will do any good, or give relief. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: I don't approve of either one - Don't like advertising on TV & radio or magazines that young people see. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes.&nbps Depends on Date & Location. I do have strong opinions on the way the law treats those on drugs. We should not wait until they are BAD then do something. WT01-B20-231IA087-000631-B017-72http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/sulenticj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081406 text/html 3801HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:13:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:04 GMTContent-length: 3586 Sulentic, Joe - US Senate - Independent Challenger - Oct. 23, 1996 Joe Sulentic 1219 Dolen Place Iowa City, IA 52246 319-351-0013 WORK U.S. Senate Independent Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Alcohol is, by far, the most abused drug in this country. It is most responsible for domestic violence and deaths in comparison to other drugs. Tobacco has been taken on, alcohol should be next. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. Our war on drugs is a failure. I am in favor of sweeping, measureable changes in the war on drugs so we have an idea if we are making any progress. I do not believe in mandatory sentences for drug offenders if that means releasing violent criminals from jail. As for developing drug policy, I would prefer to leave that in the hands of people who are strongly committed to that specific topic. My areas of expertise are economics and the environment. I would be qualified to develop those policies. WT01-B20-232IA087-000631-B017-99http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/sullivand.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081416 text/html 2890HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:14:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:01 GMTContent-length: 2675 Sullivan, Dan - IA House 98 - Republican Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Dan Sullivan 814 N. 9th St. Keokuk, IA 52632 319-524-1322 Iowa House District 98 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-233IA087-000631-B017-121http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/swimd.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081424 text/html 3147HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:14:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:41 GMTContent-length: 2932 Swim, Dave - IA House 43 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 18, 1996 Dave Swim 3852 Marquette St. Davenport, IA 52806 319-391-3054 Iowa House District 43 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: We need tougher laws, more police, courts & prisons. We also must be smarter by investing in prevention, education & treatment. The cost of educating a child in Iowa's public schools is about $5,000. Incarceration is about $30,000. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes, if elected. WT01-B20-234IA087-000631-B017-146http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/teute.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081435 text/html 3046HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:14:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:19:01 GMTContent-length: 2831 Teut, Eldon - IA House 12 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 26, 1996 Eldon Teut 20554 Sumac Ave. Ute, IA 51060 712-885-3321 Iowa House District 12 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? No. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-235IA087-000631-B043-273http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/tyrrellp.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081459 text/html 3056HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:14:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:58 GMTContent-length: 2841 Tyrrell, Phil - IA House 59 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Phil Tyrrell 222 N. Mill N. English, IA 52316 319-664-3075 HOME 319-664-3161 OFFICE House District 59 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-236IA087-000631-B043-302http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/vandehoefr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081512 text/html 2818HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:15:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:55 GMTContent-length: 2603 Vande Hoef, Richard - IA House 6 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Richard P. Vande Hoef 1833 100th Ave. Harris, IA 51345 712-349-2312 Iowa House District 6 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-237IA087-000631-B043-332http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/veenstrak.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081523 text/html 2873HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:15:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:50 GMTContent-length: 2658 Veenstra, Kenneth - IA House 5 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 15, 1996 Kenneth Veenstra 216 Arizona Ave. SW Orange City, IA 51041 712-737-2276 Iowa House District 5 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-238IA087-000631-B043-358http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/youngr.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081537 text/html 3214HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:15:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:47 GMTContent-length: 2999 Young, Ronn - IA Senate 32 - Reform Challenger - Oct. 15, 1996 Ronn Young 209 N. 2nd St. Marshalltown, IA 50158 515-753-0036 Senate District 32 Reform Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Other: I WOULD CONSIDER A LEGAL DISTINCTION BETWEEN MARIJUANA AND HARD DRUGS. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Other: ESTABLISH A COMMISSION WITH THE FOLLOWING COMPOSITION 1/4 CONGRESS 1/4 GOVERNORS (STATE) 1/2 PRIVATE CITIZENS. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-239IA087-000631-B044-16http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/zeiglerw.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081557 text/html 3016HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:15:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:44 GMTContent-length: 2801 Zeigler, Wayne - IA House 18 - Democratic Challenger - Oct. 10, 1996 Wayne G. Zeigler 115 Slayton Ave. Iowa Falls, IA 50126 515-648-4009 House District 18 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-240IA087-000631-B044-50http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/ziemanl.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081626 text/html 3215HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:16:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:41 GMTContent-length: 3000 Zieman, Lyle - IA Senate 16 - Republican Incumbent - Oct. 10, 1996 Lyle Zieman P.O. Box 368 401 Wilson Postville, IA 52162 319-864-3909 Senate District 16 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Absolutely & also The State could participate! Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-241IA087-000631-B045-10http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/angeloj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081811 text/html 2868HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:18:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:13:52 GMTContent-length: 2653 Angelo, Jeff - IA Senate 44 - Republican Challenger - Nov. 20, 1996 Jeff Angelo 808 W. Jefferson Creston, IA 50801 515-787-3700 Iowa Senate District 44 Republican Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-242IA087-000631-B045-47http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/cormackm.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081848 text/html 2821HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:18:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:34 GMTContent-length: 2606 Cormack, Michael - IA House 13 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 27, 1996 Michael Cormack 447 2nd St. NW Fort Dodge, IA 50501 515-576-3531 Iowa House District 13 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-243IA087-000631-B045-64http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/dodererm.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081855 text/html 3339HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:18:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:17 GMTContent-length: 3124 Doderer, Minnette - IA House 45 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 25, 1996 Minnette Doderer 2008 Dunlap Court Iowa City, IA 52245 319-337-9282 Iowa House District 45 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Other: Wish I had the answer! Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? (no answer) What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Need more propaganda against over use & more info on addiction and effect on families - and on potential health problems with the young. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes, made up of office holders and experts (people with the info) and decision makers so we accomplish what is possible. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Probably, but timing is bad as we go into session. WT01-B20-244IA087-000631-B045-84http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/fallone.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081904 text/html 3419HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:18:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:03 GMTContent-length: 3204 Fallon, Ed - IA House 70 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 27, 1996 Ed Fallon 1321 8th St. Des Moines, IA 50314 515-243-8828 Iowa House District 70 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. No, we should discuss moving toward legalization of drugs to eliminate the black market and its associated violence. Other: All options should be considered, but current approach is a failure. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: Keep 'em legal, but tax the dickens out of cigarettes, ban advertising for both, and crack down on companies that violate the law (e.g., marketing cigarettes to teens). Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-245IA087-000631-B045-117http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/foeger.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081922 text/html 2901HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:19:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:14:00 GMTContent-length: 2686 Foege, Ro - IA House 50 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 29, 1996 Ro Foege 412 4th Ave. S. Mount Vernon, IA 52314 319-895-6198 Iowa House District 50 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Their distribution and use should be tightly controlled by the government. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-246IA087-000631-B045-153http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/grundbergb.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081940 text/html 2871HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:19:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:16:13 GMTContent-length: 2656 Grundberg, Betty - IA House 73 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Betty Grundberg 224 Foster Dr. Des Moines, IA 50312 515-277-8760 Iowa House District 73 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? Other: NO, we are losing! Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Probably - but unsure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Other: They are harmful drugs. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes, probably. WT01-B20-247IA087-000631-B045-172http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/kremerj.html 206.61.184.43 19970122081948 text/html 3110HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:19:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:15:33 GMTContent-length: 2895 Kremer, Joseph - IA House 27 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Joseph M. Kremer 1265 9th St. Jesup, IA 50648 319-827-6921 Iowa House District 27 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. No, we should move toward legalization of drugs to eliminate the black market and its associated violence. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-248IA087-000631-B045-201http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/mascherm.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082004 text/html 2928HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:19:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:17:38 GMTContent-length: 2713 Mascher, Mary - IA House 46 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 20, 1996 Mary Mascher 40 Gryn Ct. Iowa City, IA 52246 319-339-6835 Work 319-351-2826 Home Iowa House District 46 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-249IA087-000631-B045-227http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/reynoldsk.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082017 text/html 3056HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:20:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:39 GMTContent-length: 2841 Reynolds-Knight, Rebecca - IA House 94 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 25, 1996 Rebecca Reynolds-Knight 310 Main St., Box 305 Bonaparte, IA 52620 319-592-3246 Iowa House District 94 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Yes. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Other: continue education on dangers. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Yes. WT01-B20-250IA087-000631-B045-247http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/scherrmanp.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082026 text/html 2924HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:20:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:33 GMTContent-length: 2709 Scherrman, Paul - IA House 33 - Democratic Challenger - Nov. 25, 1996 Paul Scherrman 609 3rd Ave. NW Farley, IA 52046 319-744-3393 Iowa House District 33 Democratic Challenger Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Not sure. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? Not sure. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Not sure. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-251IA087-000631-B046-19http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/szymoniake.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082054 text/html 2907HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:20:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:19:04 GMTContent-length: 2692 Szymoniak, Elaine - IA Senate 36 - Democratic Incumbent - Nov. 21, 1996 Elaine Szymoniak 2116 44th St. Des Moines, IA 50310 515-279-3115 Iowa Senate District 36 Democratic Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need to shift our focus from law enforcement to prevention and treatment. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? Yes. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? No. WT01-B20-252IA087-000631-B046-46http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DPF/SURVEY/vanmaanenh.html 206.61.184.43 19970122082107 text/html 2878HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 08:21:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:18:52 GMTContent-length: 2663 Van Maanen, Harold - IA House 95 - Republican Incumbent - Nov. 23, 1996 Harold Van Maanen 410 Liberty St. Pella, IA 50219 515-628-1434 Iowa House District 95 Republican Incumbent Do you think we are winning the War on Drugs? No, we need tougher laws, and more police, courts and prisons. Do you support legislation to allow patients under a doctor's supervision to use marijuana for medical conditions? No. Do you favor a legal distinction between marijuana and hard drugs? No. What is your position on the use of alcohol and tobacco? Current policy is appropriate. Do you think Congress should establish a blue-ribbon commission to evaluate national drug policy? Yes. Are you interested in participating in the discussion and development of drug policy? Not sure. WT01-B20-253IA087-000632-B039-202http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LINKS.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122071605 text/html 3750HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:15:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:29:47 GMTContent-length: 3533 Schaffer Library Links to Other Pages Contents | Feedback| Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Links to Other Sites of Interest In which we present only those links which are of the mostsignificance to the issues. Lycaeum The Schaffer Library does not contain any information on the recreational use of drugs. For those who are more interested in areas not directly related to issues of drug policy, I recommend Lycaeum as the biggest, best, and most comprehensive source of information on that subject. Calyx ActivistLinks Page This page contains links to other organizations involved in the fight for drug policy reform. The most comprehensive list of such organizations on the Internet. Families Against MandatoryMinimums (FAMM) FAMM is working to end the mandatory minimum drug laws. FEAR - Forfeiture EndangersAmerican Rights FEAR is working to repeal the forfeiture laws. NAMA- National Alliance of Methadone Advocates A good source of information on methadone. Methadone Today - Theofficial newsletter of Detroit Organizational Needs in Treatment Another good source of information on methadone. Contents | Feedback| Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT01-B20-254IA087-000628-B033-204http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/ute.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122063710 text/html 18379HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:37:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:22:28 GMTContent-length: 18160 Friend to the Ute Friend to the Ute OMER C. STEWART CRUSADES FOR INDIAN RELIGIOUS FREEDOM Omer C. Stewart from Colorado Heritage, The Journal of the ColoradoHistorical Society, 1982, issue 1. "Strange as the religion of Peyote may seem tosome people, it is, nevertheless, their form of worship, and it should not bebanned." OMER C. STEWART, distinguished professor emeritus ofanthropology at the university of Colorado at Boulder, is arecognized authority on Native American cultures. Since receivinghis Ph.D. in 1939, he has devoted much of his professional careerto furthering the understanding of Ute customs, includingpractice of the peyote religion. WHILE STILL A GRADUATE STUDENT in anthropology at theUniversity of California at Berkeley in January 1938, I wasinvited to be a participant-observer in an all-night peyotemeeting, held near Towaoc on the Ute Mountain Ute reservation insouthwestern Colorado. This was my third experience with the Utepeyote religion in a few months, experiences that were to have aprofound effect on the course of my career. Since that time mycontinuing research on the Ute and on the peyote religion hasuncovered a great deal of information about thislittle-understood Native American religion. Over the years I haverecorded the similarities in the ceremonies and rituals of thepeyote religion in more than twenty-seven tribes from Oklahoma toCanada and from Wisconsin to California. Especially have I foughtto protect the religious freedom of those who practice the peyotereligion as formalized in the Native American Church. Those early experiences in 1937-38 made me acutely aware ofthe vast public misunderstanding over peyote and its use. Thisprompted me to do a radio broadcast later in 1938 for aUniversity of California radio program over NBC in San Francisco.I then wrote an article about the ceremony in Colorado and Utah,which was published in a local newspaper. These were my initialefforts at applying my discipline of anthropology to furthergeneral public education. In the meantime I continued with myscholarly research, writing my Ph.D. dissertation onWasho-Northern Paiute peyotism in 1939. Following my discharge from the army in 1945, I returned toacademic work with an appointment to the University of Coloradoin Boulder. As a professor there, I worked to inform the generalpublic as well as my students and fellow anthropologists aboutpeyote and the peyote religion. Late in 1946 I began lecturing,and it seems like I lectured on the peyote religion in at leasttwenty towns, demonstrating the ritual objectsdrum, fan,staff, and rattleand singing several peyote songs in theAmerican Indian style that I had learned. The questions anddiscussions that followed my demonstrations revealed that the oldprejudices against the word "peyote" remained. I becamewell aware that a single lecture would probably change none ofthese long-held opinions. Throughout my professional career as an anthropologist, Ihave published a number of works on the subject of the peyotereligion. In 1948 the first volume in the University of ColoradoStudies Series in Anthropology was my "Ute Peyotism: A Studyof a Cultural Complex," completed in 1938, but itspublication was delayed by World War II. Over the years I havepublished extensively in the American Anthropologist,Southwestern Lore, the Delphian Quarterly, and otherscholarly journals. My book-length, definitive study,"History of the Peyote Religion," is being published bythe University of Utah Press. Although my research has uncovered many documented facts onthe early use of peyote, much of what I have learned comes fromoral tradition. While it is most inexact at fixing dates and isalso limited in accuracy, I have received information from oldSouthern Ute informants that supplements the early writtendocuments and also serves as a corrective to some of the writtenreports. Peyotism has been practiced by the two southwestern ColoradoUte tribesthe Southern Ute and the Ute MountainUtesince the turn of the century. Yet peyote and its useare not native to Colorado. The peyote cactus grows in a limitedarea near Laredo in Texas and in Mexico from the Rio Grande tothe region of San Luis Potosi. While it can be documented thatpeyote was widely used in ceremonies in Mexico in the sixteenthcentury, the development of the rituals associated with its usein the United States occurred near Laredo, Texas, and came fromthe Lipan Apache. They invented new Apache-style ritual songs andmusic and may have added some ritual elements to the CarrizoIndian peyote ceremony they learned. The peyote ceremoniescontain Christian features and qualities. Since the religionindigenous to the Ute contained none of these concepts or ritualelements, the peyote religion spread to them as a culturalcomplex. The documents establish that both the Lipan and the MescaleroApache knew about peyote and Christianity by 1770nearly acentury before the earliest documented evidence of peyotism inthe United States. The transmission of the peyote ceremonies weredirect from Laredo by known Lipan Apache, who were named as thefirst teachers of peyotism to the Kiowa and the Comanche on theirreservation in Oklahoma in the late 1870s and early 1880s. Buckskin Charlie, a Southern Ute chief, was one of the firstto become acquainted with the use of peyote. Oral traditionstates that he was introduced to the peyote ceremony whilevisiting the Cheyenne and Arapaho Indian agency in Oklahoma in1896.1 The Kiowa and Comanche then introduced thepeyote ceremony to their neighbors, the Arapaho and Cheyenne. The accounts differ as to when the Ute first learned thepeyote ceremony; all of them document its introduction by theCheyenne and Arapaho into southern Colorado. Over the years theSouthern Ute have been questioned on the early history ofpeyotism. In 1948 Tony Buck, Buckskin Charlie's son, stated thatin 1900 an Arapaho came to Ignacio two or three times and stayedfor extended periods, bringing peyote and teaching the ritual.Tony also said that he had attended ceremonies for forty-eightyears and that his father was an early leader. In 1949 it wasagain stated that peyotism began among the Southern Ute in theIgnacio area and spread to the Ute Mountain Ute at Towaoc,reiterating that the first leader was Buckskin Charlie, who hadbeen visited by Cheyenne Indians who taught him its use. In 1948 Isaac Cloud was recognized as the leader of thepeyote religion among the Southern Ute. In an interview he statedthat he commenced directing services in 1915, having learned theritual from Buckskin Charlie and his wife Emma Buck. Emma hadobtained a supply of peyote from Sam Lone Bear, the notoriousSioux peyote supplier and missionary who had settled among theUncompaghre Ute at Dragon, Utah, in early 1914. During these early years of peyote use, the Ute must havebeen very secretive or the officials of the Bureau of IndianAffairs (BIA) were very nonobservant In 1916, and again in 1919,the Bureau of Indian Affairs agents of both the Southern Ute andthe Ute Mountain Ute denied its existence on these reservations.2 It is indeed surprising, then, that in 1917 the Coloradostate legislature would pass the Crowley Bill, prohibiting theuse of peyote in the state. This law, of course, did not effectpeyote use on the reservation, where the Ute were subject only tofederal laws, but did prohibit its transfer through the UnitedStates mails and use outside reservation boundaries. Coloradobecame the first state to pass an antipeyote law. The yearbefore, federal legislation in the form of the Gandy Bill hadfailed to pass the United States Congress. The campaign againstpeyote in Colorado was led by women's organizations such as theParent Teacher Associations and the Women's Christian TemperanceUnion. The precipitating force for the final passage of theCrowley Bill, however. was Gertrude Bonnin, a Yankton Sioux whohad worked for fourteen years as a social worker among the Ute ofUtah. While in Utah, she became an opponent of the Sioux peyoteproselytizer, Sam Lone Bear, who appears to have been a peyotesupplier also to the Southern Ute. Bonnin lobbied to have theGandy Bill passed in Washington, D.C., in 1916, and following itsdefeat, transferred her efforts to Colorado, where she met withsuccess. The passage of the law did not, however, prevent the practiceof the peyote religion among the Ute. In fact, in a 1926 letterto the BIA, Mrs. C.W. Wiegel, who was chairman of the committeeon Indian welfare of the Colorado Federation of Women's Clubs inDenver, stated that "it has been reported to me that duringthe past winter the practice of using Piota (sic) medicine andthe form of worship that goes with it has been introduced to theUte Indian Reservation at Ignacio and is spreading rapidly amongthem. The better class of Indians are filled with consternationand are appealing for help to stamp it out before it ruins allthe young people."3 In answering the accusationsto the BIA, E. E. McKean, the superintendent at Ignacio, defendedpeyotism, stating that "it is very clear that herinformation is indefinite and exaggerated. It is true that therehas been a small amount of peyote coming at different times to afew of the Indians on this reservation. I would also add thatthese Indians are among the better class, both from the point ofindustry and abiding by the law.... There is small grounds foralarm of its spreading among these Indians . "4 Many years later, while testifying in 1953, Isaac Cloud usedthe period of 1919 to 1928 when E. E. McKean was in charge of theBIA in Ignacio, as a time marker. Isaac said that about that timeSam Lone Bear brought peyote and ran meetings three times inIgnacio, but he knew that Sam had been convicted and had spenttime in prison. Isaac also named men from Oklahoma who came toIgnacio for meetings: Sam Buffalo, Claude Hill, George Hill,Albert Hofman, Brown Flocko, and John Peak Heart. In addition tobeing the first important and continuous peyote proselytizer tothe Ute Mountain Ute, John Peak Heart had attended the well-knownIndian school at Carlisle in 1886-87 and was a peyote leaderamong the Cheyenne. Although Sam Lone Bear had visited the Ute atIgnacio and at Towaoc about 1915 or 1916, it was Heart who,repeatedly each summer, brought peyote to the Ute Mountain Uteand remained with them for weeks to teach them how to conduct thepeyote ritual. The first local peyote leader at Towaoc appears to have beenJames Mills, a twenty- seven-year-old Ute Mountain Ute. He hadimpressed Heart sufficiently to be invited to return to Oklahomawith him and to be an apprentice in peyotism. Beginning in 1918,Mills was Heart's assistant in Colorado each summer and remainedas the resident peyote leader between his visits, which continueduntil the early 1950s.5 While peyote ceremonies continued to be held, subsequentlyformalized in the incorporation in various states as the NativeAmerican Church, such rituals, dependent upon the use of peyote,were illegal in Colorado and in several other states. In 1962 theantipeyote law was challenged in California, and although mytestimony was stricken from the record, it was restored by theCalifornia Supreme Court in 1964 and was used when that courtruled that the state had an obligation to protect the religiousfreedom of the Native American. The 1917 law in Colorado was thenchallenged in 1967 following the arrest of Mana Pardeahtan forpossession of peyote. I also testified in this case. Citing theprecedent of the California case along with the other evidenceand documents provided, the Colorado court declared the 1917 lawunconstitutional.6 Bringing the First Amendment fight to an end, this 1967ruling greatly influenced the Colorado state legislature to amendits narcotic law in 1969 to permit the use of peyote in thereligious services of the Native American Church. After fiftyyears, the right of a people to practice their religion infreedom had been upheld. The struggle to educate and to informpeople about cultural practices that are different from theirown, however, continues. A Peyote Ceremony (Text is excerpted and edited from Stewart, "UtePeyotism," pp 8-18.) The meeting place is a tipi with its entrance to the east. Acrescent-shaped altar and fire are prepared according to custom.A drum, feather fan, eagle humerus whistle, gourd rattle, BullDurham tobacco, and sagebrush complete the necessary ritualequipment. The chief or leader usually supplies the peyote forthe meeting. Members bathe before the meeting, and aboutnightfall they gather in small groups outside the tipifirstthe chief, then the chief-drummer, the cedarman, next the men,then the women and children with the fire-chief lastallmaking their way into the tipi. The leader places the "chief peyote" upon somesagebrush leaves on the top of the altar and prays. Everyone isinvited to speak of their ills and struggles, so that prayers maybe voiced in their behalf. The Bull Durham tobacco is passed andcigarettes are made and lit from the glowing firestick. Eachperson blows the first four puffs of smoke toward the "chiefpeyote" on the altar and prays. The cigarette butts are thenplaced at the base of the altar. Next sprigs of sagebrush are passed and the leaves are rubbedbetween the hands, sniffed rubbed over the limbs, and beaten fourtimes against the chest to purify the body. A sack of peyotefollows the sage, and each adult takes four buttons. Since thepeyote is extremely bitter and nauseous, coughing and spittingoften succeed the arduous swallowing. Everyone sits as still aspossible until all have finished eating the medicine, because thepartaking of the divine plant during meetings is a sacredprocedure and supposed to be accompanied by silent prayer. After the eating, the chief holds the staff and fan, shakesthe rattle, and sings the Opening Song, accompanied by thechief-drummer's rapid drum beats. Only four songs have to be sungat fixed times: the Opening Song, the Midnight Water Call, theMorning Water Call, and the Closing Song. During the remainder ofthe ritual each man sings any song he wishes when it is his turnto lead, holding the staff and fan in one hand and shaking therattle with the other. Women neither hold the staff to lead thesinging nor beat the drum. With midnight and the Midnight Water Call, the fire-chiefreplenishes the fire, the Midnight Song is sung, and prayers areoffered through four puffs of smoke. All drink water. Singingthen continues with renewed vigor each using their own equipment.Personal supplies of peyote may be consumed after midnight, andprayers continue to be offered. A special morning ritual duplicates some features of theMidnight Water Call; the fire is refueled and the central altararea cleaned. The chief then sings the Morning Water Call, andfollowing the four blasts on the whistle, a woman, usually thechiefs wife, brings in the water and kneels. After ceremonialduties, the water is again spilled on the ground, a breakfastfollows, and the Closing Song is sung, followed by more lengthyprayers and blessings. All equipment is dismantled and put away,and then the fire-chief leads the exit, followed by the chief.Once the ritual is over, the women leave to prepare the noonfeast and the men to rest, relating their spiritual experiencesand visions. References 1. Woodson, Darlington, Oklahoma, to Day, Ignacio, Colorado13 July 1896. Federal Records Center, Denver. 2. West to Larsen, 2 November 1916, from Ignacio; also deniedby Simons to Larsen, 14 November 1916, from Towaoc; McKean toBIA, 14 April 1919; Johnson to BIA, 15 April 1919, FederalRecords Center, Denver. 3. In 1926 Sioux antipeyotist Gertrude Bonnin was a nationallecturer for the National Federation of Women's Clubs and may besuspected of having been the "better class of Indian"who spurred Mrs. Wiegel to action. Wiegel to Burke, 19 May 1926Federal Records Center. Denver. 4. McKean to BIA, 9 June, 1926. Federal Records Center,Denver. 5. David F. Aberle and Omer C. Stewart, Navaho and UtePeyotism: A Chronological and Distributional Study,University of Colorado Studies, Series in Anthropology, No. 6,1957. 6. In the County Court in and for the City and County ofDenver and State of Colorado, Criminal Action No. 9454, ThePeople v. Mana Pardeahtan, finding of June 27, 1967, JudgeWilliam Conley. Reported, with photo of Judge Conley andattorneys Deikman and Cook, Denver Rocky Mountain News, 28June, 1967. PeyoteWisdom Menu Page LSDand the Psychedelics Menu Page CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B20-255IA086-000619-B007-379http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lincoln.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034503 text/html 7827HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:29:08 GMTContent-length: 7610 The Lincoln Quote The Lincoln Quote Is This Quote for Real? "Prohibition will work great injury to the causeof temperance. It is a species of intemperance within itself, forit goes beyond the bounds of reason in that it attempts tocontrol a man's appetite by legislation, and makes a crime out ofthings that are not crimes. A Prohibition law strikes a blow atthe very principles upon which our government was founded." -Abraham Lincoln (1809-65) U.S. President. Speech, 18 Dec. 1840, to Illinois House ofRepresentatives The Story The above quote, widely attributed to Abraham Lincoln, hasbeen quoted and referred to by a number of sources over thedecades, since the early part of the 20th Century, atleast. I featured it on my web page because it is a succinct andpersuasive statement about prohibition. But, the questionremains: Did Lincoln really say it? So far, based on theevidence, it is my opinion he probably did not - that it was madeup after he died and wrongly attributed to him. The evidence isnot conclusive either way at this point, but the opinions andinformation listed below might interest you. From my good friend, Bob Ramsey: It appears on page 544 of the Congressional Record-House forDecember 22, 1914. Linclon was quoted by Rep. Robert L. Henry ofTexas. Another friend, Brian Huff, found it in the ColumbiaDictionary of Quotations: The Columbia Dictionary of Quotations is licensed fromColumbia University Press. Copyright 1993 by Columbia UniversityPress. All rights reserved. Caedmon recordings reproduced byarrangement with Harper Collins Publishers. Dr. Mark Kleiman, a professor at Harvard University,contributed the following: I tried to verify the purported Lincoln anti-prohibitionquote. Yes, we have no bananas. The standard reference is The Collected Works of AbrahamLincoln, (8 vols.) Roy P. Basler, Ed., Rutgers University Press,1953. It gives reports (though not verbatim texts) of several ofLincoln's speeches in the legislature, including remarks onDecember 14 1840 on "Payment of Interest on the PublicDebt" and on December 19 "Concerning Expenditures forPublic Printing," but nothing on December 18, and nothing atall about alcohol or temperance (according to the index) duringLincoln's entire period of service in the legislature except thegreat and unduly neglected speech to the Washington TemperanceSociety of Springfield on February 22 1942. The index also givesno reference to the Maine Liquor Law of 1846, the firstprohibition act, or to the word "prohibition." A more recent source is Abraham Lincoln: Speeches andWritings, (2 vols.) Library of America, 1989. Again, nothing onthat date, and nothing on "alcohol""temperence" "prohibition" or "MaineLiquor Law" in the entire period, except for the WashingtonTemperance address (which I hope someone with a scanner will posthere). While it's impossible to be sure that Lincoln didn't saysomething, I will give fifty to one that there is no authenticrecord of any such speech anytime in Lincoln's career. That'sbased on the results of my search, but also on three otherobservations: 1. The term "prohibition" does not appear to havebeen in the contemporary political vocabulary with respect toalcohol control laws. 2. Lincoln stood well enough with the temperance movement tobe invited to give the Washington's Birthday address to theWashington Temperance Society of Springfield in 1842. It's hardto believe that this would have been true if prohibition had beena live issue and Lincoln on the pro-liquor side of it. 3. Temperance, along with abolition, nativism, the protectivetariff, and women's rights, was among the movements thatconstituted the original Republican party. Lincoln was bold inattacking the nativist (American or "Know-nothing")wing, but if he had picked a quarrel with the temperance factionthere would surely be some record of it. In his campaign againstDouglass in 1858, he was forced to deny Douglass's charge that inhis youth he had kept a "grocery" (package-goods storeand tavern), but his supposed anti-prohibition views never becamean issue. After a little more research (to his credit) Dr. Kleiman cameback with the following: I have to take back what I said about there being no evidenceof Lincoln's supporting a prohibition law in Illinois. The Basler collection has a letter from Lincoln to HenryWhitney on June 7, 1855, lamenting the electoral defeat ofLincoln's friend Logan -- "worse beaten than any man everwas since elections were invented" -- and adding "It isconceded on all hands that the prohibitory law is alsobeaten." The "also" suggests that Lincoln was asupporter of the law. From Dale Gieringer, head of California NORML: I believe Mark K. is right that the Lincoln quote isapocryphal. It was investigated by a Lincoln scholar at the request ofOllie Steinberg of the Minnesota Grassroots party. Like Mark, hefound no record of any speech by Lincoln on the alleged date (Dec18, 1840). I've been told that according to the Home Book of Quotations(16th edition), it was fabricated in the 1880s -apparently by anti-Prohibitionists in Atlanta courting the Negrovote. Lincoln was well-known for his temperance sympathies.According to Herbert Asbury's "The Great Illusion," heauthored a dry law modeled on the Maine law, which was rejectedby Illinois voters in a special referendum on June 4, 1855. Hewas also alleged to have authored and signed a total abstinencepledge in 1846. According to temperance authorities, Lincoln wasreluctant to sign the 1862 whiskey tax that helped fund the CivilWar, on grounds it would condone the liquor trade. According to atemperance leader who spoke with him on the day of hisassassination, Lincoln predicted that the next great questionafter slavery would be abolition of the traffic in legalizedliquor. I'm sorry to say that the Lincoln quote seems bogus, since Ihad it printed on California NORML's matchbooks. It's so good, Ifeel tempted to quote it as "attributed to Lincoln." Peter Webster contributed the following: From the Columbia Dictionary of Quotations: A.L. speech 22Feb 1842, Washingtonian Temperance Society "Whether or not the world would be vastly benefited by atotal banishment from it of all intoxicating drinks seems not nowan open question. Three-fourths of mankind confess theaffirmative with their tongues, and I believe all the restacknowledge it in their hearts." CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B20-256IA087-000627-B015-110http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/sj8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051314 text/html 5499HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:13:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:29 GMTContent-length: 5282 California Medical Marijuana Resolution -- SJR 8 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Senate Joint Resolution No. 8 RESOLUTION CHAPTER 70 Senate Joint Resolution Relative to cannabis/marijuana Filed with Secretary of State September 2, 1993.; LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGEST SJR 8, Mello: Controlled substances cannabis/marijuana This measure would memorialize the President and the Congressof the United States to enact appropriate legislation to permitcannabis/marijuana to be prescribed by licensed physicians and toensure a safe and affordable supply of cannabis/marijuana formedical use WHEREAS, Scientific and medical studies by the NationalAcademy of Science have shown cannabis/marijuana to be a safe andeffective medicine with very low toxicity compared to mostprescription drugs and it has been shown to be effective in thetreatment of glaucoma, epilepsy, muscle spasticity, arthritis,the nausea, vomiting, and appetite loss associated withchemotherapies;anxiety and depression and the symptoms ofwithdrawal from alcohol and narcotics and WHEREAS studies show that one-third of all cancer patientdiscontinue potentially life-saving chemotherapy due to thesevere and debilitating side effects and the same is true formany AIDS patients receiving AZT or other similar therapies and WHEREAS, Most physicians surveyed said that they wouldprescribe cannabis/marijuana if legally available, and one-halfof all cancer specialists surveyed said that they have alreadyencouraged at least one of their patients to break the law anduse cannabis/marijuana to ease the violent nausea and vomitingassociated with their current treatments and WHEREAS, In May of 1991, the United Nations Narcotic ControlBoard voted overwhelmingly to reclassify cannabis/marijuana,placing it back on Schedule II, and making it availabIe byprescription, and, the United States representative to this boardvoted in favor of the rescheduling and WHEREAS, Despite a federal court order recognizing the"clearly established medical valuc" ofcannabis/marijuana, and mandating that it be reclassified toSchedule II and made available by prescription, the federalgovernment continues to deny access to this safe and effectivemedicine and WHEREAS, By its own admission, the federal governmentcontinues to deny access to cannabis/marijuana for politicalrather than medical reasons, and are using patients as pawns inthe ever-escalating war on drugs by following current policieswhich place message before medicine, convenience beforecompassion, and politics before patients now, therefore, be it Resolved by the Senate and Assembly of the State ofCalifornia, jointly, That the Legislature of the State ofCalifornia respectfully memorializes the President and theCongress of the United States to enact appropriate legislation topermit cannabis/marijuana to be prescribed by licensed physiciansand to ensure a safe and affordable supply of cannabis/marijuanafor medical use; and be it further Resolved, That the Secretary of the Senate transmit copies ofthis resolution to the President and Vice President of the UnitedStates, to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and toeach Senator and Representative from California in the Congressof the United States. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B20-257IA087-000625-B015-171http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hempmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122042948 text/html 10323HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:29:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:02:52 GMTContent-length: 10107 Cliff Schaffer's Hemp (Marijuana) Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp (Marijuana) This page contains materials related to hemp (marijuana),cannabis sativa. Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Did you ever wonder why hemp was illegal? Here are some of theactual transcripts from the hearings for the Marihuana Tax Act of1937 -- an interesting piece of lunacy. It is not all there yet,but it is coming soon. Please see the Historical References page forthe full history of the marijuana laws in the United States. Contents Other Hemp/Marijuana Links of Interest General Hemp/Marijuana Information Medical Information Commercial and Industrial Uses ofHemp Historical Information Alan D. Bryan's Hemp Facts 1-100 Other Hemp/Marijuana Links of Interest Hemp in Canada - Hemp BritishColumbia Home Page - Lots of good information about the historyand current facts regarding hemp in Canada. Marijuana Policy Project -Lobbying Congress for reform. Lots of current information on lawsand legal initiatives. Commercial and Industrial Usesof Hemp DaveWest's Hemp Page - A lot of interesting material from DavidP. West, Ph.D. Hemp For Fuel - Excerpted from"Energy Farming in America," by Lynn Osburn Hemp Speech - ColoradoThis is a rough draft of a speech for the 1995 Agriculturalcommittee of the Colorado congress, which will be deciding on abill to re-classify industrial cannabis as legal. (below 1.3%THC) Letter from a DEA Agent toColorado Legislature re the Hemp Bill This is a letter written by a DEA agent with the specificintent of killing a bill in the Colorado Legislature which wouldhave permitted the cultivation of hemp for industrial purposes.Because of the lies in this letter, the DEA agent was laterrelieved of duty. Reply to the DEA Agent'sletter - Thomas J. Ballanco, Environmental Action Committee,Co-Chair This is the reply to the DEA agent's letter which led tothe agent's retirement. Hemp and Related Fiber Crops Task Force,As authorized by the Governor of Kentucky , 11-23-94 Hemp Industry in Australia Thestatus of the hemp industry in Australia, as of 2/17/95. Governmentof Canada Agricultural Report on Hemp 12-16-94 Hemp As Weed Control, by D.West Industrial Hemp Farming -History and Practice Report on Australian Hemp Trialsfrom James Davis to Joe Hickey An Amazing Plant by Bill Leuders From ISTHMUS, "the weekly newspaperof Madison" Feb 8-14, 1991 Hemp Facts by Alan D. Bryan Below are a number of interesting files that Alan D. Bryan hasaccumulated relative to hemp. There is all sorts of goodinformation here, including a lot of stuff you probably didn'tknow, even if you were already familiar with the hemp issues. Hemp Facts 1-10 HEMP FOR FUEL Dewey and Merrill, "bulletin #404, Hemp Hurds As Paper-Making Material" U.S.D.A. Washington, D.C. Oct. 14, 1916. Pinch Hitters for Defense - Popular Mechanics - December 1941 Paints and Varnishes Building Materials and Housing HEMP FOR VICTORY - transcript of Dept. of Agriculture 1942 film Introduction from "Marijuana: Medical Papers," Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D., More Info on Medical Uses. More Interesting Medical Stuff Even more good medical stuff.... Hemp Facts 11-20 More Misc. Med. Stuff Marijuana MYTH # 1 Marijuana causes brain damage Marijuana Myth #2. Marijuana damages the reproductive system Marijuana Myth # 3.Marijuana is a "gateway" drug it leads to hard drugs. Marijuana Myth #4. Marijuana suppresses the immune system. Marijuana Myth #5. - Marijuana is much more dangerous than tobacco. Marijuana Myth #6. Legal marijuana would cause carnage on the highways. Marijuana Myth # 7. Marijuana "flattens" human brainwaves Hemp Facts 21-30 Marijuana Myth #8. Marijuana is more potent today than in the past Marijuana Myth #9. Marijuana impairs short-term memory Marijuana Myth #10. Marijuana lingers in the body like DDT Marijuana Myth #11. There are over a thousand chemicals in marijuana smoke Marijuana "Myth"#12. No one has ever died of a marijuana overdose SOMETHING TO LOOK INTO MEDICINE, MAN Part Deux of an article that appeared in the Guardian Newspaper on 9/18/93 part Three of an article that appeared in the Guardian Newspaper on 9/18/93 Pt. IV of an article that appeared in the Guardian Newspaper on 9/18/93. Part 5 of an article that appeared in the Guardian Newspaper on 9/18/93 Part 6 of an article that appeared in the Guardian Newspaper on 9/18/93 Hemp Facts 31-40 Part VII of an article that appeared in the Guardian Newspaper on 9/18/93. final part of an article that appeared in the Guardian Newspaper on 9/18/93 Legalization of Marijuana Long Overdue - by William F. Buckley Legalization of Marijuana Long Overdue - part 2 This is Part 1 of an article that appeared in The Hartford Courant. It shows the lies perpetrated by the Partnership for a Drug Free America. This is part 2 of an article that appeared in The Hartford Courant Part 3 of an article from The Hartford Courant The Dark Side of DARE by Pastor Jaymes Douglass Fyr A World Gone Mad Part 1 By Ronald W. Rose United States Magistrate Judge In Police News Spring 94 Hemp Facts 41-50 Hemp Facts 51-60 Hemp Facts 61-70 Hemp Facts 71-80 Hemp Facts 81-90 Hemp Facts 91-100 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B20-258IA087-000627-B013-131http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/medical.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050650 text/html 11103HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:06:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:03:57 GMTContent-length: 10887 Medical Information on Hemp / Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Medical Information on Marijuana Articles by Dr. Tod Mikuriya Tod Mikuriya, MD, is a psychiatrist and Former Director ofMarijuana Research for the National Institute of Mental Health State Statutes Recognizing Marijuana'sMedical Value Statement of the American Public HealthAssociation in favor of Medical Marijuana Cannabis Therapeutic Research Program- Report to the California Legislature, Prepared by the ResearchAdvisory Panel - 1989 -- The full text of the results of theState of California's investigation into the medical uses ofmarijuana. A Criticial Review of the ResearchLiterature Concerning Some Biological and PsychologicalEffects of Cannabis by Dr. Peter L. Nelson (1993). A criticalreview of the research literature concerning some biological andpsychological effects of cannabis. In Advisory Committee onIllicit Drugs (Eds.), Cannabis and the law in Queensland: Adiscussion paper (pp. 113-152). Brisbane: Criminal JusticeCommission of Queensland. Cannabis Amotivational Syndrome andPersonality Trait Absorption: A Review andReconceptualization by Peter L. Nelson, Ph.D. Personality Trait Absorption: AnExploratory Study of Opportunity and Capacity in Relation toCannabis Use by Peter L. Nelson, Ph.D. Pharmacological Reviews of Marijuana-- by Leo E. Hollister, MD Veterans Administration Medical Centerand Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, Californiafrom PHARMACOLOGICAL REVIEWS Copyright c 1986 by The AmericanSociety for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics Marijuana and Immunity - by Leo E.Hollister, MD -- Journal of Psychoactive Drugs p159-163 Vol.24Apr-Jun 1992 Medical Uses of Illicit Drugs byLester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalar Plaintiff's Reply Brief -- RalphSeeley's successful lawsuit for his own medical marijuana. Senate Joint Resolution No. 8 - Theresolution which passed the California legislature in 1993,calling for the medical use of marijuana. This resolution wasvetoed by Governor Pete Wilson because he says that allowing sickpeople to have medicine "sends the wrong message". Marijuana as Antiemetic Medicine:A Survey of Oncologists' Experiences and Attitudes by RichardDoblin and Mark A. R. Kleiman Psychiatric Aspects of MarijuanaIntoxication -- Samuel Allentuck, MD, and Karl Bowman, MD Therapeutic Application of Marijuana- Dr. Robert Walton. An Incident in Kansas - A tale ofthe harassment meted out to a 100 percent legal medical marijuanauser. The health and psychological consequencesof cannabis use - National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No.25 - By the Australian Government Marinol Facts -- The pharmaceuticalfacts about Marinol. Marinol Advertising Brochure (Graphic files -approximately 250K each) Page1 -- Page 2 -- Page 3 -- Page 4 - Page 5 - Page 6 -- Page 7 -- Page 8 Breckenridge, Colorado endorsesmedical marijuana Frisco, Colorado endorses medicalmarijuana Full text of resolution proposed to theCity of Bainbridge Island, Washington Alameda County Supports MedicalMarijuana Santa Cruz County Measure A MarijuanaFor Medical Use Initiative -This measure was passed by over75% of the vote. Sonoma County Approves Medical Marijuana Marijuana Smoking as Medicine, A CruelHoax by Gabriel G. Nahas, M.D. and Nicholas A. Pace, M.D. Marihuana as Medicine: A Plea forReconsideration by Lester Grinspoon, MD James B. Bakalar, JDJournal of the American medical Association, June, 1995 Marijuana Compassion Clubs by TimWhitmire Associated Press, August 10, 1995 Information for Physicians -- Nauseaand vomiting - from CancerNet from the National CancerInstitute's PDQ System -- Contains a discussion of nausea andmarijuana. References on Multiple Sclerosis andMarijuana Editorial from USA Todaysupporting medical marijuana 7-18-96 Cannabidiol: The WonderDrug of the 21st Century? Analgesic andAnti-Inflammatory Activity of Constituents of Cannabis Sativa Effects of Cannabidiolin Huntington's Disease Beneficial and AdverseEffects of Cannabidiol in a Parkinson Patient withSinemet-Induced Dystonic Dyskinesia Marijuana and Tourette'sSyndrome TherapeuticPossibilities in Cannabinoids, TheLancet, 1975 Cannabinoids BlockRelease of Serotonin in Migraine Patients Hemp - Its History -Traditional and Popular Application Effect of Cannabinoids onSpasticity and Ataxia in Multiple Sclerosis Treatment of HumanSpasticity with Delta-9 THC - Denis J.Petro, M.D., and Carl Ellenberger, Jr., M.D. Bronx, NY J ClinPharmacol. 1981; 21: 413S--416S Ulcerative Colitis andMarijuana, Annals of Internal Medicine,Volume 112, Number 6, 15 March, 1990, p. 471 US Court of AppealsDecision re Medical Cannabis - 1994 DEA Marijuana Decision21 CFR Part 1308 Docket N0. 86-22 JENKS v. FLORIDA, 582 So.2d676 (Fla.App. 1 Dist. 1991) Articles by Tod Mikuriya, MD Tod Mikuriya, MD, is a psychiatrist and Former Director ofMarijuana Research for the National Institute of Mental Health Cannabis 1988, Old Drug, NewDangers - The Potency Question Introduction from Marijuana: MedicalPapers Cannabis as an Adjunctive Treatmentfor AIDS Related Illness. Cannabis as an Adjunctive Treatmentfor AIDS Related Illness. Part 2 Possible Therapeutic CannabisApplications for Psychiatric Disorders Safe Use of Cannabis Consuming Cannabis Safely Medicinal Uses of Hemp Drugs Marijuana Medical Handbook Marijuana Addicts Anonymous by LanceB., submitted by Tod Mikuriya, M.D. Marinol and Cannabis Chronic Migraine Headache: fivecases successfully treated with Marinol and/or illicit cannabis. Cannabis and Marinol in the treatmentof Migraine Headache Toxic Effects of Marijuana For New Users of Cannabis: TheReynolds Protocol: Cannabis Medicinal Uses at a"Buyers" Club Songs by Tod Mikuriya (At leasthe has a sense of humor!) Vaporization of Cannabinoids: aPreferable Drug Delivery Route Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B20-259IA087-000625-B018-108http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/taxact.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044333 text/html 9820HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:43:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:56 GMTContent-length: 9603 The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 The history of how the Marihuana Tax Act came to be the lawof the land. This page will be devoted to historicalmaterials surrounding the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. There areseveral hundred pages of material, comprising several differentdocuments, which will eventually be placed on this page. Keepwatching for new materials. There will be something new on thispage each week for the next few months. Marihuana Tax Act - The full textof the Marihuana Tax Act, as passed in 1937 Conference on Cannabis Sativa L.January 14, 1937 -- Room 81 Treasury Building, 10:30 AM HEARINGS ON H.R. 6385 APRIL 27, 28, 29, 30, AND MAY 4, 1937 Statement of Clinton M. Hester, Assistant General Counsel for the Department of the Treasury, and S.G. Tipton, Office of General Counsel Statement of H. J. Anslinger, Commissioner of Narcotics, Bureau of Narcotics, Department of the Treasury. Additional statement of H. J. Anslinger (includes "Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals", by Eugene Stanley, district attorney, parish of Orleans, New Orleans, La.) Answers to Marihuana Questionnaire by Dr. W. L. Treadway Division of Mental Hygiene Public Health Service Additional Statement of Clinton M. Hester Statement of Dr. James C. Munch, Pharmacologist, Temple University Statement of Herbert J. Wollner, Consulting Chemist, Office of the Secretary of the Treasury Still to Come: Letters to the committee Statement of Dr. D. E. Buckingham, District Veterinarian, Washington, D.C. Statement of Hon. Ralph F. Lozier, Carrollton, Mo, General Counsel of the National Institute of Oilseed Products Further Statement of Clinton M. Hester, Assistant General Counsel, Treasury Department Additional Statement of Hon. Ralph F. Lozier, Carrollton, Mo, General Counsel of the National Institute of Oilseed Products Statement of Raymond G. Scarlett, Representing William G. Scarlett & Co., Baltimore, MD. Statement of Dr. William C. Woodward, Legislative Counsel, American Medical Association, Chicago, Ill. Statement of Dr. S. L. Hilton, Representing the American Pharmaceutical Assocation. Addenda -- Letter from Mrs. Hamilton Wright, special representative, Bureau of Narcotics Hearing on H.R. 6906 July 12, 1937 Hearing Before a Subcommittee of the Committee on FinanceUnited States Senate, Seventy-Fifth Congress, First Session onH.R.6906 - July 12, 1937 Title Page, Members Present, Full text of H.R. 6906 (under construction) Statement of Clinton M. Hester, Assistant General Counsel, Treasury Department Statement of H. J. Anslinger, Commissioner of Narcotics, Bureau of Narcotics of the Treasury Department Statement of Matt Rens, Representing Rens Hemp Co., Brandon, Wis. Statement of Mr. Moksnes, Superintendent of the Amhempco Corporation, Danville, Ill. Statement of Royal C. Johnson, Attorney, Washington, D.C., Representing Chempsco, Inc. of Winona, Minn, and Hemp Chemical Corporation of Mankato, Minn. Statement of O.C. Olman, Representing Juneau Fibre Co., Juneau, Wis. Letter from the American Medical Association Marihuana Conference held December 5, 1938 in the UNITED STATES Bureau of InternalRevenue Building (Room 3003), Washington D. C., Called by theBureau of Narcotics of the United States Treasury Department.(Complete document. Parts are listed below.) Conferees Present. Opening Statement by H. J. Anslinger, Commissoner of Narcotics Statement of Dr. A. H. Wright, Professor of Agronomy, University of Wisconsin, relating to growth of Hemp, where seeds are produced, and Hemp is grown in United States. Statement of Mr. Franklin. Chief of Drug Control, State of New York as to growth of Marihuana in that state. Statement of Dr. B. B. Robinson, Bureau of Plant Industry, Department of Agriculture, relative to experiments as to World Production of Hemp, and quantity of Production in United States and Growth and Production of Cannabis, and Comparative Results obtained from Seed obtained from various Countries. Statement of Dr. John R. Matchett, Chief Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics, as to Tests made from Seeds of Hemp in various Countries. Statement of Mr. Henry Fuller, Consulting Chemist, as to his Experience in Growth of Cannabis. Statement of Dr. James C. Munch, Professor of Pharmacology, Temple University, relating to Effects of Marihuana on Organs of Body: Statement of Dr. S. Loewe, Pharmacologist, Cornell University Medical College, as to Bio-Assay of Marihuana Statement of Dr. Walter Bromberg, Senior Psychiatrist, Department of Hospitals, New York City, relating to varying Effects of Marihuana in various Classes of Individuals. Discussion on Pharmacological Phases of Marihuana Problem. Statement of H. J. Wollner, Consulting Chemist, Treasury Department Statement of Dr. A. H. Blatt, Howard University, Relative to Survey of Chemical Constituents of Cannabis Sativa. Statement of Dr. John R. Matchett, Treasury Department, containing Report of Department of Attacks on Marihuana Problems. Statement of Dr. Joseph Levine, Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics, as to Tests for Identification of Marihuana Statement of Mr. Louis Benjamin, Chemist, Treasury Department, as to Tests. Statement of Dr. James C. Munch, as to Tests. Statement of Dr. H. M. Lancaster, Chief Dominion Analyst, Canadian Government, in relation to Tests. Statement of Dr. James Couch, Pathological Division, Bureau of Animal Industry, Department of Agriculture More coming soon!!! Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B20-260IA088-000636-B019-248http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/history.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103041 text/html 9736HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:30:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:19 GMTContent-length: 9521 Historical Research on Drugs -- Legalization,Decriminalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Historical Research on Drug Policy The history of our drug policy is one of the more fascinatingchapters in the development of America as we are today. Thissection will continue to grow and I invite everyone to makesubmissions of their favorite historical documents on thesubject. By the way, folks, in case anyone asks, we are firmlycommitted to publishing all of the historical information,regardless of which side it may favor. The History of the Drug Laws The History of the Marijuana Laws inthe United States by Charles Whitebread - A Speech to theCalifornia Judges Association 1995 annual conference Anexcellent, and funny history of how we got our current drug laws. The History of the Opium and Cocaine Laws byDavid F. Musto, MD The ForbiddenFruit and the Tree of Knowledge: An Inquiry into the LegalHistory of American Marijuana Prohibition by Professor Richard J.Bonnie & Professor Charles H. Whitebread, II -- The firstmajor study ever done of the legal history of the marihuana laws. From the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,1972 History of Marihuana Legislation History of Alcohol Prohibition History of Tobacco Regulation A Summary of Historical Events Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors, byDan Baum - A history of the drug war in modern times. Other Historical Links Hemp BC - Hemp, BritishColumbia - lots of good historical information on hemp in Canada. Drug CultureThroughout History - An interesting collection of informationregarding the history of drugs, from the earliest times to thecurrent day. Historical Articles Drug Law Timeline - Somesignificant events in the history of our drug laws The Mythical Roots of US Drug Policy:Soldier's Disease and Addicts in the Civil War by Jerry Mandel American Prohibitionists and Violence,1865-1920 - by Richard Hamm The Pure Food and Drugs Act of1906 by Thomas M. Szasz Hemp Around Their Necks -- Chapter 3of Harry Anslinger's 1961 book "The Murderers". Among other things he tells how the La Guardia Committee Report gave children a signal to light up as many reefers as they want. The Gentle, InoffensiveChinese -- from Volume II, Chapter XIII of Roughing It, byMark Twain, 1871. This is included here to help give readers anunderstanding of the racial feelings which were behind theearliest anti-opium smoking laws. Confessions of an English Opium Eaterby Thomas de Quincey -- This is the famous essay on opium fromthe early 1800's. Panic and Indifference, The Politicsof Canada's Drug Laws. P.J. Giffen, Shirley Endicott and SylviaLambert. A few samples from a book which is an excellentdiscussion of the history of Canada's drug laws. Experts Discount Marijuana as Big Factor InCrime but Drive on It Will Be Pressed This is an article from the New York Times, January 12, 1945, reporting the conclusions of the La Guardia Committee Report on marijuana. The committee found that the fears about marijuana were "unfounded" but the politicians swore to keep up the fight anyway. An "OpiumJoint" Raided. The New York Times September 28, 1891, p.2. A quaint article about the opium problem in the 19th century. Alcohol and OpiumCompared: Opinions of over 100 Physicians on the use of Opiumin China -- Compiled by William Hector Park, M.D., AmericanPresbyterian Mission Press, Shanghai, 1899 What Shall They Do to Be Saved?, Harper'smagazine 35, Aug. 1867, pp. 377-87. An article about the evils of opium addiction. The Demon of the Orient AllenS. Williams, New York: "Published by the Author," 1883Chapter IV. An American's Palace Joint Another chapter of theevils of opium. The Warfare AgainstOpium-Smoking in America Outdoor, Feb. 6, 1909, vol. 91, p275 How the Opium Habit isAcquired by Virgil G. Eaton The Popular Science Monthly 33,Sept. 1888, 663-67 An Enterprising Turk,The New York Times July 1, 1890, p. 8 This is a story about how aTurk decided to sell diluted opium and was quickly driven out ofbusiness by public exposure. In The Land of Opium.- The Immense Areas Given to the Growth of the Poppy - The NewYork Times March 29, 1896, p. 28 The Drug's History Traced from the Plant to the Pipe--The Scenes in the Indian Fields--Processes Through Which the Opium Goes--The Monopoly of Finishing for Smoking in the Hands of Chinese--View of a Lucknow Smoking Den. The San FranciscoOpium Joints -- The Review of Reviews 5 June (1892), p. 604 A lurid description of the San Francisco opium dens. It is worth noting that San Francisco had passed ordinances outlawing opium smoking in opium dens some 17 years before this article was written. The Opium Industry inAmerica by C.F. HOLDER Scientific American 1898, p. 147 Thisis a review of the opium industry as it existed in the late 19thcentury. Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? AHistorical Perspective From "Our Right To Drugs" byThomas Szasz, Praeger Publishers, NY (1992): Evidence Found of Ancient Marijuana Use:Albany (NY) Times Union, 20 May 1993 attributed to Newsday From Mr Sin to Mr Big by DesmondManderson This is a synopsis of a history of the drug laws inAustralia. It is a good demonstration of the racism behind thedrug laws. A Brief History of FederalFirearms Enforcement, Frederick S. Calhoun. Ph.D.. Historian,Federal Law Enforcement Training Center The Opium Monopoly by Ellen N. LaMotte - 1920 - An account of the opium trade in Asia in the firstpart of the Twentieth Century The Lincoln Quote - Somecommentary on a quote attributed to Abraham Lincoln. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B20-261IA087-000625-B020-181http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/general.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045514 text/html 6712HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:55:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:08:21 GMTContent-length: 6495 General Information on Marijuana/Hemp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) General Information on Marijuana/Hemp A Fiscal Analysis of MarijuanaDecriminalization in California -- An analysis of the impact of the Moscone Act on the criminal justice system in California. A very big report with lots of fiscal and financial detail. Frequently Asked Questions aboutCannabis Hemp - By Brian S. Julin Cannabis 1988 Old Drug, New Dangers,The Potency Debate, Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Vol 20(1),Jan-Mar, 1988 pg 47. Mikuriya, Tod H. and Aldrich, Michael. This is a summary of an article discussing the myth of the increase in marijuana potency over the last couple of decades. As this article and others have pointed out, the strongest forms of marijuana have been available since the dawn of recorded history. Readers are invited to make reference to the various historical documents below regarding the historical use of hashish. Answers to Frequently AskedQuestions about Marijuana Use. This is an excellent summary of many of the questions regarding marijuana. It is very well-documented. Contributed by Christopher Reeve. The Myth of Marijuana'sGateway Effect by John P. Morgan, M.D. and Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. This is a good review of the myth that marijuana leads to harder drugs. Pharmacology of Marijuana:Just Another Sedative by Frederick H. Meyers, M.D., Professorof Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, Ca. A Review of the ScientificLiterature Re Amotivational Syndrome This is an excellent synopsis of the information regarding the "amotivational syndrome" and marijuana. Complete with citations for further reference. Contributed by Brian of DRCNet. Notes on Marijuana and theAmotivational Syndrome Pot's Tab in the War on Drugs --The Arkansas Times, September 16, 1993 The Legalization Of Marijuana: byDennis M. Yates The human toxicity of marijuana: acritique of a review by Nahas and Latour. This is an abstract of an article which reviewed the work of Dr. Gabriel Nahas regarding his claims about the dangers of marijuana. Marijuanaand the Human Brain - By John Gettman, with NORML Marijuana and the Human Body --The Common Sense Series, a publication of the NationalOrganization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws Detecting Marijuana Through UrineTesting -- Approximate times for testing positive versusfrequency of use. The Interaction Between Alcohol andMarijuana -- A Dose Dependent Study of the Effects on HumanMoods and Performance Skills -- A summary of a 1986 study from Australia regarding the effects of marijuana and alcohol on driving skills. Marijuana (Cannabis) Fact Sheet -Issues Study Committee of the Bruin Humanist Forum Copyrighted bythe Bruin Humanist Forum 1967 The Effects of Marijuana on Consciousness-- From: Altered States of Consciousness, edited by Charles T.Tart, Doubleday & Co., 1972, Chapter 22 Cannabis: the brain's other supplier byRosie Mestel - reprinted from the New Scientist 31 July 1993 This is an article about natural chemicals in the brain which are very closely related to THC. Chemical Constituents of Cannabis -Report of a Study by a Committee of the INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE,National Academy Press, Washington, DC 1982 Marijuana and Actual Driving Performance,National Highway Traffic Safety Administration by Hindrik W. J.Robbe and James F. O'Hanlon Sponsoring Agency:U.S. Department of Transportation National Highway Traffic SafetyAdministration 400 Seventh Street, S.W. Washington, DC 20590 --Published November, 1993 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B20-262IA087-000625-B017-72http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/history/history.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043725 text/html 4653HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:37:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:03:26 GMTContent-length: 4438 Cannabis / Marijuana / Hemp History Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Marijuana / Hemp Historical Information Fitz HughLudlow Hypertext Library of Historical Documents on Hemp Historical and Literary Referencesto Hemp - 30 Pages of references from lots of sources to giveyou a picture of hemp through history. Historical and Literary Referencesto Hemp - Part 2 - 15 more pages of references. Hugh Downs commentary on hemp ABCNews, NY, 11/90: Hemp For Victory - By the USDepartment of Agriculture, 1942 This is the transcript of the film done by the USDA toencourage farmers to grow hemp (marijuana) during World War II,because it was a vital resource for such uses as ropes, heavycloth, etc. New Billion-Dollar Crop - Hemp-Popular Mechanics, February, 1938 Pinch Hitters for Defense -Popular Mechanics, December, 1941 Marijuana and the Bible by TheEthiopian Zion Coptic Church This pamphlet is more than just a religious tract. It includesa long series of historical, literary, and biblical references tomarijuana and the beliefs of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church. Hemp article, from EncyclopaediaBritannica, 11th ed. (1910-1911) Hemp article - from theEncyclopedia Brittanica, 1856 The Assassins by Philip K. Hitti- A short discussion of the Hashishins, who have often been usedas the historical example of the association between hashish(marijuana) and violence. The Tale of Two Hashish-Eaters (Traditional)From 1001 Arabian Nights A Short Hemp History, The Storyyou were never told in school By John Birrenbach, Founder, TheInstitute for Hemp The British PharmaceuticalCodex, 1934 - relating to cannabis Marijuana and the Pygmies - CarlSagan's idea about how marijuana may have triggered humancivilization. Hemp - Children'sEncyclopedia of 1909 Slavery in the Hemp Industry - Excerpted from A History of the Hemp Industry inKentucky by James F. Hopkins (Lexington: University ofKentucky, 1951), pp. 4, 24-30, 132-40, 196. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B20-263IA087-000625-B015-191http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hempfuel.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043001 text/html 8990HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:29:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:30 GMTContent-length: 8773 Hemp For Fuel Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) HEMP FOR FUEL Excerpted from "Energy Farming in America," byLynn Osburn BIOMASS CONVERSION to fuel has proven economically feasible,first in laboratory tests and by continuous operation of pilotplants in field tests since 1973. When the energy crop is growingit takes in C02 from the air, so when it is burned the C02 isreleased, creating a balanced system. Biomass is the term used to describe all biologically producedmatter. World production of biomass is estimated at 146 billionmetric tons a year, mostly wild plant growth. Some farm crops andtrees can produce up to 20 metric tons per acre of biomass ayear. Types of algae and grasses may produce 50 metric tons peryear. This biomass has a heating value of 5000-8000 BTU/lb, withvirtually no ash or sulfur produced during combustion. About 6%of contiguous United States land area put into cultivation forbiomass could supply all current demands for oil and gas. The foundation upon which this will be achieved is theemerging concept of "energy farming," wherein farmersgrow and harvest crops for biomass conversion to fuels. PYROLYSIS IS THE TECHNIQUE of applying high heat to organicmatter (ligno-cellulosic materials) in the absence of air or inreduced air. The process can produce charcoal, condensableorganic liquids (pyrolytic fuel oil), non-condensable gasses,acetic acid, acetone, and methanol. The process can be adjustedto favor charcoal, pyrolytic oil, gas, or methanol productionwith a 95.5% fuel-to-feed efficiency. Pyrolysis has been used since the dawn of civilization.Ancient Egyptians practiced wood distillation by collecting thetars and pyroligneous acid for use in their embalming industry. Methanol-powered automobiles and reduced emissions fromcoal-fired power plants can be accomplished by biomass conversionto fuel utilizing pyrolysis technology, and at the same time savethe American family farm while turning the American heartlandinto a prosperous source of clean energy production. Pyrolysis has the advantage of using the same technology nowused to process crude fossil fuel oil and coal. Coal and oilconversion is more efficient in terms of fuel-to-feed ratio, butbiomass conversion by pyrolysis has many environmental andeconomic advantages over coal and oil. Pyrolysis facilities will run three shifts a day. Some 68% ofthe energy of the raw biomass will be contained in the charcoaland fuel oils made at the facility. This charcoal has nearly thesame heating value in BTU as coal, with virtually no sulfur. Pyrolytic fuel oil has similar properties to no. 2 and no. 6fuel oil. The charcoal can be transported economically by rail toall urban area power plants generating electricity. The fuel oilcan be transported economically by trucking creating more jobsfor Americans. When these plants use charcoal instead of coal,the problems of acid rain will begin to disappear. When this energy system is on line producing a steady supplyof fuel for electrical power plants, it will be more feasible tobuild the complex gasifying systems to produce methanol from thecubed biomass, or make synthetic gasoline from the methanol bythe addition of the Mobil Co. process equipment to the gasifier. FARMERS MUST BE ALLOWED TO GROW an energy crop capable ofproducing 10 tons per acre in 90-120 days. This crop must bewoody in nature and high in lignocellulose. It must be able togrow in all climactic zones in America. And it should not compete with food crops for the mostproductive land, but be grown in rotation with food crops or onmarginal land where food crop production isn't profitable. When farmers can make a profit growing energy, it will nottake long to get 6% of continental American land mass intocultivation of biomass fuel--enough to replace our economy'sdependence on fossil fuels. We will no longer be increasing theC02 burden in the atmosphere. The threat of global greenhousewarming and adverse climactic change will diminish. To keep costsdown, pyrolysis reactors need to be located within a 50 mileradius of the energy farms. This necessity will bring life backto our small towns by providing jobs locally. HEMP IS THE NUMBER ONE biomass producer on planet earth: 10tons per acre in approximately four months. It is a woody plantcontaining 77% cellulose. Wood produces 60% cellulose. Thisenergy crop can be harvested with equipment readily available. Itcan be "cubed" by modifying hay cubing equipment. Thismethod condenses the bulk, reducing trucking costs from the fieldto the pyrolysis reactor. And the biomass cubes are ready forconversion with no further treatment. Hemp is drought resistant, making it an ideal crop in the drywestern regions of the country. Hemp is the only biomass resourcecapable of making America energy independent. And our governmentoutlawed it in 1938. Remember, in 10 years, by the year 2000, America will haveexhausted 80% of her petroleum reserves. Will we then go to warwith the Arabs for the privilege of driving our cars; will westripmine our land for coal, and poison our air so we can driveour autos an extra 100 years; will we raze our forests for ourenergy needs? During World War II, our supply of hemp was cut off by theJapanese. The federal government responded to the emergency bysuspending marijuana prohibition. Patriotic American farmers wereencouraged to apply for a license to cultivate hemp and respondedenthusiastically. Hundreds of thousands of acres of hemp weregrown. The argument against hemp production does not hold up toscrutiny: hemp grown for biomass makes very poor grade marijuana.The 20 to 40 million Americans who smoke marijuana would loath tosmoke hemp grown for biomass, so a farmer's hemp biomass crop isworthless as marijuana. It is time the government once again respond to our economicemergency as they did in WWII to permit our farmers to growAmerican hemp so this mighty nation can once again become energyindependent and smog free. For more information on the many uses of hemp, contact BACH,the Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp, Box 71093, LA, CA90071-0093, 213/288-4152. --excerpt from Herer, "Emperor Wears No Clothes,"1991 edition, p. 136 For an updated version of "Energy Farming InAmerica," "Books In Print" lists "Ecohemp:Economy and Ecolgy with Hemp," Access Unlimited, FrazierPark, CA, 805/632-2644. [3] The device invented was named the decorticator and in themid 1930s it was poised to do for hemp what the cotton gin haddone for cotton: create a fast and economically feasible way of"removing the fiber- bearing cortex from the rest of thestalk, making hemp fiber available for use without a prohibitiveamount of human labor." ("Popular Mechanics,"February, 1938) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B20-264IA087-000625-B015-215http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/colhemp1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043020 text/html 15022HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:30:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:43:02 GMTContent-length: 14804 Speech before the Colorado legislature on hemp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Speech before the Colorado legislature This is a rough draft of a speech for the 1995 Agriculturalcommittee of the Colorado congress, which will be deciding on abill to re-classify industrial cannabis as legal. (below 1.3%THC) From DMartinCO@aol.comWed Feb 1 12:54:34 1995 Date: Sun, 29 Jan 1995 17:24:51 -0500 Draft Testimony--1/26/94 Agronomy Hemp is an annual herbaceous plant that can grow to heights of5-20 ft. during a 3-4 month growing cycle. It grows withoutherbicides, and if grown in proper rotation, without pesticides.Due to its fast rate of growth, hemp has very high initialfertilizer requirements. However, up to 70% of the nutrients arereturned to the soil by falling leaves. Therefore, hemp isoverall less demanding on the soil than corn or wheat. According to representatives from the CSU Ag. Dept, Colorado'ssoil conditions match those preferred by hemp. Rainfall will be aproblem, especially during the first six weeks of growth, and soit will be necessary to grow hemp under irrigation. However,Colorado's highest yielding, most profitable crops are also grownunder irrigation, and hemp requires about the same amount ofwater as corn (1-1.5 acre inches/week). Hemp can be planted using current seeding equipment, andharvested using standard hay mowing and baling equipment. In thefuture, the development of specialized harvesting equipment willbe one of the many industries created by a new hemp industry. After harvesting, the crop must be retted, the process bywhich the glue that holds the fibers and hurds together, calledpectin, is broken down. In the near future, this can be doneusing a process called dew retting. Hemp is simply left laying inthe field for 4-5 weeks while mother nature naturally decomposesthe pectin. In the future, retting facilities will be developedto take advantage of various water retting methods that producebetter quality, more uniform fibers in less time. Hemp yields approximately 3-7 tons of dry stem matter peracre, and approximately 300-1000 lbs of seed per acre. Hemp offers several benefits to the Colorado farmer. First, itis an alternative cash crop that can earn around $400-1,200 peracre. Hemp's natural weed suppression and resistance to pestsmean that farmers will not have to buy costly and harmfulpesticides and herbicides, a savings of $50-60/acre compared tocorn. Besides this, hemp leaves the field weed free and high innutrients for the next crop, further reducing costs INSERT CHART. Finally, hemp would serve as an ideal weed barrier for organicfarming. Industrial hemp plants are planted approximately 1-3inches apart, which gives a plant density of around 150-650plants/sq. yard. This close spacing prevents branching, which means the plants grow a straightstem about the size of a finger, with only a small canopy ofleaves at the top. To maximize fiber quality, the plants areharvested when the male plants begin to pollinate All this meansthat industrial hemp is unsuitable as a cover crop for marijuana.Marijuana is planted with wide spacing to encourage branching. The narrow spacing of industrial hemp means it is impossibleto enter a field without leaving a noticeable trail. Industrialhemp is cut before flowering, while marijuana is harvested forthe flowers. Any marijuana plants growing in the hemp field wouldbe cut before they were worth anything. Male plants areeliminated for marijuana cultivation, so pollen from male hempplants would destroy any nearby marijuana crop. As most policeagencies will tell you, corn is the preferred cover crop. Plant Description Industrial hemp produces three main raw materials: bast fiber,which makes up approximately 20-25% of the stalk; hurds, thewoody core that makes up 75-80% of the stalk; and seeds. SHOWCANADIAN STALKS Products It has been estimated that hemp could be used to produce25-50,000 products. SHOW PRODUCTS CHART. Here are a few: Textiles: Hemp fiber is one of the strongest naturalfibers on earth. These fibers can be used to make a wide range oftextile products, from fine linens to coarse canvas. In fact, theword canvas is derived from cannabis. In addition, hemp fiber is a perfect raw material for makingrope, twine and other types of cordage. According to Pulp and Paper magazine, cotton is grown onapproximately 3% of the world's agricultural land, but accountsfor 11-15% of agricultural chemical use. In the US, it accountsfor 25-50% of chemical use. Hemp fibers are longer, stronger,more absorbent and more mildew-resistant than cotton fibers. Alightweight, more uniform hemp yarn is currently being developed,which would allow production of hemp T-shirts. At the same time,research is being conducted in Europe on hemp"cottonization," an organic process that converts hempfibers so they can be used in existing spinning and weavingequipment. Industrial applications of hemp textiles show specialpromise. Hemp fibers remain unchanged at extreme cold and warmtemperatures. According to the Chinese Academy of Sciences,fabrics with at least 50% hemp block UV rays better than otherfabrics. Several companies in the US currently produce textileproducts, such as shirts, jeans, shorts, backpacks, wallets, etc.from imported hemp fabric. Walt Disney Co. carries hemp productsfor its Indiana Jones line. Esprit will soon begin offering hempclothes as part of its Ecollection. Deja Shoe, a company thatproduces footwear made from recycled and earth-friendlymaterials, will soon be offering hemp shoes, and 100% hempConverse All Stars are already available. Currently, there is a shortage of wood fiber on the worldmarket. Prices for wood chips have more than doubled in the pastfew years, and paper prices have increased significantly. At thesame time, demand for paper is also on the rise. These trendswill put increasing pressure on world forests. Many woodsproducts producers are beginning to search for alternative fibersources. Hemp hurds are an excellent wood substitute. Paper: In 1916, the USDA reported that hemp hurds couldproduce four times as much paper per acre as trees. Withincreased yields and improved technology, it may now be as highas ten times as much per acre. Research is currently beingconducted on incorporating the whole stalk in the pulpingprocess, which would further increase hemp's advantages overtrees. Hurds contain only 10-20% lignin, the substance that bindscells together. This is much lower than the lignin content oftrees. This makes hemp much easier to pulp than trees, resultingin lower energy consumption and lower or no use of harmfulchemicals. It can also be pulped using hydrogen peroxide, whicheliminates the use of chlorine and the resulting release ofdioxin into our streams and rivers. Since hemp paper is stronger, it can be recycled many moretimes that tree paper. It will last hundreds or thousands ofyears, while tree paper turns yellow and begins to disintegratein as little as 20 years. In other countries, hemp is oftenblended into recycled paper or papers made from other plantfibers to add strength. Currently, all hemp paper sold in the US is manufacturedabroad, and must be imported, resulting in prices 2-3 timeshigher than tree paper. Kimberly Clarke, an American Fortune 500company, currently manufactures hemp paper for cigarettes andBibles in France, and much of the cigarette paper is sold toAmerican companies. Tree Free EcoPaper of Oregon imports papermanufactured in China. They are in the process of building a millin Oregon that would create 400 new jobs, but without a domestichemp supply, raw materials will have to be imported, keepingprices high. Germany's largest paper manufacturer has recentlyconverted two mills for hemp production. Construction Materials: Current research at the WashingState Wood Composite Laboratory shows that medium densityfiberboard made from hemp are twice as strong as that made fromwood. Composites are the fastest growing sector of thewood-products industry. C&S Specialty Builders Supply isconducting research on using hemp not only in fiberboard, butalso to make the binder for such composites. Currently, bindersare made using formaldehyde. Hemp hurds could be used, either alone or blended with wood,in existing mills with absolutely no changes to existingequipment. Russia, Poland and other Eastern European countriescurrently manufacture composite boards from hemp and other plantmaterials. Gridcore International of California manufacturesstructural panels made from 50% recycled paper and 50% recycledcardboard. A 4' x 10' x 3/4" Gridcore panel is not onlytwice as strong as the same size sheet of plywood, but alsoweighs half as much. They believe that blending in hemp wouldmake the panels even stronger. Animal Bedding: Hemp hurds also make an excellentanimal bedding. They are more absorbent than wood shavings, andcompost faster. Plastics: Hemp hurds are 50-77% cellulose, the basicbuilding block of plastics. Until the 1930's, hemp basedcellophane, celluloid and other products were common. Henry fordused hemp to make car doors and fenders. Today, hemp hurds could be used to make any type of plastic,and can also be blended into recycled plastic. Cargillmanufactures a line of 100% plant-based plastic silverware. Plantbased plastics, such as shopping bags, are biodegradable, andcould be composted at home. Hemp Seeds: Hemp seeds are 20-25% protein, and onehandful provides an adult's daily minimum protein requirement.Although soybeans are higher in total protein, these proteins arecomplex, and are therefore difficult or impossible for some todigest. The proteins found in hemp seed digest much easier. Hempseeds can be used to make non-dairy cheese, milk and ice cream,and can be substituted for up to 1/4 of the flour in a recipe.According to Udo Erasmus, author of Fats and Oils: The CompleteGuide to Fats and Oils in Health and Nutrition, "hemp butterputs peanut butter to shame for nutritional value." Hemp seeds are also common in birdseed. Testimony by arepresentative of the American Bird Seed Industry during thehearings on the MTA resulted in the exemption for sterilizedseed. Hemp seeds can be pressed for their oil, which ranges from30-40% of the seed. Hemp oil is useful for a number of products.Nutrition: At 81%, hemp seed oil is the richest known source ofcholesterol-fighting Essential Fatty Acids. hemp oil can be takenalone as a dietary supplement, or used to make salad dressing orother oil-based recipes. Flax oil, another oil sold as a dietarysupplement, is currently a $6 million/year industry. Hemp oil ishigher is EFA's, reportedly tastes better, and contains a thirdEFA not found in flax oil. Currently, it is legal to import sterilized seeds. However,importing greatly increases production costs. Besides this, thesterilization process harms the nutritional potential of theseeds, and hastens rancidity Personal Hygiene: Hemp oils high content of EFA alsomakes it ideal for making cosmetics. Today, most moisturizingproducts are made from saturated oils. These oils are notabsorbed by the skin cells, but simply coat the surface andprevent further moisture loss. Lotions that contain high EFA'scan be absorbed into the cells to help them heal. Many UScompanies currently offer a wide range of hemp personal hygieneproducts, including soaps, shampoos, moisturizers, salves andmassage oils. Paints and Varnishes: Until the 1930's, most paintswere made from hemp and linseed oils. Rather than simply coatingthe surface, hemp oil soaks into wood to preserve it. Duringtestimony ate the MTA hearings, a representative of SherwinWilliams reported that his company imported 135,000 pounds ofhemp oil, in addition to the hemp it produced on its Texasplantation. Hemp paints could satisfy today's demand forenvironmentally safe paints. Other: Seed oil can be easily combined with 15%methanol to create a substitute for diesel fuel which burns 70%cleaner than petroleum diesel. In fact, diesel fuel wasoriginally designed as a plant-based, not petroleum based, fuel.hemp oil is also an ideal base for non-toxic printing inks. Whilesuch inks are currently made from soybeans, hemp is higher inboth linoleic and linolenic acids, which means it requires lessprocessing and is a superior drying oil. Hemp seed oil also makesa great all purpose lubricant. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B20-265IA087-000625-B015-236http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/perry1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043036 text/html 6455HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:30:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:59 GMTContent-length: 6238 Letter from DEA Agent Perry re Hemp in Colorado Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration Rocky Mt. Division 115 Inverness Drive East Englewood, CO 80112 (303) 784-6300 The Honorable Don Ament, Chairman Agriculture, Natural Resources & Energy Committee Senate Chambers State Capitol Building 200 East Colfax Ave. Denver, Colorado 80203 Dear Senator Ament: I am taking this opportunity to offer , for the record, theDrug Enforcement Administration's views on Senate Bill 95-132,"Hemp Reclassification" which is currently before yourCommittee. As the Special Agent in Charge of DEA's Rocky Mountain FieldDivision, I am charged with enforcement of the Federal ControlledSubstances Act (CSA) in Colorado. In this capacity, it isimperative that I advise you that the "Hemp ReclassificationBill", which attempts to legalize the production of theCannabis Sativa or Cannabis Indicia, providing the THC content isunder 1.4%, violates both the letter and the spirit of the CSA. Under 21 USC 812 (c) (10), marijuana is a Schedule Icontrolled substance, regardless of the percentage of THCcontent. The production, distribution or dispensing of marijuanais a felony under federal law pursuant to 21 USC 841. Thepossession of marijuana is also a federal criminal offense under21 USC 844. As you are no doubt aware, in cases where Federal and statelaw are in opposition, the question of which law would control iswell settled. In view of these facts, passage of the "HempReclassification Bill" would have the effect of leadingotherwise law abiding farmers down the road to the commission ofa felony, under the color of a seriously misguided state statute.If even one honest farmer faces such a dilemma, it would be aninsupportable miscarriage of justice. Beyond the bare facts of the matter on the legality of whatthis Bill attempts to do, its passage would send a harmful anddysfunctional message to the people of the State of Colorado. Arecent nationwide survey conducted by the University of Michiganhas shown that the use of marijuana by the nation's schoolchildren is on the rise. Enactment of this legislation would addthe force of a Colorado statute to the perception that marijuanais "OK." And let us be clear that what we are talking about in thisBill is marijuana. Calling it "hemp" on the basis of anartificial threshold level of psychoactive ingredient does noterase the fact that it is botanically and legally the same plant.An illegal drug by any other name is still an illegal drug. The threshold level of THC content which the Bill proposes asthe imaginary dividing line between marijuana and hempcommunicates another delusional message. No less an authoritythan Dr. Charles Ksir of the University of Wyoming points outthat the marijuana sold of the streets is the 1960s and 1970s wasof this strength. To think that those interested in the criminaluse and distribution of marijuana would forsake the"hemp" as defined by the Bill is altogether naive. The claims of the Bill's proponents that Colorado would derivesome economic benefit from the commercial production of Cannabisare equally deceptive. In the words of Joseph E. Atchison, Ph.D.,an international consultant to the pulp and paper industry,"...it would make far more sense for U.S. Industry toconsider returning to the use of agricultural residues which aregrown for other purposes, such as wheat straw, seed grass strawand grain sorghum stalks, rather than attempting to grow a plantjust for its fiber content, such as kenaf and hemp." Although I am not an expert in the economics of cropproduction, I believe that my 31 years as a federal drug agentmake me an expert in drug law enforcement. From that standpoint Ican tell you that, in my professional opinion, this legislationis no more than a shallow ruse being advanced by those who seekto legalize marijuana. The people of Colorado deserve to beprotected from this sort of subterfuge. The federal criminal law on this subject does provide suchprotection and will be enforced with all the vigor at DEA'scommand. Thank you for giving consideration to my statements on thismatter. Sincerely, Philip W. Perry Special Agent in Charge Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B20-266IA087-000625-B015-263http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/perry2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043129 text/html 9031HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:31:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:55 GMTContent-length: 8814 Letter to DEA Agent Perry re Hemp in Colorado Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) February 22, 1995 Philip W. Perry Special Agent in Charge U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration Rocky Mountain Division Field Headquarters 115 Inverness Dr. East Englewood, CO 80112 Mr. Perry: This letter is in response to your fax of February 16, 1995.Let me say at the beginning that it is, at the very least,unfortunate that this "dialog" is taking place afterthe Committee hearing on SB 95-132. Contrary to what you may believe, I respect your organizationand can appreciate the difficulty of your position, but I do notagree with the way you handled SB 95-132. As the author of thatBill, I stand behind my work and take personal offense to yourletter. Your comments and concerns regarding that Bill could havebeen helpful had you responded to my letter of January 12 orreturned one of my many phone calls, seeking comment from youroffice. Instead you waited to respond until two hours before thefinal Committee hearing. Thus making a response or amendmentimpossible and effectively ambushing our efforts. Nevertheless,your comments should not and will not go unanswered. First, and perhaps most damaging, were your comments regardingthe federal law. You may be "an expert in drug lawenforcement," but you are not a lawyer and it seems fromyour comments that you are not an expert in the law. Your letterrepresents a serious misreading of federal law and amisunderstanding of Congressional policy. At no time, sincecannabis was first regulated in 1937, has Congress ever expressedan intent to outlaw the legitimate hemp industry. AtCongressional hearings after the World War II "Hemp forVictory" campaign, Will S. Wood, Deputy Commissioner of theFederal Bureau of Narcotics (forerunner of your organization),guaranteed that marijuana regulation would not have a negativeimpact on the commercial hemp industry. Congress provided forregulation of the hemp industry in all its legislation until theearly 1970s. When Congress stopped, the right to regulatecommercial hemp farmers reverted back to the states under thetenth amendment. The federal government continues to recognizethe legitimacy of the hemp industry in international treaties andby failing to list hemp producing nations as "drugsource" countries for marijuana. Finally on June 3, 1994,President Clinton signed Executive Order 12919 which includeshemp in a list of essential national resources. The federal lawis far from clear regarding the interplay between federalmarijuana laws and the legitimate hemp industry. At a minimum,this is a question to be resolved by a federal court afterappropriate argument, not one that can be dictated by youruninformed supposition. Second, you candidly admit that you are not an expert in cropeconomics, but only after you write that, "The claims. . .that Colorado would derive some economic benefit from thecommercial production of. . . [hemp are] deceptive." Atleast thirty nations, including France, England, Australia,Canada and China, disagree with your conclusions. Each has, or isdeveloping, a commercial hemp industry. The Chinese governmentrecently allocated thirty million dollars toward the productionof a hemp processing mill. I can only assume that "someeconomic benefit" is the motivation. Again it is unfortunatethat you took it upon yourself to forestall Colorado'sopportunity to explore this potential industry for another year. Finally, are your remarks regarding my character and that ofSenator Casey. You dismiss this legislation that we worked foralmost a year to prepare as "a shallow ruse being advancedby those to seek to legalize marijuana." Without theprofessional courtesy to even respond to one of my phone calls,you have no right to level such accusations against me or theSenator. The hardest part about drafting SB 95-132 was creatingthe legal distinction between hemp and marijuana where ascientific and cognitive distinction already exists. This is thepart where I solicited your help. It is significant to note thatNORML and the other groups thought I did a sufficient job. Theyrefused to endorse the Bill because it specifically keptmarijuana laws in place. Had you contacted me, you would havefound that my motivation in writing this Bill was not to legalizemarijuana. Rather it stems from the Persian Gulf War where I sentfour of my soldiers across the world to fight for oil. It alsostems from the years I have spent trying to slow the cutting inour nation's forests. Cutting which will be significantlycurtailed in Colorado in light of the recent block of the LongDraw and Dudley Horsefly timber cuts. Despite your non-expertassurances, deforestation continues to be a problem in the UnitedStates and the World. SB 95-132 was one more attempt to slow itdown. Please refrain from further attempts to publicly disparagemy reputation regarding this issue. Further, and more important, at age 68, Senator Casey ishardly what one considers an advocate of the drug culture. LloydCasey is an intelligent, honorable and courageous man forsponsoring this Bill. You, on the other hand, are none of thosethings for scuttling it at the last minute. But I must admit, youwere successful, this time. Next time, your element of surprisewill be gone. Rangers generally only get ambushed once. Again itis unfortunate that our communication must take an adversarialtone, rather than one of cooperation. However, remember that I dorespect the work that you are doing for our nation, I thank youand I look forward to engaging you with words. Whether incooperation or not, we are destined to work together. Until nexttime, keep your head down and, "Make the most of the hempseed, sow it everywhere!" Sincerely, Thomas J. Ballanco Environmental Action Committee Co-Chair cc: Honorable William J. Clinton Honorable Don Ament President of the United States Colorado State Senator Honorable Janet Reno Honorable Dennis Gallagher United States Attorney General Colorado State Senator Honorable Thomas Constantine Honorable Linda Powers Chief Administrator, U.S.D.E.A. Colorado State Senator Honorable Henry L. Solano Honorable Ginette Dennis United States Attorney District of Colorado Colorado StateSenator Honorable Roy R. Romer Honorable Tilman Bishop Governor of Colorado Colorado State Senator Honorable Gale Norton Honorable Joan Johnson Colorado Attorney General Colorado State Senator Honorable Lloyd Casey Honorable James Wattenburg Colorado State Senator Colorado State Senator Colorado Hemp Initiative Project P.O. Box 729 Nederland, CO 80466 (303) 784-5632 email: cohp@darkstar.cygnus.com Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B20-267IA087-000625-B016-7http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/tskfrc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043219 text/html 9125HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:31:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:26 GMTContent-length: 8908 Hemp and Related Fiber Crops Task Force of Kentucky Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) HEMP AND RELATED FIBER CROPS TASK FORCE As authorized by the Governor of Kentucky BRERETON C JONES GOVERNOR EXECUTIVE ORDER 94 - 1211 November 23, 1994 Secretary of State Frankfort Kentucky HEMP AND RELATED FIBER CROPS TASK FORCE WHEREAS, the agriculture industry within the State of Kentuckyis a $3.2 billion business which must be protected so as topreserve its unique character and long-term economic viability;and WHEREAS, the Kentucky agricultural industry provides jobs for250,000 and generates as much as $20 billion in related sales andservi.ces annually; and WHEREAS, Kentucky tobacco farmers are now earning less andless from the State's leading cash crop with the prospect of evenmore severe and substantial economic losses; and WHEREAS,Kentucky farmers have the potential to produce supplemental fibercrops which are already used in other countries for making paper,fuel, cooking oil, fabric and bedding for livestock; and WHEREAS, there is a need to now critically examine and studyin a more positive and constructive way the possibilities ofdeveloping viable, economically sound, and environmentallydesirable supplemental crops for Kentucky agriculture; and WHEREAS, hemp and related fiber crops are indigenous toKentucky but, because it has been illegal to grow since 1937, nosignificant research or development has been undertakenconcerning the many legal uses of fiber crops and their potentialfor being a supplement to growing tobacco by Kentucky tobaccofarmers: NOW, THEREFORE, I, Brereton C. Jones, Governor of theCommonwealth of Kentucky, pursuant to the authority vested in meby KRS 12.029F do hereby order and direct the follo wing: 1. The Hemp and Related Fiber Crops Task Force is herebycreated and established. The Task Force shall report directly tothe Governor. 2. The mission of the Task Force will be: (a) to identify andreport on the current legal use and potential legal use of hempand related fiber crops for commercial enterprise purposes; (b)to provide an overview of the historical uses of hemp and relatedfiber crops prior to 1937, as well as its contemporaneous legaluse in other countries and corresponding programs formonitorization; ( c ) to identify methods of selective breedingof hemp plants and related fiber crops for the purpose ofremoving or producing low levels of tetrahydrocannabinol; (d) toidentify and report on companies in the United States which arecurrently using in their manufacturing process hemp based andrelated fiber crops; (e) to determine the marketability andeconomic competitiveness of products which are produced from hempand related fiber crops and identify the technology needed forgrowing and processing the plants; (t) to work with the executiveand legislative branches on legislation, policies, and programsfor promoting a concerted effort to seriously look at and examinehemp and related fiber crops production as a supplemental crop totobacco And develop recommendations for research programs andbudget request for the continued study and examination of thepotential developmental uses for hemp and related fiber crops. 3. The Task Force shall complete its work and deliver itsrecommendations to the Governor and Department of Agriculture byOctober 30, 1995. 4. The Task Force shall be attached to the Office of theGovernor for administrative and staff purposes. 5. Members of the Task Force shall be reimbursed for actualexpenses, if anyt incurred while attending meetings. 6 The Governor's Office shall take all actionsnecessary to effectuate the provisions of this Order. 7. Thechairperson shall be appointed by the Governor from themembership of the Task Force. 8 The Task Force shall consist of the following individuals: Ed Logsdon Commissioner Department of Agriculture Capital Plaza Tower Frankfort, Kentucky 40601 Billy Joe Miles 2700 Keller Road Owensboro, Kentucky 42301 Theodore Ray-Broida 290 South Ashland Avenue Lexington, Kentucky 40502 Joe Wright Star Route Harned, Kentucky 40144 Jerry Lovitt Commisisoner Department of Kentucky State Police 91,9 Versailles Road Frankfort, Kentucky 40601 William R. Sprague President Kentucky Farm Bureau Federation Post Office Box 20700 Louisville, Kentucky 40250-0700 Dr. Luther B. Hughes, Jr. Professor Department of Agriculture Western Kentucky University Bowling:G.Leeii, Kentucky 42101-3576 Dr. C. Oran Little Dean, College of Agriculture University of Kentucky S-123 Agriculture Science Center Lexington, Kentucky 40546-0091 James E. Claycomb Office of the Governor Capitol Frankfort, Kentucky 40601 Mark Farrow State Representative 2785 Stamping Ground Road Stamping Ground, Kentucky 40379 Dr. Danny Britt Chairman Department of Agriculture Eastern Kentucky University Richmond, Kentucky 40475 Dr. Eldon Heathcott Chairman Department of Agriculture Murray State University Murray, Kentucky 42071 Harold Ronell Benson, Ph.D. Land-Grant Programs Kentucky State University Frankfort, Kentucky 40601 Dr. Lane Cowsert Chairman Department of Agriculture Morehead, Kentucky 40351 Gale Glenn 2612 Basin Springs Road Winchester, Kentucky 40391 Jake Graves 301 East Main Street Lexington, Kentucky 40507 Hal Hamilton Director Community Farm Alliance 200 S@ Berea, Kentucky 40403 Further, I hereby designate Billy Joe Miles, Owensboro, toserve as Chairman of the Task Force. Please issue to them commissions. BRERETON C. JONES, Commonwealth of Kentucky BOB BABBAGE Secretary of State Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B20-268IA087-000625-B016-39http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/aushemp1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043238 text/html 5912HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:32:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:43:17 GMTContent-length: 5695 Hemp Industry in Australia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) HEMP INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA From: westender@peg.apc.org THE STORY SO FAR 1. ON February 15, HEMP South Australia rang to say that theirgovernment had decided to investigate the viability of a hempfibre industry. They were acting swiftly, amending the releventlaws by regulation rather than legislation, and they expected tohave over 100 farmers engaged in a hemp growing trial by April 2 On the 16 Feb, I put out the following press release forQueensland HEMP. HEMP MEDIA RELEASE GOSS SCORNS BILLION DOLLAR CROP! HEMP FOR FIBRE NOT WOODCHIP! Yesterday the South Australian Government announced plans tofast-track the hemp industry in that state. In April, 100 SouthAustralian farmers will begin growing hemp throughout the state. "South Australia has stolen a march on Queensland in thedevelopment of a hemp industry due to Goss governmentinaction," Brisbane HEMP spokesperson, John Jiggens,declared. "The people who will pay in the long run will be thefarmers struggling in the forgotten rural areas ofQueensland." Mr Jiggens said. " Hemp is the glamour crop of the nineties. It has thepotential to be a billion dollar crop." As a cloth, hemp is softer, warmer, and more water resistant than cotton, and commands much higher prices. The original Levi Jeans were made from hemp. The majority of the world's books were printed on hemp paper until the 20th Century. Banknotes are still printed on hemp paper. Hemp can produce from two to four times as much fibre per hectare as woodchipping. A hemp paper industry is labour intensive rather than being capital intensive like woodchip. This means MORE jobs. Woodchips sell for $60/ton. Hemp pulp sells for $400 per ton for low grade pulp, and up to $1500 for organosolv, the highest grade. 200,000 hectares of hemp could replace Australia's woodchip exports industry - subsidised by the taxpayers to the rate of $300 million. Cannabis hemp makes the strongest particle board with far greater durability than any woodchip source. "Marijuana prohibition not only clogs our courts andprisons," Mr Jiggens said. " It denies our farmers theright to grow the crop of the decade. "The South Australians have realised this. When willQueensland ever learn??" John Jiggens for HEMP 17/2/95 THE STORY GROWS The Courier Mail reponded to my press release by ringing upthe Dept of Agriculture in Queensland, and wrote an articlecalled HEMP PLAN REJECTED. "The Queensland government has ruled out the developmentof a hemp industry. . . . A spokesman for Queensland PrimaryIndustries Minister Ed Casey said yesterday the department wasinvestigating several plants for the development of a fibre industry. Hempwas less attractive in Queensland than several other plantsbecause it was more suited to temperate climates." Both the Greens and the National parties in Queenslandcriticised the government for rejecting hemp out of hand, and theOpposition Leader Rob Borbidge said he had commissioned a studyinto legalising the crop. This was duly reported in an articlecalled DEBATE ON LEGALISING HEMP GROWS. INFORMATION NEEDED FOR FURTHER PRESS RELEASES What I was wondering is this; the Dept of Agriculture havedismissed hemp out of hand on the assumption it will not growwell in Queensland's tropical and sup-tropical climate;Queensland stretches from 29 degrees S to 11 S. I know Italy hada superb fibre hemp industry. Where else in the world was fibrehemp grown in tropical and sub-tropical areas??? John Jiggens Queensland HEMP Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B20-269IA087-000625-B016-55http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/indust/WEED_CTR.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122043249 text/html 7330HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:32:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:07:12 GMTContent-length: 7113 Hemp as Weed Control by D. West, Ph.D. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) HEMP AS WEED CONTROL D. P. West, Ph.D. Weed control is a recalcitrant issue in crops grown for organic certification. One approach is the prior use of a competitive crop. In his textbook, Modern Weed Control, A. S. Crafts cites as potential weed smothering crops: millet, Sudan grass, sweet clover, sunflower, rape, barley, rye, reed canary grass, crested wheatgrass, sorghums, buckwheat, soybeans, alfalfa, cowpeas, clovers, hemp, Jerusalem artichoke, and ensilage corn. Of these only one, hemp, can be taken seriously as an adequate weed controlling mechanism. The historical testimonials to hemp's ability to control weeds are numerous. For example: "...it is certain that hemp contributes more than any other crop towards repairing the damage done by its own growth through the return of the leaves to the soil, besides other matters while it is undergoing the process of retting. Hemp is an admirable weed killer and in flax countries is sometimes employed as a crop in rotation, to precede flax because it puts the soil in so good condition." -Charles Dodge, Director, Office of Fiber Investigation, 1890. "There will be little trouble with weeds if the first crop is well destroyed by the spring plowing, for hemp generally occupies all the ground giving weeds but little chance to intrude....In proof of this, a North River farmer a few years ago made the statement that thistles heretofore had mastered him in a certain field, but after sowing it with hemp not a thistle survived, and while ridding his land of this pest the hemp yielded him nearly $60 per acre where previously nothing valuable could be produced." -C. Dodge, Hemp Culture, USDA Yearbook of Agriculture, 1895 "Hemp prevents the growth of weeds and other vegetation which would be found on such soils in most other crops or after others are laid by, and its cultivation also seems to make the soil more uniform in character." -Lyster Dewey, The Hemp Industry in the United States, USDA Yearbook of Agriculture, 1901 "Very few of the common weeds troublesome on the farm can survive the dense shade of a good crop of hemp...In one 4- acre field in Vernon County, Wis., where Canada thistles were very thick, fully 95 per cent of the thistles were killed...." Lyster Dewey, Hemp. USDA Yearbook of Agriculture, 1913. "Hemp has been demonstrated to be the best smother crop for assisting in the eradication of quack grass and Canada thistles....At Waupon in 1911 the hemp was grown on land badly infested with quack grass, and in spite of an unfavorable season a yield of 2,100 pounds of fiber to the acre was obtained and the quack grass was practically destroyed." -Andrew Wright, Wisconsin's Hemp Industry, 1918. "Hemp has been recommended as a weed control crop. Its dense, tall growth helps to kill out many common weeds. The noxious bindweed, a member of the morning glory family is checked to some extent by hemp."-B. B. Robinson, Hemp, USDA Agric Bull #1453, 1943 "Among the species studied, the hemp species proved itself to be the best in fiber production. This plant was all the more interesting owing to its low fertilization requirements, and its ability to grow without being irrigated and without chemicals, whether it be for weed or pest control." Barriere, et al. 19941 "Hemp grows quickly, soon covers the ground and chokes out the weeds. So weed control is not necessary." -Eddy A. A. de Maeyer. 19941 In Holland, Lotz, et al. tested hemp's superior weed suppressing ability (Figure 1)against four other cropping situations in a controlled experimental setting. The target weed was yellow nutgrass (Cyperus esculentus), a weed also common in the US, which propagates by tubers and is difficult tocontrol. The authors conclude, "...hemp was the most competitive cropin this study. Selecting this crop in a rotation will cause the strongest population reduction of C. esculentus on infested farmland. This control option of hemp against harmful weeds as C. esculentus is an attendant benefit of the introduction of hemp as a commercial crop."2 1From papers delivered at the Conference on Alternative Oilseedand Fiber Crops for the Cool and Wet Regions of Europe, Wageningen, The Netherlands,April 7-8, 1994. 2Lotz, L. A., P. R. M. W. Groeneveld, B. Habekotte, and H. vanOene. 1991. Reduction of growth and reproduction of Cyperus esculentus by specific crops.Weed Research 31:153-160. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B20-270IA087-000625-B016-85http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/indust/INDHMPFR.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122043308 text/html 87261HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:32:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:07:31 GMTContent-length: 87043 Industrial Hemp Farming - History and Practice Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) INDUSTRIAL HEMP FARMING: HISTORY AND PRACTICE Part 1 A HISTORICAL SKETCH OF HEMP FARMING ANDINDUSTRY 1 Antebellum 	Our concern here is with hemp. 	When we use the word "hemp" we do so to distinguish it from other varieties1 of Cannabis sativa L. which are horticultural, not agronomic crops and which have other uses but are generally unsuitable for the manufacture of durable goods such as paper, textiles or fiberboard. Of those other varieties, we will have little to say in this context, except in presenting evidence to verify the distinction of types.	The first historical record of utilization of the hemp plant for its stem fiber comes from the Chinese who described the plant they called ma as having been introduced by the Emperor Shen Nung in the twenty-eighth century BC. The wild Cannabis ancestor is believed to have grown somewhere in a general area between western China and the eastern Caucasus, north of the Hindu Kush. This wild ancestor is not found today.	Jute, ramie, abaca, sisal, kenaf and cotton are fiber crops adapted to lower latitudes. Before cotton took over, hemp and flax (in spite of the latter's origin in Africa) were the principal crops used for fabric and cordage by temperate cultures. The fineness and quality characteristics of these two fibers overlap and depend on the growing conditions, seed variety and post-harvest handling of the crop. Flax, having a lower lignin content in the fiber, was for centuries the premier fiber for apparel in western cultures. There are exceptions to this general trend, however. In Hungary, for instance, the traditional national costume was made of hemp cloth. In antebellum America, hemp homespuncalled "Kentucky jeans"was commonly used to clothe the slave population.Run away, the 23rd inst. a negro fellow, named Jack, 26 years of age, straight well made fellow, has on an old black wool hat, coarse hemp linen shirt....2	Hemp's major use was as a cordage fiber. Its natural resistance to rot recommended it for maritime uses, and, as European seafaring expanded, so did the importance of hemp. So critical was hemp to naval powers that laws were passed in England and in the American colonies requiring farmers to allot a portion of their acreage to the production of hemp. Were it not for hemp, European expansion, the Age of Exploration and the discovery of the New World would certainly not have occurred as they did. 	Sailing ships carried hempseed in their stores and the crop was seeded in new lands to provide for the repair of marlines, hausers and sails. Ships were caulked with oakum made of the short hemp tow fibers. 	 Hemp was growing in Chile by 1545, in New England by 1629. The Founding Fathers were strong promoters of hemp. For a time following the War of Independence, farmers could pay their taxes in hemp. George Washington admonished, "Sow it everywhere."3 Thomas Jefferson, a strong proponent of hemp as a crop, invented a hemp brake and experimented with different genetic varieties. 	 Hemp production during the Revolutionary period was greatest in Virginia where its labor requirement led to a rapid increase in that state's slave population.4 Hemp fabric clothed the slaves, but was too coarse for the gentle classes. 	Hemp moved west with the Pioneers. It was first planted in Kentucky on Clarke's Creek near Danville by Archibald McNeil in 1775. The growth and vicissitudes of the Kentucky hemp industry have been described in detail by James Hopkins in his History of the Hemp Industry in Kentucky. 5 Kentucky was the principal producer of hemp fiber until the Civil War. 	The mainstay of the Kentucky industry was baling rope and bagging used for cotton bales. Hemp accounted for 5% of the weight of a cotton bale and the fortunes of the Kentucky industry rose and fell with the cotton market. But despite substantial efforts on the part of the government and private individuals to encourage the use of Kentucky hemp by the US Navy, it was generally rejected for quality in favor of imported Russian "Riga Rein" hemp. After the Civil War, jute and iron bands replaced hemp for cotton bales and the Kentucky industry declined. 	Hemp fabric can be fine, strong and very durable. But great skill is required to produce quality fiber with retting preferably done in water rather than on the ground. This art was practiced in Europe, particularly in Italy, which was credited with having hemp fabric of the finest quality. The US Navy insisted on water-retted hemp. In an effort to promote the domestic industry, the government offered inducements for water-retting. In the final analysis, these efforts failed. The Federal Government in 1841 authorized a bounty, which allowed for the payment of not more than $280 per ton for American water-retted hemp, provided it was suitable for naval cordage. Many of the planters prepared large pools and water-retted the hemp they produced. But the work was so hard on Negroes that the practice was abandoned. Many Negroes died of pneumonia contracted from working in the hemp pools in the winter, and the mortality became so great among hemp hands that the increase in value of the hemp did not equal the loss in Negroes.6 Another obstacle to the industry was the location of cordage manufacturing on the coast. Rope walks were established in Kentucky as early as 1814, but the major manufacturing center was Boston, near the shipyards. Raw fiber could reach the east coast by ship from the East Indies as cheaply as from the western frontier, so hemp had to compete with tropical cordage fibers. For a time, tariffs protected the domestic bast fiber industry.	During the nineteenth century, Russia supplied most of the hemp fiber used internationally for naval cordage. (We are told that Napolean's reason for invading Russia was to cut off England's access to Russian hemp upon which the Royal Navy's power depended.) The USS Constitution had over sixty tons of hemp in its sails and riggings. 	From the sixteenth through the ninteenth century, the supply of hemp fiber was a matter of significant military concern. The strategic importance of hemp would be revisited again in 1941 when Japan's invasion of the Philippines severed US access to Manila hemp (abac) leading to a brief resurrection of the domestic hemp industry. Hemp is still listed among agricultural products considered strategic necessities by the US government.7 2 Civil War to Depression 	The ages of hemp can be broadly divided at the American Civil War. The classical period, described above, with hemp unchallenged in its maritime use, began to give way in the mid-nineteenth century as abac,  a relative of the banana, preempted hemp for naval cordage. Abaca had several things going for it: it floated on water and did not require tarring; and it could be produced with cheap coolie labor on plantations in the East Indies. 	Domestically produced hemp had difficulty competing with abac and other tropical fibers because of the high labor requirement. It had to be cut by hand and gathered into shocks to dry before being spread on the field for retting. When retting was complete, the stems were gathered up and broken using a hemp brake. Then it was hackled by flaying it on a pin-cushion of long needles to further separate the fiber from the inner woody core of the plant, called "hurds." Prior to the Civil War, this work was done by slaves in the major hemp producing areas of Kentucky and Missouri. After the war, the black population in Kentucky continued to find employment in the winter months breaking hemp.8 The ready availability of this labor force, and its dependence on hemp processing for subsistence, was given as one reason Kentucky's transition to mechanization in the early twentieth century was delayed.	The Civil War disrupted Kentucky's hemp economy because the primary consumer of hemp fiber was the Southern cotton industry. During the war, a federal commission was directed to identify cotton substitutes: it focused on flax and hemp as alternatives. The practice of weaving flax and hemp upon the old looms experienced a revival and factories began making fibers into cloth. From Fayette County in 1863 came a statement that high prices were being offered for hemp and a hopeful opinion was expressed that "a vast source of profit will be derived by our farmers who will cultivate this crop, as from the present scarcity of cotton, it will doubtless be used to a large extent for clothing as well as for the many purposes for which it has entered into competition as one of the great staples of our country."9 With the end of the war, cotton agriculture revived and the optimistic prospects for hemp fabric went unfulfilled. Cheap imported fibers, particularly jutea weaker fiber with no resistance to rot, but suitable for common twine and cotton baggingincreasingly cut into hemp's markets. In 1872, the repeal of a tariff which had protected the domestic bast fiber industry, opened doors to unlimited importation of jute and other tropical fibers. Iron bands replaced vegetable cordage for binding cotton bales. The Kentucky hemp industry never recovered its antebellum dimensions.	With the coming of steam-powered ships in the last half of the nineteenth century, hemp acreages declined internationally. The changes brought by abaca and steam relegated hemp to a minor naval function: binding the ends of ropes and caulking. Wire cables, required by law on inland vessels, further reduced the demand for hemp. 	Under pressure from frontier legislators, the federal government enacted programs to encourage the hemp industry, including the construction of a navy yard in Memphis, Tennessee. Despite these efforts and several failed attempts to expand water-retting, the Kentucky industry continued to decline. Gradually farmers in Kentucky shifted to more dependably profitable crops, principally tobacco. 	Hemp moved west with the Pioneers: Missouri (1835); Minnesota (1860); Illinois (1875); Nebraska(1887); Wisconsin (1908); California (1912). By 1860, Missouri had replaced Kentucky as the major supplier of hemp. At the same time, hemp was moving north, being first grown in Minnesota that same year. 	As the nation expanded, so did its government. In 1890, the cabinet office of Secretary of Agriculture was created. Its first appointee was Jeremiah Rusk, a former governor of Wisconsin. One of Rusk's first actions was the inauguration of the USDA's Office of Fiber Investigations to encourage domestic bast fiber production. Its first director, Charles Dodge, opined: "There is no reason why hemp culture should not extend over a dozen States and the product used in manufactures which now employ thousands of tons of imported fibers."10 	Much of this importation was due to the invention, circa 1880, of the self-binding grain harvester which needed binder twine. The twine binder brought about the final evolution of the harvesting machine. John F. Appleby, Jacob Behel and Marquis L. Gorham were the pioneers in developing the twine binder and knotter. Imported Manila jute and sisal were woven into balls of binder twine and sold to every farmer who owned a binder. The twine binder, called a "self-binder," more than any other single machine enabled the farmers to expand their wheat crops.	In 1882, the McCormick Company, having turned from wire binders to twine binders, sold over fifteen thousand twine binders. The twine binders with their automatic knotters made possible the rapid extension of the wheat belt into the West and Northwest; and large scale farming became common practice in those areas. Schager cites one farm near Casselton, North Dakota, on which sixty self-binders were employed as early as 1882.11 Hemp's greater strength per unit weight made it ideal for this purpose. Writing to Charles Dodge in 1890, one binder manufacturer testified: There is no fiber in the world better suited to this use than American hemp. It is our judgment, based on nearly ten years' experience with large quantities of binder twine each year, that the entire supply of this twine should be made from American hemp....There are 50,000 tons of this binding twine used annually, every pound of which could and should be made from this home product.12 Mechanization has been a feature of American agriculture from the time of Eli Whitney. It was the key to the agricultural conquest of the nation's breadbasket, the Great Plains. Mechanization progressed rapidly in the northern and western states' wheat and corn growing regions where there developed a tradition of the small local farm implement manufacturers, like the McCormicks and John Deere, with inventive notions. The resurrection of the domestic bast fiber industry required mechanization of the various stages of fiber processing: harvesting (cutting and retting), breaking, scutching, hackling. Lacking mechanization, there was no possibility of hemp competing with the cheap tropical fibers. In Nebraska, where the [hemp] industry is being established, a new and important step has been taken in cutting the crop with an ordinary mowing machine. A simple attachment which bends the stalks over in the direction in which the machine is going facilitates the cutting...The cost of cutting hemp in this manner is 50 cents per acre, as compared with $3 to $4 per acre, the rates paid for cutting by hand in Kentucky." 13 A machine invented in Nebraska could cut five to seven acres per day compared to half an acre cut by hand using the traditional Kentucky practice. But it was not in the traditional hemp growing regions of Kentucky and Missouri that the new technologies were aggressively applied. Kentucky would remain the source of seed, but the fiber crop moved north. 	With the promotion from the USDA's Office of Fiber Investigations, hemp was first planted at three sites in Wisconsin in 1908.14 It did well. Hemp caught the interest of local farmers near Waupon, on the eastern side of the state, who noticed that it cleaned the fields of quackgrass. The success of the hemp experiments in Wisconsin led to the appointment of Dr. Andrew Wright, of the University of Wisconsin Agricultural Experiment Station, as industry steward.	Andrew Wright recognized the necessity of, one, mechanization and, two, locating mills with railway access. Fortunately, by the early twentieth century, Wisconsin was crisscrossed with rail lines. The industry established itself on rail spurs in the east-central part of the state, near Lake Winnebago. With the new mechanical processing and rail spurs coming directly into the mills, the Wisconsin hemp industry prospered and grew. On October 17, 1917, the Wisconsin Hemp Order was inaugurated at Ripon "to promote the general welfare of the hemp industry in the state."15 When the work with hemp was begun in Wisconsin, there were no satisfactory machines for harvesting, spreading, binding, or breaking. All of these processes were performed by hand. Due to such methods, the hemp industry in the United States had all but disappeared. As it was realized from the very beginning of the work in Wisconsin that no permanent progress could be made so long as it was necessary to depend upon hand labor, immediate attention was given to solving the problem of power machinery. Nearly every kind of hemp machine was studied and tested. The obstacles were great, but through the cooperation of experienced hemp men and one large harvesting machinery company, this problem has been nearly solved.  The hemp crop can now be handled entirely by machinery.16 Andrew Wright was working with Lyster Dewey of the USDA's Office of Fiber Investigations. Dewey is unarguably the most significant individual in US hemp history. He joined the Office of Fiber Investigations just before the turn of the century and set about evaluating hemp germplasm collected from around the world. His monographs on hemp, published in the USDA Yearbooks of Agriculture, 1901 and 191317, remain the most informative writings on hemp in America. 	In the 1901 piece, Dewey describes the status of hemp germplasm at that time in the US: Until comparatively recent times hemp seed of European origin was used in Kentucky, and its effects are still plainly seen in the mixed character of plants too often found in the hemp fields. These plants are so prolific in seed that the growers hesitate to throw them out when harvesting their hemp seed.An ideal hemp plant should be 10 to 12 feet in height, one-fourth to three-eighths inch in diameter near the base, with internodes 10 inches or more in length, and stems prominently fluted, with comparatively large hollows, making them thin-shelled and more easily broken. The fiber is generally tougher on the thin-shelled stalks. The Chinese and best Japanese varieties approach most nearly this ideal. Starting with these as a foundation and practicing a rigid seed selection for a half dozen generations or longer would undoubtedly result in improved varieties of uniform plants adapted to cultivation in this country.18 Dewey explained that beginning in the mid-nineteenth century a shift toward Chinese varieties had taken place. Seed was obtained through the agency of American missionaries in China and was grown for a few generations to increase the seed supply before being planted for fiber.19	Foreign hemp strains required a period of natural selection to adjust to the new North American growing environment. Chinese hemp appeared better suited to North America than European varieties. In a later writing, Dewey remarked that introduced foreign strains had to be grown "for at least three generations (three successive years) in the country where it is to be grown for fiber"20 to achieve satisfactory adaptation to the local growing environment.	Out of the Chinese introductions a unique hemp variety was developed which came to be known as "Kentucky hemp." It conformed to Dewey's ideal type and the hollowness of the stem was particularly noted. All hemp has hollow stem ( hemp stem image), but that of Kentucky hemp was apparently superior since specific attention is drawn to it.21	We should also take special note of Dewey's remark about the "mixed character" of plants in the fields. This tells us that Kentucky hemp may have originated as a "fusion variety" from the mixing of two previously isolated genetic pools, the Asian and the European. The heterosis released by hybridity would produce more vigorous and fecund plants which "farmers hesitate to throw out." Some modern Hungarian hemp varieties exploit the potential from this same interracial cross.22 	If this is the case, then Kentucky hemp was an evolutionary leap comparable to that which corn (maize) was undergoing in this same period from the mixing of previously isolated southern dent and northern flint Zea mays populations. If this fusion occurredsomething modern tools for genetic analysis could determinethen American Kentucky hemp was truly a unique and superior type of hemp. 	Was.	Dewey began actively breeding hemp in 1912. By 1917, the program was producing notably improved stocks. Progress was steady. 1917: "The crop of hempseed last fall, estimated at about 45,000 bushels, is the largest produced in the United States since 1859. A very large proportion of it was from improved strains developed by this bureau in the hempseed selection plats at Arlington and Yarrow Farms."231918: "Early maturing varieties, chiefly of Italian origin, are being grown at Madison, Wisconsin, in cooperation with the Wisconsin Agricultural Experiment Station. This is the third year of selection for some varieties, and the results give promise of the successful production in that State of seed of hemp fully equal to the Ferrara of northern Italy. "241919: "The second-generation hybrid Ferramington, combining the height and long internodes of Kymington with the earliness and heavy seed yield of Ferrara, gives promise of a good fiber type of hemp that may ripen seed as far north as Wisconsin."251920: "The work of breeding improved strains of hemp is being continued at Arlington Farm, Va., and all previous records were broken in the selection plats of 1919.  The three best strains, Kymington, Chington and Tochimington, averaged, respectively, 14 feet 11 inches, 15 feet 5 inches, and 15 feet 9 inches, while the tallest individual plant was 19 feet. The improvement by selection is shown not alone in increased height but also in longer internodes, yielding fiber of better quality and increased quantity."26 Recently discovered correspondence between Lyster Dewey and the Woodford-Spears Seed Company of Paris, Kentucky, indicates that the improved seed from the USDA breeding program was entering the commercial stream. But despite the earliness of varieties like Ferramington and Kymington, no hempseed industry ever developed in the north. Kentucky continued to supply seed for the Wisconsin industry. 	The geographic scale of the US solved a problem which the small nations of Europe could not: the dioecious flowering character of the hemp plant. Because male plants flower first, they are more mature and more lignified when the female plants are ready for harvest. Ideally, for fiber, plants are harvested before they flower. In some primitive systems, the males were removed by hand as soon as they could be recognized and before lignification. Flowering in hemp is controlled by length of the night. If the daylength is long, flowering is delayed. In the US, by growing Kentucky seed in Wisconsin, flowering was avoided and the sexual dimorphism of hemp was circumvented. In China, hemp is harvested at this stage.	Maximum fiber yields are obtained if the plants remain in the vegetative state throughout the growing season, hence the area of hempseed production is best located south of the optimum area for fiber production.27 This was the symbiosis which evolved between the seed producers in Kentuckylike Woodford-Spears in Paris, and another in Versaillesand companies like the Rock River Mills  and Rens Hemp Company of Wisconsin. 	In the Twenties, hemp mills were operating on both the east and west sides of Wisconsin. Wright was able to boast that Wisconsin had more hemp mills than all other states combined. 	Dewey's program continued to produce new varieties through the Twenties. In the 1927 USDA Yearbook, he described the  breeding technique used to develop the varieties Kymington (Kentucky by Minnesota 8); Chington (from a plant introduction from Hankow, China, able to attain heights of 20 feet); Ferramington (Chinese by northern Italian) and Arlington (Kymington by Chington). Seed of these varieties was supplied to hempseed producers. 	By 1929, a variety named "Chinamington" was breaking all records for fiber yields. Dewey reported: "In 1929 three selected varieties of hempMichigan Early, Chinamington and Simple Leafwere grown in comparison with unselected common Kentucky seed near Juneau, Wis. Each of the varieties had been developed by 10 years or more of selection from the progeny of individual plants. The yields of fiber per acre were as follows: Simple Leaf, 360 pounds; Michigan Early, 694 pounds; Chinamington, 1054 pounds; common Kentucky, 680 pounds."28 In spite of this progress, by 1930, as the nation struggled under Depression, hemp acreage was again in decline. The uses to which hemp was being put were enumerated by Dewey in a 1931 article titled "Hemp fiber losing ground, despite its valuable qualities:" "Wrapping twines for heavy packages; mattress twine for sewing mattresses; spring twines for tying springs in overstuffed furniture and in box springs; sacking twine for sewing sacks containing sugar, wool peanuts, stock fed, or fertilizer; baling twine, similar to sacking twine, for sewing burlap covering on bales and packages; broom twine for sewing brooms; sewing twine for sewing cheesecloth for shade grown tobacco; hop twine for holding up hop vines in hop yards; ham strings for hanging up hams; tag twines for shipping twines; meter cord for tying diapharams in gas meters; blocking cord used in blocking men's hats; webbing yarns which are woven into strong webbing; belting yarns to be woven into belts; marlines for binding the ends of ropes, cables and hawsers to keep them from fraying; hemp packing or coarse yarn used in packing valve pumps; plumber's oakum, usually tarred, for packing the joints of pipes; marine oakum, also tarred for calking the seams of ships and other water craft."29 It was largely variations on the same theme: twine. 	Fiber is a fungible commodity. Fibers move in international markets and are purchased in huge volumes where small price fluctuations are highly significant. In rough times, quality loses to price. Hemp lost to sisal and jute, as natural fibers in general lost out to the new, exciting synthetics. 3 The Thirties As has been the general trend with agricultural products, manyof hemp's markets were being displaced by synthetic materialsfrom the growing organic chemical industry. What was lacking wasa determined effort to develop new uses and new markets for hemp.Why was this? The interplay of political and economic forces inthe increasing political power of the South and cotton overagricultural policy, and its effect on allocations for fiberresearch at the USDA, has been described elsewhere. (Fiber Wars:The Extinction of Kentucky HempHemp was not alone in the erosion of its markets. The productionof flax for fiber had virtually disappeared. Flax was grownprimarily as an oilseed crop. It commanded greater influence thanhemp due to the importance of linseed oil for paints andvarnishes and linoleum.31 By 1930, the country had less than 1500acres of hemp, principally in Wisconsin. In 1933, with thecountry deep in Depression, the USDA was undergoing radicalchanges including the first subsidy payments to farmers to limitproduction of surplus crops. The South depended on cotton.32 Soit was that the Office of Fiber Investigations was restructuredas the USDA Division of Cotton and Other Fibers and LysterDewey's breeding program was terminated. He retired two yearslater. His last report summarized the success of the program: The hemp breeding work, carried on by the Bureau for more than 20 years, was discontinued in 1933, but practical results are still evident in commercial fields. A hemp grower in Kentucky reported a yield of 1750 pounds per acre of clean, dew-retted fiber from 100 acres of the pedigreed variety Chinamington grown in 1934. This is more than twice the average yield obtained from ordinary unselected hemp seed.33 How unfortunate that all this germplasm has been lost! We have the National Seed Storage Laboratory in Fort Collins, Colorado, and several regional laboratories charged with the preservation of valuable crop varieties. But in the phytopogrom which subsequently developed, Cannabis  would be shunned and with the pariah status and the governmental redtape, Kentucky hemp and Deweys selected varieties would be lost. As an agricultural variety, Kentucky hemp is effectively extinct. Its feral remnant today we call "ditchweed." It is a repository of important genes, not a threat to society. The extermination campaign being waged against this genetic resource is no less than a crime, a crime against humanity and future generations. 4 Hemp Becomes a Drug Plant 	Its probably accurate to say the history of hemp has been, to this point, fairly banal. It was a useful fiber supplanted by technological change. By 1930, it had become an insignificant crop on the verge of being relegated to history's trashcan. During the 1930s, there averaged fewer than 1500 acres of hemp in Wisconsin, with seed production continuing in Kentucky. Yet here we are today with hemp apparently elevated to the status of a plant which can "save the planet." How is it that this minor crop has refused to go quietly into that good night?	Although marijuana (or marihuana, as they wrote in the 30s) would seem to have been the downfall of hemp, it has probably also been the only reason Cannabis did not disappear from human interest. In countries where hemp was not subject to the legal encumberances imposed in the west, hemp acreage also declined percipitously after WWII. Cotton, followed by wool and silk, dominated natural fiber textiles, which lost out on the whole to synthetics. Hemps association with marijuana did not help, but neither was it the sole cause of hemps attrition. It is, however, clearly the boot which holds it down. The identification of fiber cannabis with herbal cannabis is as inappropriate as the identification of sweetcorn with fieldcorn. This latter example of plant variety causes little difficulty for most people, who would soon inform their grocer were a substitution attempted. 	The identification was forced from the start and continues to be so today. Since our focus here is on hemp as a crop, revelations regarding the motivations which were operative in 1937 will be left to a separate venue. Hemp is a neglected and valuable agronomic crop. It was nearly lost, but was returned to our notice through the auspices of persons mostly concerned with the black sheep cousin by which it was shunned. These persons have alleged hanky-panky in the events of 1937. There certainly was. All in all, the words of Auden best sum up that "low, dishonest decade." 5 Hemp is Not Marijuana 	Since now we are suffering fiber shortages, we come back to hemp. And those who want to grow it find they have a problem: Someone says the kids are going to steal the crop and smoke it to get high.	What are the facts?	Psychoactive varieties of Cannabis originated in tropical Asia and probably trace to northern India where they were valued by certain religious sects. Medicinal uses were well known to classical pharmacology. The herbal of Chinese Emperor Shen Nung from 2737BC, appears to be the first pharmacological citation. In the nineteenth century, recreational use was popular among an talented, though debauched, group of European literati known as the Club de Haschishins. By the early decades of the twentieth century use by certain minorites in the US had begun to draw attention. Its popularity among the artist-musician-bohemian set has been well documented.34 	The cannabis used medicinally and recreationally in the US came from the West Indies and Mexico. Chinese and European varieties of fiber hemp lack the biochemistry, the enzymatic machinery, for efficient conversion of the cannabidiol (CBG) precursor into psychoactive tetrahydrocannibinol (THC).35 Germplasm with this capability originated in tropical zones where THC may serve an adaptive role by protecting the plant tissue from intense sunlight and damaging UV radiation. 36	As early as 1889, botanist and plant explorer George Watt had written of the distinction between types of Cannabis: A few plants such as the potato, tomato, poppy and hemp seem to have the power of growing with equal luxuriance under almost any climatic condition, changing or modifying some important function as if to adapt themselves to the altered circumstance. As remarked, hemp is perhaps the most notable example of this; hence, it produces a valuable fibre in Europe, while showing little or no tendency to produce the narcotic principle which in Asia constitutes its chief value.37 The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 requires all growers, importers and processors of hemp to register and be licensed. As a result of growing public opposition to the cultivation of this drug plant [italics added], the continuation of hemp culture in the United States may depend upon eliminating as much as possible of the active drug principle from the plant. Preliminary tests indicate a possibility of ultimately obtaining a hemp variety with little or no active drug.  Research on this problem is actively under way.38 All research on Cannabis  in the US since 1937 has been predicated on, and has served to reinforce, the misinformation that all Cannabis  is psychoactive and a threat to society requiring elaborate and expensive eradication and suppression efforts. Much of basic research funded through the National Institutes of Drug Abuse has been directed at elucidating the pathway of THC synthesis and designing synthetic analogs. There are now THC analogs reported to have 500 times the potency of natural THC so we can be confident that a new, potent, illicit drug will soon find its way to the streets, as occurred with the coca plant.	The forced association of hemp with marijuana has continued to the present, in spite of the plethora of information to the contrary. Cannabis expert Robert C. Clarke has graphically depicted the variation for psychoactive potential within the genus using the ratio of THC to CBD as developed by Small, et al. (Figure 1). The Type 2 Cannabis varieties from sites in Minnesota, Iowa and Germany, easily separate out as those with THC/CBD ratios less than 1. FIGURE 1: Type 1 (medicinal, psychoactive, herbal, drug) vs Type 2 (fiber) Cannabis accessions classified by ratio of THC to CBD and related to point of origin. Reproduced from Clark (1981).39 Clarke and Pate (1994) succinctly stated the difference between Type 1 and Type 2 Cannabis: It is not feasible to 'get high' on hemp, and most marijuana produces very little low-quality fiber. Hemp should never be confused with marijuana, as their roles cannot be reversed.40 Canadian researcher, Ernest Small has written a two volume study of "The Species Problem in Cannabis"41 based on his extensive exploration of the subject. He summarizes the debate: Lamarck was apparently only vaguely aware that the distinction he was drawing in Cannabis reflected the fact that this genus, through domestication, has been subjected to intensive disruptive selection, which has produced two kinds of plant. On the one hand, plants have been domesticated for the valuable phloem fibres in the bast. To maximize quality and obtainability of these fibres, man has selected plants which are tall, relatively unbranched, with long internodes, and with a relatively hollow stem. Lamarck termed such plants C. sativa. Such domesticated plants have been characteristically grown in Europe, northern Asia, and North America. "Wild" plants of such northern areas of the world  tend to be somewhat similar, either because they have escaped back to wild existence from cultivated fibre strains, or because they have been influenced by hybridization with such domesticated strains.In contrast, man has also selected cannabis plants for the ability to produce an inebriant. Cannabis synthesizes a resin in epidermal glands which are abundant on the leaves and flowering parts of the plant. This resin comprises a class of terpenoid chemicals called the cannabinoids. Two are of particular importance: the non-intoxicant cannabidiol (CBD) and the highly intoxicant 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)....Predominance of CBD characterizes the resin of fibre strains, and also strains selected for the valuable oil content of the fruits (achenes). Predominance of THC characterizes "narcotic" strains of Cannabis. Drug strains do not exhibit features related to harvesting the fibre. They are often fairly short, possess short internodes, are highly branched, and have comparatively woody stems. It was this type of plant that Lamarck named C. indica. Such plants are characteristic of southern Asia and Africa where Cannabis has been used for millenia as a source of the drug. "Wild" plants of such relatively southern areas of the world tend to be similar, either because they have escaped back to wild existence from drug strains, or because they have been influenced by hybridization with such domesticated strains. End of discussion. 6 The "Other" Industry 	Although by 1930 the traditional hemp industry in Wisconsin had contracted to miniscule acreage, beginning around 1934, there was a marked expansion in hemp acreage elsewhere (Table 1). The circumstances which would make it expedient to call hemp "marijuana" can only be understood if one is cognizant of this development. But, again, in keeping with our immediate purpose, we will not undertake here to complete the picture of all the humongous forces at play on that historical stage and how hemp became "star-crossed" in the drama.	As we see in Table 1, there was a sudden dramatic expansion in hemp acreage beginning in the early thirties. (Table 1 data raise some questions for which we do not currently have answers. Hemp yields, computed from these data, were relatively constant at around half-a-ton per acre until the period 1914-1918. Was this a reflection of USDA hemp improvement activity, and why did it decline again? Also, why does the acreage expansion in the thirties not report increased fiber production?) TABLE 1.  PRODUCTION, ACREAGE, AND IMPORT OF HEMP IN UNITED STATES42 					5-Year Period	Hemp Grown	Fiber Produced	Fiber Imported	  (acres)	   (tons)	(tons)1876-1880	15,000	7,000	No Record1881-1885	11,000	5,000	No  Record1886-1890	16,000	7,500	No Record1891-1895	11,000	5,000	4,5001896-1900	10,000	4,500	5,0001901-1905	12,000	5,500	5,0001906-1910	10,000	4,500	6,0001911-1913	10,000	4,500	6,0001914-1918	10,500	8,500	5,0001919-1923	8,600	3,800	4,0001924-1928	4,300	1,800	2,0001929-1933	1,200	500	1,0001934-1938	7,100	600	7401940			241						* These figures are from U.S. Dept. Agr. Bull. : Hemp, Its Production and Use as a Fiber Crop."			The relevance of this new industry to our discussion of hemp is that it was here that the "chemurgic" possibilities of the crop were explored. It was this other, new, unorthodox industry which was the focus of the enforcement of the Marihuana Tax Act by the Treasury Departments Federal Bureau of Narcotics. The law was not equally enforced against all hemp producing area. This fact betrays a hidden agenda on someone's part. The industry in Wisconsin limped along until 1958. It was not bothered by the FBN in the thirties, and contrary to current popular opinion, the tax was not prohibitive. 	The chemurgic industry had its roots in German hemp technology which had advanced markedly in the preceding decades. Cut off from the overseas supplies of cotton, jute, sisal and ramie, the German governments reconsidered hemp and supported improvements to cultivation, harvesting and processing technologies. For example, the development of the so-called cottonization process allowed production of a short fiber, high quality substitute from the long hemp fibers. During the 1920s the substitution of all cotton imports by cottonized domestic hemp was seriously discussed.43 The decorticator was developed in Germany and it was there that the chemurgic idea of using hemp as a cellulose source was seriously researched in the laboratories of I. G. Farben. 	The industry which emerged in the US starting around 1933 were Amhempco, Inc. in Danville, Illinois; the National Cellulose Corporation in Mankato, Minnesota (later renamed the Hemp Chemical Corporation); Chempco, Inc. and Cannabis, Inc. in Winona, Minnesota.	A picture of the new hemp industry seen from street-level comes to us from an article in the Winona (MN) Republican-Herald, December 31, 1937. 	The plant manager at Chempco explains their interest in the hurds as a source of cellulose for making plastics: cellulose acetate, also known as rayon acetate. Rayon, until that very year, 1937, the only significant synthetic fiber, was made with cellulose from cotton linters, the short, leftover, pure cellulose strands of cotton fiber. Wood was another source. Cellulose from any source can be used, potentially.	Another thing you can make from cellulose is nitrocellulose, smokeless gunpowder. 	This article appeared on New Year's eve 1937. It was a year which saw the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act and the patenting of nylon, the first non-cellulose synthetic fiber, made from petroleum hydrocarbons. It is also the year nylon's inventor, Wallace Carothers, committed suicide. And DuPont, Britain's ICI and Germany's IG Farben were negotiating the division of Argentina's La Cellulosa chemical company. 	This was also the eve of the year when the new Agricultural Adjustment Act, which paid farmers not to produce, would establish four regional laboratories to explore new uses for agricultural produce, a concept inspired by the Chemurgy Movement. The proponents of Chemurgy suggested that the farm crisis could be alleviated by mandating the use of agricultural products in the production of synthetic chemical products. "Cellulose," Williams Haynes observed44, "is the great chemurgic cropthat is, a crop grown for industrial use, not for food." And, he suggested, "The chemical that grows is an ideal raw material out of which to build a global economy of abundance for all mankind."	It was the eve of the Second World War. 6 Then What? 	It is sometimes suggested that the Marihuana Tax Act was prohibitive and forced the demise of the industry. In fact, it was minimal. People involved with scientific and medical studies paid $1 for a license; those in agriculture and industry paid $3; seed handlers paid a little more and had extra paper work. Willard Rens, the "Hemp King of Wisconsin" closed the doors on that industry in 1958. He told the author that the narcotics agents never visited his company. It was simply a matter of filling out the forms and sending off the money. 	Recent investigations have revealed that the 1937 Marihuana Tax Act was used specifically against the short-lived ventures in Minnesota and Illinois. Dr. Edmond A. Schlesselman, son of Dr. J. T. Schlesselman, Mankato, MN, eye, ear, nose and throat doctor and President of Cannabis, Inc, was 30 years old when his father's company was hassled by the FBN. He tells that "they had to get an agent for every step. It just made it unworkable."	The reader has a right to wonder why these companies were made the object of FBN harassment when the industry in Wisconsin, as Andrew Wright said, "are not concerned about this last law [The Marihuana Tax Act] because I believe they were given a very square deal in the national legislation on the matter."45 The myth is still perpetuated that this action was in some way justified because hemp can be used as a drug. Agencies of government still draw substantial taxpayer support predicated on this myth, and, to avoid having to explain that they have lied, the story is advanced that hemp had to be fixed. We are then told that new varieties have been developed which have fixed it so now we can grow it again. Poppycock. There is plenty of evidence that Kentucky hemp never had psychoactive potential. There was nothing to fix. 	So the reader may well wonder what was going on then, and what is going on now. 	This was not the first time hemp had stood on the verge of marvelous opportunities. Another "lost episode" in hemp's saga is that of George W. Schlichten. This amazing story, unearthed by Donald Wirtshafter, reveals the invention of a machine called a decorticator just after WW1. Inventor Schlichten, a German immigrant, had perfected a process for bast fiber separation which handled unretted stalk and produced a superior, lustrous, white, hemp fiber. A witness said of it: "I have seen a wonderful, yet simple, invention. I believe it will revolutionize many of the processes of feeding, clothing and supplying other wants of mankind."46	In 1917, after spending $400,000 developing his decorticator, Schlichten was setting up in California to process hemp. Then, Schlichten and his machine quietly fade into history. It is said a fire destroyed everything. 	Schlichtens decorticator apparently worked by the differential stretching of the fiber with a series of complicated gears and fluted rollers which broke the pectin bond between fiber and woody core. 	The machine was lost, but a man named F. E. Holton, who appears seemingly out of nowhere, promoting hemp in Minnesota in the mid-thirties, also had a machine he called a decorticator. Together with Dr. Schlesselman, and local bank president, Harry Pribnow, he formed Cannabis, Inc. In the course of other comments at the 1938 Marihuana Conference (which was also attended by Andrew Wright), Dr. B. B. Robinson of the USDAs Division of Cotton and Other Fibers, made an oblique reference to the passing of the Minnesota companies: Another argument for the hemp industry is the adaptability of the hemp plant to various regions of the country and because of suitability for mechanical handling, and these are some of the reasons why the office with which I am connected in the Department of Agriculure is interested in seeing this small nucleus of hemp industry continued each year until it is capable of supporting itself. I am speaking more of the industry in Wisconsin rather than the promotional attempts to grow hemp in Minnesota which one might speak of as unorthodox processing. But this industry we have [Wisconsin] is capable at the present time of supporting itself if public opinion does not force it to be shut down, or additional restrictions hamper it....This past summer, we had 1300 acres of hemp produced commercially in this country, and it has been running about that acreage with the exception that in 1934 and 1935 this acreage appeared in Minnesota, and in 1936 and 1937 we had a big acreage in Illinois, but those were acreages planted, you might say, for other purposes than the ordinary use, for there was an idea of producing fibre as a substitute for wool [celanese rayon] and various things of that nature. Those industries that attempted to do that, for one reason or another, have dropped by the wayside...47 The reader may well wonder about all this. For those who do, read another book.	When Japan cut off access to Phillippine abaca, only the Wisconsin-Kentucky operation remained. Seed supplies were short, but the emergency production of 1942-4 was sufficient to alleviate the fiber crisis. In spite of the approximate $300,000 spent setting up each of the 42 mills built throughout the midwest by the War Hemp Industries Corporation, hemp production collapsed again at the end of the war. The mills were sold off as government surplus shortly after the war ended. Many of these structures are still standing today, as they were built very sturdily. The mills were reportedly designed by Andrew Wright (Figure 2). Whether in Ripon, Wisconsin, or Winchester, Kentucky, they all have the same concrete block construction with curved roof and long drying tunnel. The drying tunnel was heated by burning the leftover hurds. 	The rest of the history of hemp, to the present, has little to do with hemp. Our attention has turned to hemp again, at fin de siecle, as the world experiences fiber shortage, for paper, construction material, insulation and textiles. With recognition of the cotton-chemical complex, consumers are shifting to "green" hempen eco-apparel. And, with rising consciousness, people have begun to question how the government was ever allowed to usurp the ancient right to plant a seed and use the natural harvest (consider Genesis 1:29.). They ask, "Why not hemp?" 	A decent respect for the opinions of mankind requires a just response to the question. It was probably beyond Thomas Jefferson's wildest fears of government that it would someday presume jurisdiction over this basic freedom, or the Bill of Rights would surely contain eleven amendments. PART 2 THE CULTURE OF HEMP 	The current dilemma for North American hemp is that we have lost the germplasm, the machinery and the know-how of raising the crop. But, at the same time, neither is it encumbered by antequation. It seems fair to expect the crop will find niches heretofore untapped (Figure #), since environmental impact as consideration in consumer choice is a relatively new phenomenon. The emergence of ISO14000 environmental standards heralds a new paradigm surpassing ISO9000 Quality standards in manufacturing. Powerful forces canalizing twentieth century society into the consumption of synthetic goods have, until recently, met with little resistance. Perhaps this is changing.	Newly available are two classic references on hemp from studies in the US. Dewey's 1913 USDA Yearbook of Agriculture article on hemp was reproduced in Rosenthals Hemp Today. The 1944 Iowa State Experiment Station Farm Bulletin, P63, "Hemp Production Experiments" is appended here. This latter publication is the most comprehensive study done in the US on hemp husbandry. Both these sources should be read in their entirety. 	The farmer who wishes to grow this crop must determine what his/her intended use is for the harvested product. Today, the potential uses for hemp are more numerous than have previously been recognized, and, to varying degrees, each should be considered an individual crop with specific varieties, seeding rates and management. If seed is the crop, and stem is the byproduct (suitable for paper and composite lumber, not for textiles), the grower should seek a seed (monoecious) variety. But if fine textiles are the goal, the crop will be taken before flowering. A Hungarian kompolti variety is recommended. Likewise, if the market for the hemp stalk is replacing wood chips in fiberboard, it may well be that a high percentage of core (smaller hollow) is preferable and breeding selection will develop appropriate varieties. The feral germplasm in North America may be particularly valuable in this case.	The hurdsthe leftover, broken, inner woody corehave been something of a nuisance historically. When stems were broken in the field by moving the break from shock to shock, the hurds quickly composted into the soil. The Wisconsin industry used the hurds to heat the drying tunnel through which the stems moved on their way to the decorticator. Hurds were reportedly still leftover in abundance and were given away to farmers for animal bedding. Today, Hemcore in Britain has found a market selling hurds for horse bedding: it composts faster than straw or wood chips, it is four times more absorbent and it does not tangle into the animals hair.	Animal bedding is only one of the uses rediscovered or newly invented for this former byproduct. Cellulose, such as the Minnesota companies were intending in the 1930s, is another. In France, Isochanvre is a building material made by mixing hemp hurds and plaster. It is seven times lighter than concrete and has superior thermal and acoustic insulating properties. But in France, hurds are only available as a byproduct from the hemp industry licensed for fiber production, thus limiting the expansion of this usage. 1 Hemp As Organic Weed Control 	The first synthetic herbicides appeared in the 1930s. Since that time the chemical dependency of farms has been progressively secured. Non-chemical approaches have generally been relegated to "fringe" associations. Recently though, the concept of sustainability in agriculture has been finding greater academic support. A component of sustainability is responsible use of agchemicals, with emphasis on reduction in favor of "organic" methodologies. Hemp has an important role to play in sustainable and organic agriculture systems because it can clean fields of weeds.	 In his textbook, Modern Weed Control, A. S. Crafts cites as potential weed smothering crops: millet, Sudan grass, sweet clover, sunflower, rape, barley, rye, reed canary grass, crested wheatgrass, sorghums, buckwheat, soybeans, alfalfa, cowpeas, clovers, hemp, Jerusalem artichoke, and ensilage corn. Of these only one, hemp, can be taken seriously as an adequate weed controlling competitive crop. 	The testimonials to hemp-as-weed-control are legion. Some examples: "...it is certain that hemp contributes more than any other crop towards repairing the damage done by its own growth through the return of the leaves to the soil, besides other matters while it is undergoing the process of retting. Hemp is an admirable weed killer and in flax countries is sometimes employed as a crop in rotation, to precede flax because it puts the soil in so good condition."Charles Dodge, Director, Office of Fiber Investigation, 1890."There will be little trouble with weeds if the first crop is well destroyed by the spring plowing, for hemp generally occupies all the ground giving weeds but little chance to intrude....In proof of this, a North River farmer a few years ago made the statement that thistles heretofore had mastered him in a certain field, but after sowing it with hemp not a thistle survived, and while ridding his land of this pest the hemp yielded him nearly $60 per acre where previously nothing valuable could be produced."C. Dodge, Hemp Culture, USDA Yearbook of Agriculture, 1895"Hemp prevents the growth of weeds and other vegetation which would be found on such soils in most other crops or after others are laid by, and its cultivation also seems to make the soil more uniform in character."Lyster Dewey, The Hemp Industry in the United States, USDA Yearbook of Agriculture, 1901"Very few of the common weeds troublesome on the farm can survive the dense shade of a good crop of hemp...In one 4-acre field in Vernon County, Wis., where Canada thistles were very thick, fully 95 per cent of the thistles were killed...." Lyster Dewey, Hemp. USDA Yearbook of Agriculture, 1913."Hemp has been demonstrated to be the best smother crop for assisting in the eradication of quack grass and Canada thistles....At Waupon in 1911 the hemp was grown on land badly infested with quack grass, and in spite of an unfavorable season a yield of 2,100 pounds of fiber to the acre was obtained and the quack grass was practically destroyed." Andrew Wright, Wisconsin's Hemp Industry, 1918."Hemp has been recommended as a weed control crop. Its dense, tall growth helps to kill out many common weeds. The noxious bindweed, a member of the morning glory family is checked to some extent by hemp."B. B. Robinson, Hemp, USDA Agric Bull #1453, 1943"Among the species studied, the hemp species proved itself to be the best in fiber production. This plant was all the more interesting owing to its low fertilization requirements, and its ability to grow without being irrigated and without chemicals, whether it be for weed or pest control."  Barriere, et al. 199448"Hemp grows quickly, soon covers the ground and chokes out the weeds. So weed control is not necessary." Eddy A. A. de Maeyer. 1994 54"In an age increasingly interested in sustainable agriculture and crop diversification, hemp offers some attractive possibilities.  It is exceptionally disease and herbivore-resistant, can be easily grown in a wide range of agricultural systems and is an excellent rotation crop which eliminates weeds." --Gordon Reichert, 1994.49	In Holland, Lotz, et al. tested hemp's superior weed suppressing ability (Figure 1) against four other cropping situations in a controlled experimental setting. The target weed was yellow nutgrass (Cyperus esculentus), a weed also common in the US, which propagates by tubers and is difficult to control. The authors conclude, "...hemp was the most competitive crop in this study. Selecting this crop in a rotation will cause the strongest population reduction ofC. esculentus on infested farmland. This control option of hemp against harmful weeds as C. esculentus is an attendant benefit of the introduction of hemp as a commercial crop."50 Although the historical record contains testimonials to hemp's rather benign impact on the land, and instances where it has been grown in monoculture for over twenty years, it is not recommended that hemp be grown repeatedly on the same plot. Two successive years of hemp, if properly fertilized, will not be injurious and in cases of recalcitrant weeds, may be required to clean the fields. A favorable rotation includes a nitrogen fixer alternating with hemp and row crops or small grains. Hemp will do well in rotation with alfalfa and corn. The old-timer's rule of thumb was, "any land that grows a good crop of corn will grow good hemp."	Kok and Coenen (1994) reported that hemp was a poor host for Meloidogyne chitwoodii, a nematode pest. Hemp grown on infested acreage would not support proliferation of this pest.51 In a similar vein, Mankowski, et al. (1994) reported growing hemp on land polluted with heavy metals. The metals were taken up into roots and stem.52 2 Agronomics Seed Variety	In a sophisticated, industrial society in which hemp is a cropping option on equal footing with all others (corn, soybean, cotton, etc.), varieties will be bred by commercial plant breeders for specific uses. Multi-purpose varieties may also be bred, although it is often the case that such varieties fail to optimize their primary economic traits. 	At this stage, available varieties have been bred for fiber. Broadly classified, hemp varieties are either monoecious or dioecious, that is having the sexes on the same or separate plants, respectively. Monoecious varieties have been bred in France, primarily. The advantage is greater uniformity and increased yield of seed. Monoecious varieties are best where a dual usagefiber and seedis desired. Bosca, the great Hungarian hemp breeder, has pointed out that monoecious varieties suffer a degree of inbreeding (perhaps 20%) which would decrease potential.53 	Current legal encumberances to the hemp crop tend to mitigate in favor of French varieties. Nonetheless, varieties from Hungary, Poland and the Ukraine should be considered as well. Only in Hungary have hybrid varieties been developed. Elsewhere, the eastern European hemps are dioecious, open-pollinated synthetics, rather like the type of corn (maize) grown prior to the advent of hybridization in the early decades of this century. The significance of this relates to the manner in which the seed supply is reproduced. Hybrid varieties require fairly elaborate operations to maintain the parent materials which are crossed to create the hybrid variety planted by the farmer. Considerable research goes into identifying specific genotypes which, when hybridized, combine genetically for optimum productivity. However, the farmer must depend on an industry which manages the seed production. This dependence, decried by some, seems to have served farmers in the case of corn. It is generally true that hybrid varieties are made if manipulation of pollination is practical. The corn plants morphology, for instance, allows easy emasculation (detassling).	Male hemp plants can be physically removed from a dioecious population serving as seed parent. Certain Hungarian hemp hybrids are made using a technique which employs the ability to make unisexual (female) populations which can function in a manner analogous to male-sterility to facilitate crossing. Currently, hemp hybrids grown by the farmer are acutally the F2, or second generation. Higher yields result, but uniformity, such as we are accustomed to in F1 corn hybrids, will be lacking. So far hemp has been recalcitrant to inbreeding (so was corn, in the early stages). Hemp varieties are therefore inherently variable.  Because of genetic segregation, subsequent generations from that immediately following hybridization (F1) are even more variable. Thus, the trade-off for performance is the need to purchase planting seed each year. Use of bin-run seed is inadvisable from this perspective. At present, this matters little, as it is probable that farmers growing hemp in the near future will be required to obtain their seed from certified seed growers to assure compliance with THC regulation. This hang-up will no doubt ultimately be recognized as silly, but while competing interests control public policy, we will be forced to accommodate. (These competing interests will attempt to entangle hemp farming in a plethora of redtape, with which it may be strangled. Excessive accommodation is not recommended.) One promising system has been suggested in Kentucky and will be discussed later.	If the variety is not hybrid, the owner of the variety, such as the various bast fiber institutes of Eastern Europe, is likely to require the buyer to sign a contract promising not to reproduce it (save seed for replanting or sale). Germplasm is handled like software in these modern times, and as such it is private property. Right to ownership of germplasm assures the breeder that research costs can be recouped. Today, it is even possible to patent seed varieties. Like it or not, such developments can be anticipated for hemp as it becomes a more sophisticated crop. 	There are many hemps which are excluded by current regulations, including some superior Hungarian hybrids as well as hemps which have not sought inclusion, such as the Chinese and Chilean hemps. The 0.3% THC threshold was established more on political than scientific grounds and is in need of serious reevaluation. Countries newly opening to hemp should not adapt this outmoded criterion without assessing the implications it has for germplasm options.	Because hemp varieties adapted to North America have been lost, the North American farmer will, for the near-term, be required to import seed. This is only one of the barriers to be faced. When importing seed, the buyer must ensure that the seed is accompanied by the appropriate forms. First of these is the phytosanitary certificate, which the seller should provide. This certificate indicates that the seed has been inspected and is free of disease organisms which could introduce a disease to the indigenous crop (irony aside). There may also be a requirement for the "Orange International Seedlot Certificate." Again, it is the responsibility of the seller to make sure this form accompanies the seed. It is important for the buyer to remind the seller of these requirements as some hempseed sources in Eastern Europe may be unfamiliar with these requirements.	The expectant hemp farmer is advised that the rigmarole implicit in having to import the seed necessitates initiating the seed acquisition well in advance. 	LAND PREPARATION	Hemp is not a crop to be grown haphazardly or sloppily. Many reports indicate an intimate relationship between fiber quality and the character of the land. Bear in mind that hemp varieties do not have the genetic uniformity that North American farmers are accustomed to in their F1-hybrid corn varieties or their wheat and soybeans. In the case of corn, all plants of a given variety are genetically the same because the hybrids are created from carefully bred and selected inbred lines which are genetically homozygous (lacking variation). Soybean and wheat are self-pollinating crops which are themselves inbred and homozygous. A variety of a self-pollianted crop generally traces back to a superior individual plant selection which was increased for commercial distribution.	Hemp has so far been quite recalcitrant to inbreeding. The separation of the sexes ensures that individual plants do not mate with themselves. When hemp is forced to inbreed, the vigor and fecundity of progenies declines rapidly and the lineage is quickly extinguished. This then means that varieties are maintained as pools of genetic variation, rather like a race, or regionalism. Within a generally recognizable type, a wide range of variation is found from individual to individual.	So?	One consequence of the genetic variation among individual plants in the field is that some will have greater vigor than others just by the random assortment of genes each generation. Given the opportunity, these plants can outgrow their weaker neighbors, crowding them out and leading to great irregularity in the crop. 	Preparation of the land is always highly emphasized in standard discussions of hemp culture. Unevenness in the field due to improper tillage or fertilization will contribute to undesirable plant to plant variation.  Plowing should be deep, followed by harrowing until a smooth, level bed is developed. Excessive clumping of soil, dead furrows, recalcitrant weed patches and uneven fertility are to be assiduously avoided. Care in preparation of the seed bed is probably the single most significant factor in the production of quality hemp fiber. If the field has had a bad weed infestation, it is important to fully disk down the weeds so that hemp will get a jump on them. Once hemp is established, it will generally suppress weeds, as we have repeatedly emphasized.	Fertilization is a complicated issue when it comes to hemp. The reader is referred for details to the appended Iowa State Bulletin. If the hemp is being grown for fiber, quality features are as important as total biomass yield. Pouring on the nitrogen will increase yield, this has been adequately demonstrated. But too much nitrogen leads to coarse, rank growth. The best source of nitrogen is the prior growth of a nitrogen fixing legume, preferably alfalfa or clover and application of manure. The authors of the bulletin indicate that soybeans are less effective at providing nitrogen to a following hemp crop. (See Figures 14 & 17 in the bulletin.)	Hessler54 concurred with the effect of over-fertilization. Furthermore, he demonstrated that "a definitely weaker fiber was produced where fertilizers containing nitrogen were used." Nitrogen was found to increase the protein content of the stem to the detriment of strength. The weakest samples had the highest nitrogen content. Van der Werf55 demonstrated that excess nitrogen fertilization increased interplant competition leading to greater self-thinning in the crop and uneven growth. 	Dempsey, in his classic work, Fiber Crops,56 presents a table indicating that hemps removal of nutrients greatly exceeds that of maize and other grains. Since this table has been reproduced in the recent, popular, AgCanada BiWeekly Bulletin: Hemp,57 Hemp, it is important to point out that the maize yields represented in the table are unrealistically low for modern farming. The general rule-of-thumb for corn farmers is "a pound of N for every bushel of expected yield." At such rates, and, moreover, considering that the majority of N hemp uses for growth can be returned to the soil, the soil budget for hemp is even more attractive. 	The Iowa Bulletin indicates that inorganic fertilizer of the same kind commonly used for corn works well for hemp. Kozlowski, in Poland, recommends 80-110lbs/acre available nitrogen (N); 60-90 phosphorus (P); 135-160 potassium (K); 14-18 calcium (CaO). This considerable range leaves much open to the farmer's experimentation. Fiber and seed crops are handled differently:ratio N:P:K1:0.7:1.5 (fiber)1:0.8: 1 (seed)58	Given its weed control function, hemp works well into "organic" agriculture. Hemp is reported to perform best on well-manured soils with high organic matter (well-drained). Naturally, the soil nutrient status should be thoroughly tested and periodically monitored. Although hemp is reported to accept soil acidity as low as pH 5.5, neutral pH is recommended. Lime accordingly.	Hemp may be drilled or broadcast. Drilling is recommended for uniformity. A grain drill or modified alfalfa seeder can be used. Planting depth is between 0.5 and 1.0 inch, although greater depths are occasionally recommended (up to 2 inches in Poland). Row spacing for fiber should be four to seven inches, 50-60lbs/acre (a bushel and a peck). (Variability in germination can be a problem among hemp seedlots. The grower is well advised to test a sample and adjust planting rate accordingly, at least until the seed industry takes responsibility for this crop.)	The seed crop is planted much less densely (the seed crop is not a weed controller) at about twenty-inch spacing, approximately 10lbs/acre. A bushel of Kentucky hemp seed weighed 44 pounds. 	There are circumstances, for instance, the production of fine, flaxen, water-retted textile fiber, which warrant planting at much higher rates, hundreds of pounds of seed to the acre. There is much opportunity for experimentation by individual farmers to determine optimium practice in their specific environment.	Hemp can be planted early. Recommended soil temperature for planting is 8-10C. In Wisconsin the crop was planted before corn. It can generally be the first crop seeded. Darsie, et al. (1914), reported the temperature of the emerging hemp seed to be the highest of the plants they surveyed.59 It generates its own heat metabolizing its seed oil. This early emergence character of hemp is a component of its weed suppression. 	Another positive attribute of the crop is that once it is planted, no further husbandry is required until harvest. This "plant it/harvest it" aspect of the crop reduces energy consumption as well as soil compaction from passes by spraying and cultivating equipment. Although in damp climates, the crop can suffer from the Botryis leaf fungus, treatment is not deamed worthwhile. Similarly, European corn borer, a pest of corn, has been reported to occasionally burrow a hemp stalk. But no insects bother the crop sufficiently to warrant remediation. 	Researchers in Manitoba in 1995 had some negative experiences both with insects and weeds. The crop was planted late because the permitting redtape delayed seed shipments. Furthermore the varieties were imported from Eastern Europe since or own adapted material is no longer available. This is not an uber-crop impervious to all the viscissitudes of environment. Properly managed adapted varieties throughout the world have a very positive track record on pest problems.	Birds, on the other hand, can be a serious problem in the seed crop. Birds love hempseed. Good luck.	HARVEST	This is where things start getting more complicated. 	The Kentucky Hemp Growers Co-operative Association, recently reincarnated from its 1942 charter, is ahead of the ball on the practical aspects of organizing the production of this crop. Their system borrows from the tobacco model, familiar to most farmers in the state:	In their model, all aspects of the crop would be handled through the co-op. Farmers plant seed provided by the co-op; this provides for control of genotype. The co-op manages issues related to hemp variety evaluation and certification in compliance with legalities. Just as the cannery specifies the pea variety to the farmer, so does the hemp co-op allot acreages for specific hemps. The co-op forward contracts with fiber end-users for the needed  production. Acreages are alloted accordingly among co-op member farmers.Marketing of the fiber is handled through the co-op. The crop can only be grown under contract to the co-op. It cannot be grown "on spec." Supply/demand relationships are managed to maintain profitability for the farmer. A grower must be a member of the co-op and bonded. Members found violating variety control regulations lose their allotment and forfeit their bond. In the Kentucky Co-op model, conceived for Kentucky conditions, farmers hold the fiber on-farm, probably in a baled form, and disperse it to the mills over the year, providing steady income. This intelligent system handles the objections so often raised to obstruct this crop: the supposed fear that hemp fields will be used to sequester marijuana plants. Under this system farmers have powerful incentive not to engage in planting of illicit varieties of Cannabis. (Hemp fields are not good places to grow horticultural varieties of Cannabis for the following reasons: 1) Hemp for fiber is cut before plants flower; 2) plant density is high in the agronomic setting; 3) if flowering occurred, abundant pollen would reduce the quality of the herb; herb farmers will want to keep their plants away from hemp fields; high test genetic strains will be degraded by contamination with fiber hemp pollen.60) 	The Kentucky system provides for total integration of crop production and marketing. No one will be growing the crop who does not have a permit and the trail will be complete from seed through the final disposal of the fiber. Authorities can know where and by whom the crop is being produced.  If a person is in possession of Cannabis who is not in the co-op system, they will be guilty of illegal possession, regardless of THC assay. The co-op will police its membership, obviating the need for complicated and expensive fielding testing of farmers' crops. 	Given a system operating in this way, the specific technical issues associated with harvesting and post-harvest handling of the crop will be determined by the co-op organization in accordance with the intended end use. Such specialized harvesting equipment as is needed will likely also be arranged through the co-op and shared. Seed harvest can be accomplished with a grain harvester with appropriately sized screens. European and Soviet manufacturers have designed combine harvestors for hemp which remove seed and bundle the stem simultaneously. The great expense of such machines necessitates a co-op organization of growers.	Fiber harvest is a whole new matter. Harvest technicalities have nearly done-in the fiber crop at times in the foretold history. This topic could well occupy an entire tome; our treatment can only sketch the subject.	First issue: how will the crop be retted? Dew or water; or unretted decortication or sonic explosion?[in progresso] 1Small, E. 1979. The Species Problem in Cannabis. Corpus, Canada.2Hopkins, J. F. 1951. A History of the Hemp Industry in Kentucky. University of Kentucky Press, Lexington. p.1133His diaries record the removal of male plants from the hempseed production fields which has led some to speculate that he was attempting to grow seedless(high potency) marijuana. This is not the case. It is common practice in hempseed production to remove all but a few male plants to reduce competition with the seed bearing females. There is no evidence George smoked his crop or that the European fiber hemp he grew had psychoactive potential. Quite the contrary.4Mitchell, R. D. 1973. Agricultural Change and the American Revolution: A Virginia Case Study. Agricultural History 43:130n.5Hopkins, J. F. 1951. A History of the Hemp Industry in Kentucky. University of Kentucky Press, Lexington.6Bidwell, P. W. and J. I. Falconer. 1941. History of Agriculture in the Northern United States: 1620-1860. Carnegie Inst. Washington, D.C. p.365.7Presidential Executive Order 12919. June 4, 1994. Oil from the hempseed has been specified by the military as a lubricant for particular weaponry.8The winter season is represented on the dome of the Paris, Kentucky, courthouse by a depiction of hemp breaking.9Hopkins, p. 19510Dodge, C. A. 1890.  The Hemp Industry.  USDA  Division of Statistics 1: 64-74. 11Oliver, J. W. 1956. History of American Technology. The Ronald Press Co. p. 366.12Dodge, p.68.13USDA. 1902. USDA. Yearbk of Agric. p. 23.14One was at Viroqua, the hometown of theby thenlate Jeremiah Rusk, and others of lesser note.15Wright, Andrew. 1918. Wisconsin's Hemp Industry. Wisconsin Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin # 293.p. 8.16Wright, p.5.17The 1913 article has been reproduced and published in E. Rosenthal,ed., Hemp Today, 1994, Quick American Archives, Oakland, CA.18Dewey, L. H. 1901. The Hemp Industry in the United States. USDA Yearbk of Agric. p.554.19An unfortunate aspect of this introduction appears to have been the importation of a weed known as "broom-rape" which is parasitic on hemp roots. The seed is similar in size to hempseed and can be disseminated with hempseed if care is not taken in the seed fields. 20Dewey, L. H. 1943  Fiber Production in the Western Hemisphere. USDA Misc. Publ. no. 518.21Small (1979) contrasts the hollowness of fiber vs non-fiber (psychoactive) types of Cannabis, which he illustates in this book. The author (DPW) has confirmed the persistence of the large lumen in feral stands of Wisconsin hemp which were undergoing eradication.22Bocsa, I. 1995.-------23USDA. Bureau of Plant Industry. 1917. Report of the Chief. p. 12.24USDA. Bureau of Plant Industry. 1918. Report of the Chief. p. 28. Water-retted hemp from Italy was the standard for quality fiber.25USDA. Bureau of Plant Industry. 1919. Report of the Chief. p. 21.26USDA. Bureau of Plant Industry. 1920. Report of the Chief. p. 26.A detailed description of four varieties developed by Lyster Dewey's federal hemp breeding program is included in the 1927 Yearbook of Agriculture. 27van der Werf, H. 1994. The Crop Physiology of Fibre Hemp. Wageningen, The Netherlands.28USDA. 1929. Bureau of Plant Industry, Annual Report. p. 27.29Dewey, L. H. 1931. Hemp fiber losing ground, despite its valuable qualities. USDA Yearbk of Agric. p. 285.30West, D.P. 1994. Fiber Wars: The Extinction of Kentucky Hemp. In, E. Rosenthal, ed. Hemp Today. Quick American Archives, Oakland CA.31Hemp and flaxalthough botanically unrelatedhave very similar fibers and almost identical drying oils (oils high in linolenic acid) in their seed. 32Fite, G. C. 1984. Cotton Fields No More: Southern Agriculture 1865-1980. The University of Kentucky Press.33USDA. 1935. Annual Reports of the Department of Agriculture, p.6.34Herer, J. 1994. The Emperor Wears No Clothes. Queen of Spades Publ. Kaplan, J. 1970. Marijuana: The New Prohibition. World Publ. Co.35Small, 1979.36Pate, D._______________37Watt, George. 1889. Dictionary of the Economic Products of India. Calcutta 2:105.38USDA. 1938. Bureau of Plant Industry, Annual Report, p. 7.39Clark, R. C. 1981. Marijuana Botany. Ronin Publ. Berkeley, CA. Based on Small, E. and H. D. Beckstead. 1973. Cannabinoid phenotypes in Cannabis sativa. Nature 245:147-148.40Clarke, R. C. and D. W. Pate. 1994. Medical marijuana. J. International Hemp Assoc. 1:9.41Small, 197942Mauersberger, H. R. 1947. Matthews Textile Fibers. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., London.43Karus, M. and G. Leson. 1994. Hemp research and market development in Germany. J. International Hemp Assoc. 2:15-19.44Haynes, Williams. 1958. Cellulose, The Chemical that Grows. 45Andrew Wright, addressing the 1938 Marihuana Conference.46Wirtshafter, D. 1994. The Schlicten Papers. The Ohio Hempery.47Marihuana Conference, p. 31.48From papers delivered at the Conference on Alternative Oilseed and Fiber Crops for the Cool and Wet Regions of Europe, Wageningen, The Netherlands, April 7-8, 1994.49Reichert, G. 1994. Hemp. AgCanada Bi-Weeekly Bulletin 7:23.50Lotz, L. A., P. R. M. W. Groeneveld, B. Habekotte, and H. van Oene. 1991. Reduction of growth and reproduction of Cyperus esculentus by specific crops. Weed Research 31:153-160.51Kok, C. J. and G. C. M. Coenen. 1994. Reproduction of Meloidogyne chitwoodii  on alternative crops. Proc. Alternative oilseed and fibre crops for cool and wet regions of Europe. Wageningen, The Netherlands. Ap. 7-8, 1994. 52Mankowski, J., L. Grabowska and P. Baraniecki. Hemp and flax cultivated on soil polluted with heavy metals. Proc. Alternative oilseed and fibre crops for cool and wet regions of Europe. Wageningen, The Netherlands. Ap. 7-8, 1994. 53Bocsa, I. IHA54Hessler, L. E. 1947. The effect of fertilizers on the chemical composition and quality of dew-retted hemp fiber. J. Am. Soc. Agron. 39:812-816.55Van der Werf, H. 1994. The Crop Physiology of Hemp. Wageningen.56 Dempsey, J. M. 1975. Fiber Crops. University of Florida Press.57Reichert, G. 1994. Hemp. Canadian Bi-Weekly Bulletin --------58Kozlowski, R. 1995. Bioresource Hemp. Frankfurt, Germany59Darsie, et al. 1914. Botanical Gazette 38:101.60Kenaf, which has a rough similarity to the Cannabis leaf, would be a better crop in which to hide marijuana. They wouldn't cross pollinate. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)