WT01-B21-1IA087-000625-B016-105http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/indust/AUSTRALI.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122043321 text/html 12320HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:33:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:07:39 GMTContent-length: 12102 Report on Australian Hemp Trials from James Davis to JoeHickey Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information Report on Australian Hemp Trials from James Davis to JoeHickey "The Aspens" Roberts Ck. Rd. POREPUNKAH 3740 January 15, 1996 Dear Fellow Farmer, I have been trialling fibre hemp this season and am delighted toconfirm that it is a very clean and easy crop to grow. It takes about 60 daysfrom seeding to harvest and should yield around three tonne of milledfibre per hectar. We are expecting to get around $700 per tonne for thefibre. On a commercial scale we estimate that it will cost around $260 pertonne to produce. The crop requires fertile, well drained soils andirrigation, although the first crop received 125mm of rainfall and we onlyhad to apply 75mm of irrigation. That means the crop requires less water thanwheat to produce a comparable yield for a product worth twice as much. We could expect to grow at least two crops per year and probablythree making it more profitable than even tobacco. We cultivated the soil to a fine seed bed and sowed on the flat.The first crop successfully smothered all weeds including dock, summergrass, wild raddish and Datura. A corn crop planted next to the hemp did NOTsurvive the weeds. In the latter stages of growth the flower heads attractedHeliothus caterpillars but no treatment was necessary prior to harvest. For a fast growing crop, fertiliser is essential and hemp is noexception. We are developing a milling machine and apart from this, fibrehemp can be cultivated and harvested with normal farm equipment. I look forward to growing this environmentally friendly andpotentially profitable crop and hope you will join me in this excitingventure. Yours sincerely, James Davis Fibre Hemp Grower THE CLARKE CONSORTIUM INDUSTRIAL HEMP FIELD DAY "THE ASPENS" ROBERTS CK. RD. POREPUNKAH 23 January, 1996 PROGRAM The Field Day includes a detailed inspection of the industrialhemp and discussion on the trial of varieties, growing technique,processing and marketing. There will be displays of hemp products andopportunities for potential growers to talk with marketers and end users. SPEAKERS JAMES DAVIS Jim is the agronomist and farmer who has planned and grown thetrials of industrial hemp. He has a long and successful career in research,education and crop production and is well experienced to conduct trialsinto the growing and marketing of new crops. SAM LOLICATO Sam is a research officer with Agriculture Victoria and has beeninstrumental in the bringing together of research, farming and marketinginterests to achieve the trialing of industrial hemp in North and CentralVictoria. He has played a major role in the liaison with the variousgovernment departments involved in issuing the growing permits. HAMISH DENNIS Hamish is a horticultural undergraduate at Melbourne University(Burnley Campus) and has performed all the monitoring, data collection andanalysis activities of the program. He has been conducting a number ofexperiments relating to the processing requirements of hemp. ADRIAN CLARKE Adrian is a professional lobbyist and was responsible forbringing about the situation that has allowed trial permits to be issued and thiscrop to be grown. He has been active in developing Australian and exportmarkets for hemp at varying stages of processing Varietal Section: Cannabis sativa is day length sensitive normally requiring 12hours of uninterrupted darkness to initiate flowering. Five French and four Eastern European varieties were provided fortrial. The varieties were to provide a range of maturity dates. Name Maturity French varieties European varieties Ferimon 12 Early Beniko Fedora 19 Early Bialobrzeskie Felina 34 Mid-Late Kompolti-TC Fedrina 74 Late Secuini Futura 77 Late Planting Density: Seed thickly (50-80kg per ha) and grow to 1.5 to 3 m in height. Drill seed at 2-3cm deep and in 10-18cm rows. Sow when soil temperatures reach 18-20 degrees. Irrigation: Methods of application- Flood; Sprinkle; Cannon; Trickle. We used Cannon sprinkler. Pests & Disease: Caterpillars; locusts; aphids; white fly; Phytophthora; leafdiseases; birds; rabbits; kangaroos; rodents are all pests and diseases to beconsidered. Harvesting: Cut and windrow; leave to ret in field; bale of stock prior tostorage and delivery to factory. 4-7 weeks of cutting and windrowing; 3-4 weeks of baling. Yields Estimates: 5 to 20 tonnes. Average U.K. trials 10 tonne/ha. Commercial crops average 6 tonne/ha. Achievements at "The Aspens", Porepunkah. The French varieties were sown on October 28, 1995 at 80kg per hain a split plot randomized trial with six replicates. The second part of thetrial was sown on November 28, 1995. The four eastern European varietieswere sown in a supplementary randomised trial with three replicates. The ground was ripped rotary hoed and cultivated three weeksprior to sowing. Two tonne/ha of lime was incorporated with 100kg of Nitrogen 40kgof Phosphorus and 40kg of potassium as a blend of Pivot, DAP,Ammonium Nitrate and Muriate of Potash. No herbicides were used. The crop was sown with a cone seeder (specially developed fortrials by Agriculture Victoria). Soil temperature was 14 degrees. There wasgood sub-soil moisture following excellent spring rains. Fifteen mm ofirrigation was applied after seeding and germination occurred in five days. 125 mm of rain fell on the crop and a further 60 mm of irrigationwas applied during December. The crop grew rapidly, achieving 5 cm per day after thirty days,to a harvestable height of 1.8m. All weeds were suppressed by thecrop. The time of harvest was determined by flowering (a requirement ofthe permit was to harvest before seedset). Ag Vic. sampled the crop at flowering for forensic analysis, thesubsequent results of which showed less than 0.3% THC. Harvesting was carried out on December 28, 1995. Because of theplot size and split nature of the trial, brush cutters were used to fellthe crop. The produce from each plot was picked up by hand and weighed. Samples were taken for dry matter analysis and the results fromthis activity used to calculate the production per hectare. There was very little difference between all of the Frenchvarieties with some favour being attributed to Felina. Average yields were around 11 tonnes per ha of dry mattertranslating to marketable commodity of seven (7) tones/ha. No significant pests or diseases were observed. Heliothuscaterpillars appeared on the flowering heads just before harvest but did notrequire any treatment. Economics per tonne per ha Grow, harvest, manage and secure $190 $1,330 Harvesting & Storage Cost $ 50 $ 350 Total cost/ha based on 7 tonne yield $240 $1,680 Farm gate price required for whole stalk $450 $3,160 CULTIVATION OF FIBRE HEMP TRIALS AND TRIBULATION FOR THE CLARKE HEMP CONSORTIUM Industrial Hemp is produced from annual plant (Cannabis Sativa)and can be processed into a number of products ranging from textiles, paperand construction materials from the outer bark (fibre) to furniture,paints and plastics from the hurd or core and lubricants, food and medicinesfrom the seed. Combinations of the whole plant can be manufactured into a mulchmat with wide spread uses in the landscape gardening, land reclamation andpet care industries. Although hemp has been cultivated around the world for millennia,modern day attention to the crop has been limited to Asian and EasternEuropean countries. Currently the growing of Cannabis sativa is illegal in Australiaand most other western nations with the notable exceptions of France,Holland, England and Canada. In late 1995 the Victorian Government issued a number of permitsto various commercial and regional groups to conduct trials on the growingof industrial hemp. Sites were chosen for their security and suitability tohemp growing. The judgement on suitability was based on growing conditionsknown to be successful overseas and in Tasmania where trials have been goingon for three years. The North East region of Victoria fits the prescribe growingconditions so we proceeded to incorporate the crop into a summer cropping.Following are the agronomic requirements specified for industrial hemp and ourresults. Agronomic Specification for Industrial Hemp Climate & Environment: Frost susceptible, high humidity increases fungal attack. Windand heavy rain damages crops but need moderated wind to enhance fibrestrength. Deep rooted crop-providing a good disease break and improvingsoil structure. 120 day crop with critical harvest period. Rabbits and insects attack Hemp. Retting required before harvest. Security required. Soils & Seedbed Preparation Well drained alluvial sandy loam - pH 6.5-7 High organic matter High Nitrogen demand (120 kg/ha) High Phosphorus demand in early stages (120 kg/ha) Moderate Potassium (160 kg/ha) Cultivate to a fine tilth and pre-drill fertiliser. Herbicideusage - pre and post-emergent. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information WT01-B21-2IA087-000625-B016-124http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/fact1_10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043340 text/html 28982HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:33:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:51:08 GMTContent-length: 28764 Hemp Facts 1-10 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp Facts 1 - 10 By Alan D. Bryan 1. HEMP FOR FUEL: About 6% of contiguous United States land area put intocultivation for biomass could supply all current demands for oiland gas. Very few people know what "biomass conversion"or "pyrolysis" mean--not only in terms of theirdictionary definitions, but in terms of what they mean asalternative sources of energy, to the limited, expensive anddirty petro-chemical, nuclear, or coal sources. The only reasonthe U.S.-- and every other nation on earth--can't once againbecome energy independent and smog free is because people are noteducated concerning the facts about solutions to theenvironment/energy "crisis" continuously lamented andtepidly addressed "leaders", claiming they are the bestinformed to decide what to do. The knowledge exists right now forour lifeline to the future and the health and well-being of theSeventh Generation yet unborn. Everyone of us must learn aboutthis existent lifeline and teach everyone else we know what thefacts are the way out of the current "crisis". HEMP IS THE NUMBER ONE biomass producer on earth: 10 tons peracre in approximately four months. It is a woody plant containing77% cellulose. Wood producers 60% cellulose. This energy crop canbe harvested with equipment readily available. It can be"cubed" by modifying cubing equipment. This method condenses the bulk, reducing trucking costs from thefield to the pyrolysis reactor. And the biomass cubes are readyfor conversion. Hemp is drought resistant, making it an ideal crop in the drywestern regions of the country. Hemp is the only biomass resourcecapable of making America energy independent and our governmentoutlawed it in 1938. The argument against hemp production does not hold up toscrutiny: hemp grown for biomass makes very poor grade marijuana.The 20-40 million Americans who smoke marijuana would loath tosmoke hemp grown for biomass, so a farmer's hemp biomass crop isworthless as marijuana. Excerpt from Herer "Emperor Wears No Clothes" 1991edition p. 136 Hemp FACT of the Day #2 Dewey and Merrill, "bulletin #404, Hemp Hurds AsPaper-Making Material" U.S.D.A. Washington, D.C. Oct. 14,1916. There appears to be little doubt that under the present systemof forest use and consumption the present supply cannot withstandthe demands placed upon it. By the time improved methods offorestry have established an equilibrium between production andconsumption, the price of pulp wood may be such that a knowledgeof other raw materials may be imperative. Semi-commercial paper-making tests were conducted, therefore,on hemp hurds, in cooperation with a paper manufacturer. Afterseveral trials, under conditions of treatment and manufacturewhich are regarded as favorable in comparison with those usedwith pulp wood, paper was produced which received very favorable comment both from investigators and from thetrade which according to official tests would be classified asNo. 1 finished printing paper. (p. 25) The new paper process used hemp "hurds"--77% of thehemp stalk's weight, which was then a wasted by-product of thefiber-stripping process. In 1916, USDA Bulletin #404, reportedthat ONE ACRE OF CANNABIS HEMP, in annual rotation over a 20-yearperiod, WOULD PRODUCE AS MUCH PULP FOR PAPER AS 4.1 ACRES OFTREES BEING CUT DOWN over the same 20 year period. This processwould use only 1/4 to 1/7 as much polluting sulfur-based acidchemicals to break down the lignin that binds the fibers of thepulp, or even none at all using soda ash. The problem of dioxincontamination of rivers is avoided in the hemp making process.HEMP PROVIDES FOUR TIMES AS MUCH PULP WITH AT LEAST 4-7 TIMESLESS POLLUTION. As an example: If the new (1916) hemp pulp paper process werelegal today, it would soon replace about 70% of all wood paper,including computer printout paper, corrugated boxes and paperbags. Hemp FACT of the Day #3 Pinch Hitters for Defense - Popular Mechanics - December1941 Over in England it's saccharine for sugar; on the continentit's charcoal "gasogenes" in the rumble seat instead ofgasoline in the tank. Here in America there's plenty of sugar,plenty of gasoline. Yet there's an industrial revolution inprogress just the same, a revolution in materials that willaffect every home. After 12 years of research, the Ford Motor Company hascompleted an experimental automobile with a plastic body.Although its design takes advantages of the properties ofplastics, the streamline car does not differ greatly inappearance from its steel counterpart. The only steel in thehand-made body is found in the tubular welded frame on which aremounted 14 plastic panels, 3/16" thick. Composed of amixture of farm crops and synthetic chemicals, the plastic isreported to withstand a blow 10 times as great as steel withoutdenting. Even the windows are of plastic. The total weight of theplastic car is about 2,000 lbs., compared with 3,000 lbs. for asteel auto of the same size. Although no hint has been given asto when plastic cars may go into production, the experimentalmodel is pictured as a step toward materialization of HenryFord's belief that some day he would "grow automobiles fromthe soil". When Henry Ford recently unveiled his plastic car, the resultof 12 years of research, he gave the world a glimpse of theautomobile of tomorrow, it's tough panel molded under hydraulicpressure of 1500 lbs. per square inch from a recipe that callsfor 70% of cellulose fibers from wheat straw, HEMP, and sisalplus 30% resin binder. The only steel in the car is its tubularwelded frame. The plastic car weighs a ton less than a comparablesteel car. Manufacturers are already taking a low-priced plasticcar to test the public's taste by 1943. Poster's note: If anyone remembers this process, I would beinterested in hearing comments. Hemp FACT of the Day #4 Paints and Varnishes For thousands of years, virtually all good paints andvarnishes were made with hemp seed oil and/or linseed oil. For instance, in 1935 alone, 116 million lbs. [NationalInstitute of Oilseed Products congressional testimony *against*the 1937 Marijuana Transfer Tax Law] of hemp seed were used inAmerica just for paint and varnish. As a comparison, considerthat the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency, along with all America'sstate and local police agencies, claim to have seized for all of1988, 651.5 tons of American-grown marijuana--seed, plant, root,dirt clump and all. [National Narcotics Intelligence (duh)Consumer's Committee, NNICC Report, 1988 DEA Office Release, ElPaso, TX, April, 1989.] The hemp drying oil business wentprincipally to DuPont petro-chemicals/[Slomand, Larry,"Reefer Madness" Grove Press N.Y, N.Y. 1979, pg 72]. Congress and the Treasury Dept. were assured through SECRETTESTIMONY given by DuPont in 1935-37 directly to Herman Oliphant,Chief Counsel for the Treasury Dept., that hemp seed oil could bereplaced with synthetic petro-chemical oils MADE PRINCIPALLY BYDUPONT. (Poster's note: Sound like a conspiracy.) Oliphant was solely responsible for drafting the Marijuana TaxAct that was submitted to Congress.[Richard Bonnie and CharlesWhitebread, "The Marijuana Conviction", Univ. ofVirginia Press 1974]. Hemp FACT of the Day #5 Building Materials and Housing Because one acre of hemp produces as much cellouse fiber pulpas 4.1 acres of trees (Dewey & Merrill, "Bulletin#404," U.S. Dept Ag., 1916), hemp is the perfect material toreplace trees for pressed board, particle board and core concreteconstruction molds. Pratical, inexpensive construction material which is fireresistant, with excellent thermal and sound insulating qualities,can be made using a process called Environcore(c). This process,developed by Mansion Industries, applies heat and compression toagricultural fiber to create strong contruction paneling, replacing dry wall and plywood. Hemp has been used throughout history for carpet backing. Hempfiber has potential in the manufacture of strong, rot resistantcarpeting--eliminalting the poisonous fumes of burning syntheticmaterials in a house or commerical fire, along with allergicreactions associated with new synthetic carpeting. Plastic plumbing pipe (PVC) can be manufactured usingrenewable hemp cellulose as the chemical feedstocks, replacingnon-renewable petroleum-based chemical feedstocks. So we can envision a house of the future built, plumbed,painted and furnished with THE WORLD'S NUMBER ONE RENEWABLESOURCE--HEMP. Herer,"The Emperor Wears No Clothes: 1991 edition p. 10. Hemp FACT of the Day #6 HEMP FOR VICTORY Transcript of the original 1942 U.S.D.A. film, "Hemp forVictory" extolling some of the many uses of this ancientplant and premier world resource. Long ago when these ancient Grecian temples were new, hemp wasalready old in the service of mankind. For thousands of years,even then, this plant had been grown for cordage and cloth inchina and elsewhere in the East. For centuries prior to about1850 all the ships that sailed the western seas were rigged withhempen rope and sails. For the sailor, no less that the hangman,hemp was indispensable. A 44-gun frigate like our cherished Old Ironsides took over 60tons of hemp for rigging, including an anchor cable of 25"in circumference. The Conestoga wagons and prairie schooners ofpioneer days were covered with hemp canvas. Indeed the very wordcanvas comes from the Arabic word for hemp. In those days hempwas an important crop in Kentucky and Missouri. Then came cheaperimported fibers for cordage, like jute, sisal and Manila hemp,and the culture of hemp in America declined. But now with Philippine and East Indian hemp in the hands ofthe Japanese, and shipment of jute from India curtailed, Americanhemp must meet the needs of our Army and Navy as well as of ourIndustry. In 1942, patriotic farmers at the government's requestplanted 36,000 acres of seed hemp, an increase of severalthousand percent. The goal for 1943 is 50,000 acres of seed hemp. In Kentucky much of the hemp acreage is on river bottom landsuch as this. Some of these fields are inaccessible except byboat. Thus plans are afoot for a great expansion of a hempindustry as a part of the war program. This film is designed totell farmers how to handle this ancient crop now little knownoutside Kentucky and Wisconsin. This is hemp seed. Be careful how you use it. For to grow hemplegally you must have federal registration and tax stamp. This isprovided for in your contract. Ask your county agent about it. Hemp FACT of the Day #7 Introduction from "Marijuana: Medical Papers,"Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D., Medi-Comp Press, 1973, pp. xiii-xxvii, describing some of therecent history of western medical explorations into the salutorymedicinal benefits of hemp drugs_a history that is almostcompletely unknown to people at the end of the 20th century, but,throughout the majority of the 19th century, was commonly knownand experienced by much of the population: Introduction Medicine in the Western World has forgotten almost all it onceknew about therapeutic properties of marijuana, or cannabis. Analgesia, anticonvulsant action, appetite stimulation,ataraxia, antibiotic properties and low toxicity were describedthroughout medical literature, beginning in 1839, whenO'Shaughnessy introduced cannabis into the Western pharmacopoeia. As these findings were reported throughout Western medicine,cannabis attained wide use. Cannabis therapy was described inmost pharmacopoeial texts as a treatment for a variety of diseaseconditions. During the second half of the 1800s and in the presentcentury, medical researchers in some measure corroborated theearly reports of the therapeutic potential of cannabis. Inaddition, much laboratory research has been concerned withbioassay, determination of the mode of action, and attempts tosolve the problems of insolubility in water and variability of strengthamong different cannabis specimens. "Recreational" smoking of cannabis in the twentiethcentury and the resultant restrictive federal legislation havefunctionally ended all medical uses of marijuana. In light of such assets as minimal toxicity, no buildup oftolerance, no physical dependence, and minimal autonomicdisturbance, immediate major clinical reinvestigation of cannabispreparations is indicated in the management of pain, chronicneurologic diseases, convulsive disorders, migraine headache,anorexia, mental illness, and bacterial infections. Recently declassified secret U.S. Defense Department studiesreconfirm marijuana's congeners to have therapeutic utility. Cannabis indica, Cannabis sativa, Cannabis americana, Indianhemp and marijuana (or marihuana) all refer to the same plant.Cannabis is used throughout the world for diverse purposes andhas a long history characterized by usefulness, euphoria or evil_depending onone's point of view. To the agriculturist cannabis is a fibercrop; to the physician of a century ago it was a valuablemedicine; to the physician of today it is an enigma; to the user,a euphoriant; to the police, a menace; to the traffickers, asource of profitable danger; to the convict or parolee and hisfamily, a source of sorrow. This book is concerned primarily with the medicinal aspects ofcannabis. The Chinese emperor Shen-nung is reported to have taught hispeopleto grow hemp for fiber in the twenty-eighth century B.C. Atext fromthe period 1500-1200 B.C. documents a knowledge of theplant in China--but not for use as fiber. In 200 A.D., the use ofcannabis as an analgesic was described by the physicianHoa-tho.[44] In India the use of hemp preparations as a remedy wasdescribed before 1000 B.C. In Persia, cannabis was known severalcenturies before Christ. In Assyria, about 650 B.C., itsintoxicating properties were noted.[44] Except for Herodotus'report that the Scythians used the smoke from burning hemp seedsfor intoxication, the ancient Greeks seemed to be unaware of thepsychoactive properties of cannabis. Dioscorides in the firstcentury A.D. rendered an accurate morphologic description of theplant, but made no note of it's intoxicating properties. Hemp FACT of the Day #8 More Info on Medical Uses. In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, Arabic writersdescribed the social use of cannabis and resultant cruel butunsuccessful attempts to suppress its non-medical use. [44]Although Galen described the use of the seeds for creatingwarmth, he did not describe the intoxicating qualities of hemp.Of interest is the paucity of references to hemp's intoxicatingproperties in the lay and medical literature of Europe before the1800s.[44] The therapeutic use of cannabis was introduced intoWestern medicine in 1839, in a forty-page article by W. B.O'Shaughnessy, a thirty-year-old physician serving with theBritish in India.[27] His discussion of the history of the use of cannabis productsin the East reveals an awareness that these drugs had not onlybeen used in medicine for therapeutic purposes, but had also beenused for recreational and religious purposes. O'Shaughnessy is not primarily known for his discovery of hempdrugs, but rather for his basic studies on intravenouselectrolyte therapy in 1831, and his introduction of thetelegraph into India in the 1850s.[26] After studying theliterature on cannabis and conferring with contemporary Hindu andMohammedan scholars O'Shaughnessy tested the effects of various hemppreparations on animals, before attempting to use them to treathumans. Satisfied that the drug was reasonably safe, headministered preparations of cannabis extract to patients, anddiscovered that it had analgesic and sedative properties. O'Shaughnessy successfully relieved the pain of rheumatism andstilled the convulsions of an infant with this strange new drug.His most spectacular success came, however, when he quelled thewrenching muscle spasms of tetanus and rabies with the fragrantresin. Psychic effects resembling a curious delirium, when anoverdose was given, were treated with strong purgatives, emeticswith a blister to the nape of the neck, and leeches on thetemples.[27] The use of cannabis derivatives for medicinal purposes spreadrapidly throughout Western medicine, as is evidenced in thereport of the Committee on Cannabis Indica of the Ohio StateMedical Society, published in 1860. In that report physicianstold of success in treating stomach pain, childbirth psychosis,chronic cough, and gonorrhea with hemp products.[25] A Dr. Fronmueller, of Fuerth, Ohio, summarized his experienceswith the drug as follows: I have used hemp many hundred times to relieve local pains ofan inflammatory as well as neuralgic nature, and judging fromthese experiments, I have to assign to the Indian hemp a placeamong the so-called hypnotic medicines next to opium; its effectsare less intense, and the secretions are not so much suppressedby it. Digestion is not disturbed; the appetite rather increased;sickness of the stomach seldom induced; congestion never. Hempmay consequently be employed in inflammatory conditions. Itdisturbs the expectoration far less than opium; the nervoussystem is also not so much affected. The whole effect of hempbeing less violent, and producing a more natural sleep, withoutinterfering with the actions of the internal organs, it iscertainly often preferable to opium, although it is not equal tothat drug in strength and reliability. An alternating course ofopium and Indian hemp seems particularly adapted to those caseswhere opium alone fails in producing the desired effect. Hemp FACT of the Day #9 More Interesting Medical Stuff Because cannabis did not lead to physical dependence, it wasfound to be superior to the opiates for a number of therapeuticpurposes. Birch, in 1889, reported success in treating opiate andchloral addiction with cannabis,[5] and Mattison in 1891recommended its use to the young physician, comparing itfavorably with the opiates. He quoted his colleague Suckling: With a wish for speedy effect, it is so easy to use thatmodern mischief-maker, hypodermic morphia, that they [youngphysicians] are prone to forget remote results of incautiousopiate giving. Would that the wisdom which has come to their professionalfathers through, it may be, a hapless experience, might servethem to steer clear of narcotic shoals on which many a patienthas gone awreck. Indian hemp is not here lauded as a specific. It will, attimes, fail. So do other drugs. But the many cases in which itacts well, entitle it to a large and lasting confidence. My experience warrants this statement: cannabis indica is,often, a safe and successful anodyne and hypnotic.[23] In theirstudy of the medical applications of cannabis, physicians of thenineteenth century repeatedly encountered a number ofdifficulties. Recognizing the therapeutic potential of the drug,many experimenters sought ways of overcoming these drawbacks toits use in medicine, in particular the following: Cannabis products are insoluble in water. The onset of the effects of medicinal preparations of cannabistakes an hour or so; its action is therefore slower than that ofmany other drugs. Different batches of cannabis derivatives varygreatly in strength; moreover, the common procedure forstandardization of cannabis samples, by administration to testanimals, is subject to error owing to variability of reactionsamong the animals. There is wide variation among humans in their individualresponses to cannabis. Despite these problems regarding theuncertainty of potency and dosage and the difficulties in mode ofadministration, cannabis has several important advantages overother substances used as analgesics, sedatives, and hypnotics: The prolonged use of cannabis does not lead to the developmentof physical dependence. [11, 13, 14, 24, 39, 44] There is minimaldevelopment of tolerance to cannabis products. (Loewe notes aslight "beginner's habituation" in dogs, during the first few trials withthe drug, as the only noticeable tolerance effect.[20]) [11, 13,14, 24, 44] Cannabis products have exceedingly low toxicity.[9,21, 22, 24] (The oral dose required to kill a mouse has beenfound to be about 40,000 times the dose required to producetypical symptoms of intoxication in man.)[21] Cannabis producesno disturbance of vegetative functioning, whereas the opiatesinhibit the gastrointestinal tract, the flow of bile and thecough reflex.[1, 2, 24, 44, 46] Besides investigating thephysical effects of medicinal preparations of cannabis,nineteenth-century physicians observed the psychic effects of thedrug in its therapeutic applications.[4, 27, 33] They found thatcannabis first mildly stimulates, and then sedates the highercenters of the brain. Hare suggested in 1887 a possible mechanismof cannabis' analgesic properties: During the time that thisremarkable drug is relieving pain a very curious psychicalcondition manifests itself; namely, that the diminution of thepain seems to be due to its fading away in the distance, so thatthe pain becomes less and less, just as the pain in a delicateear would grow less and less as a beaten drum was carried fartherand farther out of the range of hearing. Hemp FACT of the Day #10 Even more good medical stuff.... In his definitive survey of the literature and report of hisown studies, deceptively titled "Marihuana, America's NewDrug Problem," Walton notes that cannabis was widely usedduring the latter half of the nineteenth century, andparticularly before new drugs were developed: This popularity of the hemp drugs can be attributed partly tothe fact that they were introduced before the synthetic hypnoticsand analgesics. Chloral hydrate was not introduced until 1869 andwas followed in the next thirty years by paraldehyde, sulfonaland the barbitals. Antipyrine and acetanilide, the first of theirparticular group of analgesics, were introduced about 1884. Forgeneral sedative and analgesic purposes, the only drugs commonlyused at this time were the morphine derivatives and theirdisadvantages were very well known. In fact, the most attractivefeature of the hemp narcotics was probably the fact that they didnot exhibit certain of the notorious disadvantages of theopiates. The hemp narcotics do not constipate at all, they moreoften increase than decrease appetite, they do not particularlydepress the respiratory center even in large doses, they rarelyor never cause pruritis or cutaneous eruptions and, mostimportant, the liability of developing addiction is very muchless than with opiates.[44] The use of cannabis in Americanmedicine was seriously affected by the increased use of opiatesin the latter half of the nineteenth century. With the introduction of the hypodermic syringe into Americanmedicine from England in 1856 by Barker and Ruppaner, the use ofthe faster acting, water-soluble opiate drugs rapidly increased.The Civil War helped to spread the use of opiates in thiscountry; the injected drugs were administered widely-and oftenindiscriminately-to relieve the pain of maimed soldiers returningfrom combat. (Opiate addiction was once called the "armydisease."[41]) As the use of injected opiates increased,cannabis declined in popularity. Cannabis preparations were still widely available in legendand over-the-counter forms in the 1930s. Crump (Chairman,Investigating Committee, American Medical Association) in 1931mentioned the proprietaries "Piso's Cure," "OneDay Cough Cure" and "Neurosine" as containingcannabis.[44] In 1937 Sasman listed twenty-eight pharmaceuticalscontaining cannabis.[36] Cannabis was still recognized as amedicinal agent in that year, when the committee on legislativeactivities of the American Medical Association concluded asfollows: . . . there is positively no evidence to indicate the abuse ofcannabis as a medicinal agent or to show that its medicinal useis leading to the development of cannabis addiction. Cannabis atthe present time is slightly used for medicinal purposes, but itwould seem worthwhile to maintain its status as a medicinal agentfor such purposes as it now has. There is a possibility that are-study of the drug by modern means may show other advantages tobe derived from its medicinal use.[32] Meanwhile, in Mexico, thepoor were smoking marijuana to relax and to endure heat andfatigue. (Originally marijuana was the Mexican slang word for thesmoking preparation of dried leaves and flowering tops of theCannabis sativa plant-the indigenous variety of the hemp plant.) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B21-3IA087-000625-B016-144http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf11_20.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043356 text/html 15344HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:33:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:30 GMTContent-length: 15126 Hemp Facts 11-20 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT of the Day #11 Date: 95-01-21 11:10:30 EDT From: ADBryan More Misc. Med. Stuff.... Coming soon--How Hemp SavedGeorge Bush The recreational smoking of marijuana may have started in thiscountry in New Orleans in about 1910, and continued on a smallscale there until 1926, when a newspaper ran a six-part series onthe use of the drug.[44] The fad subsequently spread up theMississippi and throughout the United States, faster than localand state laws could be passed to discourage it. The use of"tea" or "muggles" blossomed into a minor"psychedelic revolution" of the 1920s. Narcoticsofficers encouraged the enactment of local prohibitory laws andeventually succeeded in bringing about restrictive Federallegislation. In 1937 Congress passed the Marihuana Tax Act, thefinale to a series of prohibitory acts in the individual states.Under the new laws, the already dwindling use of cannabis as atherapeutic substance in medicine was brought to a virtual halt.In 1941, cannabis was dropped from the "National Formularyand Pharmacopoeia." Around the time of the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act,Walton postulated sites of action for cannabis drugs. Corticalareas, he found, are affected at low dosage, while at high dosagethere seems to be a depressant effect on the thalamo-corticalpathways. Hyperemia of the brain appears to be a localphenomenon, unless centers controlling vasodilation might belocated in the thalamo-cortical region. Similar possiblemechanisms are suggested for the phenomenon of mild hypoglycemia,usual hunger and thirst and occasional lacrimation andnausea.[44] Despite restrictive legislation, a few medical researchershave had the opportunity to continue the investigation of thetherapeutic applications of cannabis in recent years. In hisstudy of the medical applications of cannabis for Mayor LaGuardia's committee, Dr. Samuel Allentuck reported, among otherfindings, favorable results in treating withdrawal of opiateaddicts with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful purifiedproduct of the hemp plant.[1, 24] An article in 1949, buried in ajournal of chemical abstracts, reported that a substance relatedto THC controlled epileptic seizures in a group of children moreeffectively than diphenylhydantoin (Dilantin_ref ), a mostcommonly p Hemp FACT #12-Marijuana Myths 1 Date: 95-01-24 10:51:59 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana MYTH # 1 Marijuana causes brain damage The most celebrated study that claims to show brain damage isthe rhesus monkey study of Dr. Robert Heath, done in the late1970s. This study was reviewed by a distinguished panel ofscientists sponsored by the Institute of Medicine and theNational Academy of Sciences. Their results were published underthe title, Marijuana and Health in 1982. Heath's work was sharplycriticized for its insufficient sample size (only four monkeys),its failure to control experimental bias, and themisidentification of normal monkey brain structure as"damaged". Actual studies of human populations ofmarijuana users have shown no evidence of brain damage. Forexample, two studies from 1977, published in the Journal of theAmerican Medical Association (JAMA) showed no evidence of braindamage in heavy users of marijuana. That same year, the AmericanMedical Association (AMA) officially came out in favor ofdecriminalizing marijuana. That's not the sort of thing you'dexpect if the AMA thought marijuana damaged the brain. There was a numbering problem. There are no FACTS 13 & 14 Hemp FACT #15-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-01-25 11:19:11 EDT From: ADBryan Poster's Note: I DO NOT endorse the use of any drugs duringpregnancy including aspirin. Marijuana Myth #2. Marijuana damages the reproductivesystem This claim is based chiefly on the work of Dr. Gabriel Nahas,who experimented with tissue (cells) isolated in petri dishes,and the work of researchers who dosed animals with near-lethalamounts of cannabinoids (i.e., the intoxicating part ofmarijuana). Nahas' generalizations from his petri dishes to humanbeings have been rejected by the scientific community as beinginvalid. In the case of the animal experiments, the animals thatsurvived their ordeal returned to normal within 30 days of theend of the experiment. Studies of actual human populations havefailed to demonstrate that marijuana adversely affects thereproductive system. Hemp FACT#16-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-01-26 12:00:41 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana Myth # 3.Marijuana is a "gateway" drugit leads to hard drugs. This is one of the more persistent myths. A real world exampleof what happens when marijuana is readily available can be foundin Holland. The Dutch partially legalized marijuana in the 1970s.Since then, hard drug use heroin and cocaine have DECLINEDsubstantially. If marijuana really were a gateway drug, one wouldhave expected use of hard drugs to have gone up, not down. Thisapparent "negative gateway" effect has also beenobserved in the United States. Studies done in the early 1970sshowed a negative correlation between use of marijuana and use ofalcohol. A 1993 Rand Corporation study that compared drug use instates that had decriminalized marijuana versus those that hadnot, found that where marijuana was more available the statesthat had decriminalized hard drug abuse as measured by emergencyroom episodes decreased. In short, what science and actualexperience tell us is that marijuana tends to substitute for themuch more dangerous hard drugs like alcohol, cocaine, and heroin. SOURCES 3) The Dutch experience is written up in "The Economicsof Legalizing Drugs", by Richard J. Dennis, The AtlanticMonthly, Vol 266, No. 5, Nov 1990, p. 130. See "A Comparisonof Marijuana Users and Non-users" by Norman Zinberg andAndrew Weil (1971) for the negative correlation between use ofmarijuana and use of alcohol. The 1993 Rand Corporation study is"The Effect of Marijuana Decriminalization on HospitalEmergency Room Episodes: 1975 - 1978" by Karyn E. Model. Hemp FACT #17-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-01-27 11:03:48 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana Myth #4. Marijuana suppresses the immune system. Like the studies claiming to show damage to the reproductivesystem, this myth is based on studies where animals were givenextremely high in many cases, near-lethal doses of cannabinoids.These results have never been duplicated in human beings.Interestingly, two studies done in 1978 and one done in 1988showed that hashish and marijuana may have actually stimulatedthe immune system in the people studied. References: 4) See a review of studies and their methodology in"Marijuana and Immunity", Journal of PsychoactiveDrugs, Vol 20(1), Jan-Mar 1988. Studies showing stimulation ofthe immune system: Kaklamani, et al., "Hashish smoking andT-lymphocytes", 1978; Kalofoutis et al., "Thesignificance of lymphocyte lipid changes after smokinghashish", 1978. The 1988 study: Wallace, J.M., Tashkin,D.P., Oishi, J.S., Barbers, R.G., "Peripheral BloodLymphocyte Subpopulations and Mitogen Responsiveness in Tobaccoand Marijuana Smokers", 1988, Journal of Psychoactive Drugs,ibid. Hemp FACT #18-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-01-28 10:58:20 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana Myth #5. - Marijuana is much more dangerous thantobacco. Smoked marijuana contains about the same amount of carcinogensas does an equivalent amount of tobacco. It should be remembered,however, that a heavy tobacco smoker consumes much more tobaccothan a heavy marijuana smoker consumes marijuana. This is becausesmoked tobacco, with a 90% addiction rate, is the most addictiveof all drugs while marijuana is less addictive than caffeine. Twoother factors are important. The first is that paraphernalia lawsdirected against marijuana users make it difficult to smokesafely. These laws make water pipes and bongs, which filter someof the carcinogens out of the smoke, illegal and, hence,unavailable. The second is that, if marijuana were legal, itwould be more economical to have cannabis drinks like bhang (atraditional drink in the Middle East) or tea which are totallynon-carcinogenic. This is in stark contrast with"smokeless" tobacco products like snuff which can causecancer of the mouth and throat. When all of these facts are takentogether, it can be clearly seen that the reverse is true: marijuana is much SAFER thantobacco. References: 5) The 90% figure comes from Health Consequences of Smoking:Nicotine Addiction, Surgeon General's Report, 1988. In Healthmagazine in an article entitled, "Hooked, Not Hooked"by Deborah Franklin (pp. 39-52), compares the additiveness ofvarious drugs and ranks marijuana below caffeine. For currentinformation on cannabis drinks see Working Men and Ganja:Marijuana Use in Rural Jamaica by M. C. Dreher, Institute for theStudy of Human Issues, 1982, ISBN 0-89727-025-8. For informationon cannabis and actual cancer risk, see Marijuana and Health,ibid. Hemp FACT #19-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-01-30 11:04:40 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana Myth #6. Legal marijuana would cause carnage onthe highways. Although marijuana, when used to intoxication, does impairperformance in a manner similar to alcohol, actual studies of theeffect of marijuana on the automobile accident rate suggest thatit poses LESS of a hazard than alcohol. When a random sample offatal accident victims was studied, it was initially found thatmarijuana was associated with RELATIVELY as many accidents asalcohol. In other words, the number of accident victimsintoxicated on marijuana relative to the number of marijuanausers in society gave a ratio similar to that for accidentvictims intoxicated on alcohol relative to the total number ofalcohol users. However, a closer examination of the victimsrevealed that around 85% of the people intoxicated on marijuanaWERE ALSO INTOXICATED ON ALCOHOL. For people only intoxicated onmarijuana, the rate was much lower than for alcohol alone. Thisfinding has been supported by other research using completelydifferent methods. For example, an economic analysis of theeffects of decriminalization on marijuana usage found that statesthat had reduced penalties for marijuana possession experienced arise in marijuana use and a decline in alcohol use with theresult that fatal highway accidents decreased. This would suggestthat, far from causing "carnage", legal marijuana mightactually save lives. References: 6) For a survey of studies relating to cannabis and highwayaccidents see "Marijuana, Driving and Accident Safety",by Dale Gieringer, Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, ibid. Theeffect of decriminalization on highway accidents is analyzed in"Do Youths Substitute Alcohol and Marijuana? SomeEconometric Evidence" by Frank J. Chaloupka and AditLaixuthai, Nov. 1992, University of Illinois at Chicago. Hemp FACT #20-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-01-31 10:33:31 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana Myth # 7. Marijuana "flattens" humanbrainwaves This is an out-and-out lie perpetrated by the Partnership fora Drug-Free America. A few years ago, they ran a TV ad thatpurported to show, first, a normal human brainwave, and second, aflat brainwave from a 14-year-old "on marijuana". Whenresearchers called up the TV networks to complain about thiscommercial, the Partnership had to pull it from the air. It seemsthat the Partnership faked the flat "marijuanabrainwave". In reality, marijuana has the effect of slightlyINCREASING alpha wave activity. Alpha waves are associated withmeditative and relaxed states which are, in turn, oftenassociated with human creativity. References For information about the Partnership ad, see Jack Herer's book, The Emperor Wears No Clothes, 1990, p. 74. See also "Hard Sell in the Drug War", The Nation, March 9, 1992, by Cynthia Cotts, which reveals that the Partnership receives a large percentage of its advertising budget from alcohol, tobacco, and pharmaceutical companies and is thus disposed toward exaggerating the risks of marijuana while downplaying the risks of legal drugs. For information on memory and the alpha brainwave enhancement effect, see "Marijuana, Memory, and Perception", by R. L. Dornbush, M.D., M. Fink, M.D., and A. M. Freedman, M.D., presented at the 124th annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, May 3-7, 1971. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B21-4IA087-000625-B016-162http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf21_30.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043406 text/html 30579HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:34:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:24 GMTContent-length: 30361 Hemp Facts 21-30 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT #21-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-02-01 10:46:56 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana Myth #8. Marijuana is more potent today than inthe past This myth is the result of bad data. The researchers who madethe claim of increased potency used as their baseline the THCcontent of marijuana seized by police in the early 1970s. Poorstorage of this marijuana in un-air conditioned evidence roomscaused it to deteriorate and decline in potency before anychemical assay was performed. Contemporaneous, independent assaysof unseized "street" marijuana from the early 1970sshowed a potency equivalent to that of modern "street"marijuana. Actually, the most potent form of this drug that wasgenerally available was sold legally in the 1920s and 1930s bythe pharmaceutical company Smith-Klein under the name,"American Cannabis". References: 8) See "Cannabis 1988, Old Drug New Dangers, The PotencyQuestion" by Tod H Mikuriya, M.D. and Michael Aldrich,Ph.D., Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, ibid. Hemp FACT #22-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-02-02 10:59:16 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana Myth #9. Marijuana impairs short-term memory This is true but misleading. Any impairment of short-termmemory disappears when one is no longer under the influence ofmarijuana. Often, the short-term memory effect is paired with areference to Dr. Heath's poor rhesus monkeys to imply that thecondition is permanent. Marijuana Myth #10. Marijuana lingers in the body like DDT This is also true but misleading. Cannabinoids are fat solubleas are innumerable nutrients and, yes, some poisons like DDT. Forexample, the essential nutrient, Vitamin A, is fat soluble butone never hears people who favor marijuana prohibition makingthis comparison. References: 9) See Marijuana and Health, ibid. Also see "Marijuana,Memory, and Perception", ibid. 10) The fat solubility of cannabinoids and certain vitamins iswell known. See Marijuana and Health, ibid. For some informationon vitamin A, see "The A Team" in Scientific American,Vol 264, No. 2, February 1991, p. 16. Hemp FACT #23-Marijuana Myths Date: 95-02-03 13:53:44 EDT From: ADBryan Marijuana Myth #11. There are over a thousand chemicals inmarijuana smoke Again, true but misleading. The 31 August 1990 issue of themagazine Science notes that of the over 800 volatile chemicalspresent in roasted COFFEE, only 21 have actually been tested onanimals and 16 of these cause cancer in rodents. Yet, coffeeremains legal and is generally considered fairly safe. Marijuana "Myth"#12. No one has ever died of amarijuana overdose This is true. It was put in to see if you are payingattention. Animal tests have revealed that extremely high dosesof cannabinoids are needed to have lethal effect. This has ledscientists to conclude that the ratio of the amount ofcannabinoids necessary to get a person intoxicated (i.e., stoned)relative to the amount necessary to kill them is 1 to 40,000. Inother words, to overdose, you would have to consume 40,000 timesas much marijuana as you needed to get stoned. In contrast, theratio for alcohol varies between 1 to 4 and 1 to 10. It is easyto see how upwards of 5000 people die from alcohol overdosesevery year and no one EVER dies of marijuana overdoses. References: 11) See "Too Many Rodent Carcinogens: MitogenesisIncreases Mutagenesis", Bruce N. Ames and Lois Swirsky Gold,Science, Vol 249, 31 August 1990, p. 971. 12) Cannabis and alcohol toxicity is compared in MarijuanaReconsidered, ibid., p. 227. Yearly alcohol overdoses was takenfrom "Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,Consequences, and Alternatives" by Ethan A. Nadelmann,Science, Vol 245, 1 September 1989, p. 943. Hemp FACT #24-A Book to Read Date: 95-02-04 11:00:33 EDT From: ADBryan SOMETHING TO LOOK INTO There is a book that tells the vast number of medical uses ofmarijuana. It explains that many (not all) of the dangers we havebeen warned about have been myths. The book is "Marihuana,the Forbidden Medicine" by Lester Grinspoon, M.D., and JamesB. Bakalar (1993). Obviously everything on this planet has itsdangers. Everything could be abused or used in a harmful way.Anything could be addictive, but not everything is physicallyaddictive. Marijuana is not proven to be physically addictive.The drug does not cause brain damage. It is also far less toxicthan many of today's prescription medicine. This book containsstories written by patients that had experienced using marijuanato help with their disease or disorder. It shows you the historyof the cannabis; why it was made a law, why people still believethe myths, and why full legalization is necessary so the medicalusers could obtain it cheap and without any trouble. Some peopleare getting marijuana medication, but the vast majority ofmedical marijuana users are still being arrested and serving longprison terms without the proper medication (marijuana). Here is a list of diseases and disorders marijuana helps: Itcould help addicts of opiates, cigarette attics, probably manymore recuperate; cancer chemotherapy (it does not cause cancer),glaucoma, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, paraplegia andquadriplegia, AIDS, chronic pain, migraine, pruritis, menstrualcramps and labor pain, depression and other mood disorders, andmany more. Here is a description of the book from its jacket and aparagraph from the very first page: From the jacket: Much of the book consists of accounts writtenby patients (including one from famed scientist Stephen JayGould) that dramatically illustrate not only the relief providedby marihuana but also the unnecessary distress caused by the needto obtain it illegally. Grinspoon and Bakalar recount the longhistory of medical marihuana use, discuss the real (as opposed tofancied) potential health hazards of the drug, and analyze thesocial causes of the government's insistence of making outlaws ofits medical users. They find that marihuana is a remarkably safesubstance and that criminalizing its use is costly, ineffective,and unfair. They conclude that legalizing it for medical purposesalone would be unworkable and that it must be given the samestatus as alcohol--legal, with appropriate limitations, for useby adults for any purpose. From the first page: "When I began to study marihuana in1967, I had no doubt that it was a very harmful drug that wasunfortunately being used by more and more foolish young peoplewho would not listen to or could not understand the warningsabout its dangers. My purpose was to define scientifically thenature and degree of those dangers. In the next three years, as Ireviewed the scientific, medical, and lay literature, my viewsbegan to change. I came to understand that I, like so many otherpeople in this country, had been brainwashed. My beliefs aboutthe dangers of marihuana had little empirical foundation. By thetime I completed the research that formed the basis for a book, Ihad become convinced that cannabis was considerably less harmfulthan tobacco and alcohol, the most commonly used legal drugs. Thebook was published in 1979; its title, Marihuana Reconsidered,reflected my change in view." --Lester Grinspoon,M.D. Hemp FACT #25-U.K. Article.Pt.1 Date: 95-02-06 10:54:16 EDT From: ADBryan Here's a portion of an article that appeared in the GuardianNewspaper on 9/18/93. Read and Enjoy. Please remember that thisarticle was written in the UK all comments in ( ) are theposters. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- INSIDE STORY MEDICINE, MAN Since the Thirties cannabis has been taboo demonised as astepping stone to hard Drugs. Yet for centuries it was arespected medicine. Now, people with ailments from multiplesclerosis to glaucoma are clamouring for pot on prescription.Could marijuana be a wonder drug for the Nineties? ALEX KERSHAW investigates. "When I first took it the effects were dramatic. It was agod-send. It's help with my spasticity, my bladder, taken away myhead sweats and gives me a much better night's sleep." Ayear ago, 43-year-old David McGill was suffering chronic pain.Depressed and insomniac, he had sunk to his lowest point sincebeing diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 1983. Then, lastNovember he heard about cannabis. He is just one of hundreds,maybe thousands, who now use the drug regularly as a treatmentfor MS and all sorts of other debilitating diseases. Despite widespread use for thousands of years, cannabis'ssecret medical history is only now being rediscovered in thiscountry, thanks in part to those battling against diseases forwhich there is no known cure. Yet from 1842 to 1900, cannabismade up half of all the medicine sold in America. Robert Burton the English clergyman, first recommendedcannabis for depression in the Anatomy of Melancholy, publishedin 1621. Queen Victoria used it to alleviate period pains. A hundred odd years later, the use or supply of cannabis is,of course, illegal. Next month, a Merseyside GP (GeneralPractitioner) is due to appear at Liverpool Crown Court chargedunder the Misuse of Drugs Act, 1971. It is likely to be a testcase about the supply of cannabis out of medical necessity. Thecase is the first of its kind in this country, but there havebeen many similair presented in American courts. Although the US Surgeon General, Jocelyn Elders, supportscannabis for therapeutic use, the medical profession remainsbitterly divided over cannabis. Its political potency, it seems,is as intoxicating as ever. And far more is at stake thanpossible legalisation. The arguments over cannabis are also aboutthe efficacy of modern medicine, the futility of the government'swar on drugs and even the ecology of the planet itself. Most evidence of cannabis's therapeutic value come fromAmerica. Marihuana: The Forbidden Medicine, for example writtenby Dr Lester Grinspoon, Associate Professor of Psychiatry atHarvard medical school, includes moving personal accounts of howcannabis has alleviated epilepsy, the weight loss of Aids, thenausea of chemotherapy, menstrual pains and multiple sclerosis. Several glaucoma sufferers have found that using cannabis hadlowered the pressure within the eye, so averting the onset ofblindness. Robert Randall is one of them. In 1975, steep streetprices drove him to grow cannabis plants in his Washington home"just eight blocks from Capitol Hill" to treat hisglaucoma. He was arrested, acquitted and then sued the Americangovernment to obtain the first legal supply of cannabis in theUnited States. "My defence was actually derived from English commonlaw," recalls Randall. "Thirty five US states haveallowed the medical use of marihuana. In opinion polls, 80 percent of Americans support marijuana on prescription." Nowpresident of the US alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics, Randallwas told in 1972 that his sight would last three years. Today hisglaucoma is no worse. (Part 2. of this article tomorrow) Hemp FACT #26-U.K. Article.Pt 2 Date: 95-02-07 11:20:45 EDT From: ADBryan This is Part Deux of an article that appeared in the GuardianNewspaper on 9/18/93. Please remember, this article was written in the UK allcomments in ( ) are the posters. A handful of patients with cancer or suffering chronic painhave also won access. In 1990, a man known as Steve L becam thefirst Aids patient to obtain the drug legally, 10 days before hedied. The same year, Aids patients Kenny Jenks and his wife,Barbra, won the same right following their arrest for possesingtwo cannabis plants. Ten armed narcotics officers had broken downthe door to their trailer home and held a gun to Barbra Jenks'shead. Then, in 1991, James O Mason, head of America's Public HealthService, suspended the programme which allowed the Jenkses andothers cannabis on compassionate grounds. Robert Randall, whorecieves a tin box every month crammed with 300 joints (!), isone of only nine people in the US permitted a legal supply grownon the US governments's marijuana plot at the University ofMississipi. "We let doctors decide every day whether we are allowedto take morphine and all kinds of dangerous drugs," saidKenneth Jenks before he died on July 19. "The decision totake marijuana should be between the doctor and thepatient". Jenks's sentiments are echoed by many in this country.Sufferers from various ailments are turning to cannabis, often inthe last resort and in preference to legally prescribed,sometimes highly toxic, drugs. Many suffering manic depressiveorder, for example, complain the lithium carbonate robs them oftheir creativity and vitality to the extent that they stop takingit despite the potentially serious consequences. Cannabis, forsome, has proved an effective substitute. And for MS sufferes, inparticular, Dr. Lester Grinspoon insists, "cannabis is thedrug of necessity." Desperate for relief, many swear ithelps to alleviate muscle spasms and other symptons. "It has completely changed my life," says ElizabethMacRory, who is 51 years old. Diagnosed as having MS in 1986after a car accident, MacRory was told "go home and get usedto it and don't read any books." "Sometimes I joke thatI'll be the first woman in prison in a wheelchair," shesays. "Cannabis has criminalised me but also liberated me.It has helped with muscle spasms, allowed me to sleep properlyand helped control my bladder." Clare Hodges , a 36-year-old mother of two, who has coped withMS for 10 years, reports similair results. She runs the BritishAssociation of Cannabis Therapeutics from her home in Leeds."I now wake up in the morning and my balance is sensational.I've been prescribed alll sorts of medicines. Most of the time Ifelt I was being overdrugged, but with cannabis you can reallyregulate the dosage. So-called experts are always quick to pointto the side-effects. But if you read about the possible effectsof aspirin, you'd never take it again," she says, lighting ajoint containing herbal tobacco. MacRory, Hodges, McGill and other MS sufferers, who claimconsiderable benefit from cannabis, are increasingly disaffectedwith the charity representing their interests, the MultipleSclerosis Society. Hodges points to the memorandum on cannabisuse issued by the Society in which John Walford, its generalsecretary, asserts that "there is no evidence that thisagent has an effect on people with MS." Walford also claimedthat "long-term use may be associated with significant,serious side effects." This contradicts Therapeutic Claimsin MS, published by the International Federation of MS Societies,which concludes that "no significant side effects werereported in the limited trials" and "no seriouslong-term effects have been proven to result from the drug." Part 3 Tomorrow Hemp FACT #27-U.K. Artcl.Pt 3 Date: 95-02-08 10:57:04 EDT From: ADBryan This is part Three of an article that appeared in the GuardianNewspaper on 9/18/93. Please remember that this article was written in the UK. Allcomments in ( ) are the posters. When pressed, Walford concedes, "The society wouldwelcome properly conducted trials into any substance that isthought to be helpful, but there are 80,000 people with MS in theUK. What you are alking about is a small minority. There arepeople who will swear by all manner of things." "He [Walford] thinks we all just get high," countersElizabeth MacRory with some bitterness. "He says there are'significant side effects associated with long-term cannabis use'yet the Society fails to inform the membership of the toxiceffects of drugs with no proven efficacy which neurologistscontinue to prescribe." "Cannabis is one of humanity's oldest medicines, with aremarkable record of both safety and efficacy," insists DrLester Grinspoon whose unflinching advocacy of cannabis caused astorm in America and even led to death threats, "I'd like tosee the day when full medical potential of cannabis isrecognized," he says. "Then it will be seen in the samelight as other so-called wonderdrugs: penicillin, aspirin andinsulin. People will look back and ask how people could have beenso blind. There is no plant with so many therapeutic qualities.It's one of the safest drugs known to mankind." Far from being a potential "wonderdrug", it has beenclaimed that cannabis causes birth defects, hormonal imbalancesresulting in males growing breasts, impaired sperm and eggproduction as well as impotence, frigidity, cancer and braindamage. None of these claims has yet been supported by scientificevidence. An estimated 10,000 studies worldwide and hundredsconducted by the US gorvernment between 1966-76 to back itspolicy of prohibition, have shown that cannabis, even when smokedin huge quantities, is relatively benign. The spaced-outpot-head, permanently brain damaged after countless tokes on a"Camberwell carrot", is a figment of what Grinspooncalls Psycopharmacological McCarthyism". As all regular users know - and the Home Office estimated thatthere were 1.5 million in the UK in 1991, and new figures to bepublished later this month are likely to put the total higher -cannabis does have well-known side-effects: attention andshort-term memory, tracking and co-ordination can be impaired.But not permanently. The only well-confirmed negative effect of marijuana,according to Grinspoon, is caused by the smoke, which containsthree times more tars and five times more carbon monoxide thantobacco. But even the heaviest marijuana smokers rarely use asmuch as an average tobacco smoker. And, of course, many prefer toeat it. Coming manana Part 4 of this article. Hemp FACT #28-U.K. Artcl.Pt.4 Date: 95-02-09 11:11:10 EDT From: ADBryan This is Pt. IV of an article that appeared in the GuardianNewspaper on 9/18/93. Please remember that this article was written in the UK allcomments in ( ) are the posters. "Cannabis does have therapeutic properties," admitsDr Heather Ashton, Professor of Clinical Psychopharmacology atNewcastle University, "but at the cost, in my view, ofunacceptable side-effects. I'm not convinced that it can be anymore therapeutic than other drugs which don't have the risks orthat the advantages of cannabis outweigh its disadvantagescompared to other drugs." Also a leading expert on cannabis, Professor Ashton points tothe "marked increase in heart rate" caused bymarijuana, which, she insists, "can precipitate heartattacks in people with cardiac diseases." She stresses thatmarijuana does cause "amotivational syndrome" whenconsumed - "it take away the desire to do anything becauseyou feel good." It has, in some rare cases, also triggeredpsychotic episodes. Dr Roger Pertwee, Secretary of the International CannabisResearch Society and the UK's pre-eminent cannabis expert, seeshimself as occupying the middle ground on the cannabis debate."Cannabis does seem to be as effective, if not better, thanexisting drugs in dealing with spasticity and bladder problems ofmultiple sclerosis. The side-effects seem to be more tolerablefor some patients," he says. "Clinical trials have allbacked cannabis in being able to, not cure, but suppress some ofthe symptons. Migraine could well be another case." As a recreational drug, alongside nicotine, alcohol and evencaffeine, Dr Pertwee concedes that cannabis compares favourably.No human fatalities have as yet been recorded as a result ofmarijuana. Withdrawal symptons have been reported in long-termchronic users in Jamaica and Costa Rica, but they do not appearto be dependent in the damaging sense that others are to, say,alcohol and tranquillizers. Much effort has also been devoted to proving the"stepping-stone hypothesis" that marijuana smokingleads to the use of dangerous drugs. In Holland, laws passed in1976 established a division between hard and soft drugs,effectively decriminalizing, with strict conditions, thepossesion and supply of cannabis. The Lancet report in 1989:"The Dutch have shown that there is nothing inevitable aboutthe drugs ladder in which soft drugs lead to hard drugs. Theladder does not exist in Holland because the dealers have beenseparated." The most exhaustive recent investigation into cannabis occuredin America between 1986 and 1988, when the Drug EnforcementAdministration heard evidence from doctors, patients and studiedthousands of pages of documentation. The conclusion reached bythe DEA's administrative judge, Francis J Young, makes startlingreading: "Nearly all medicines have toxic, potentiallylethal effects," declared Young, "But marijuana is notsuch a substance . . . Marijuana, in its natural form, is one ofthe safest active substances know to man. By any measure ofrational analysis marijuana can be safely used within asupervised routine of medical care." Pt. 5 Tomorrow Hemp FACT #29-U.K. Artcl.Pt.5 Date: 95-02-10 11:19:44 EDT From: ADBryan This is Part 5 of an article that appeared in the GuardianNewspaper on 9/18/93. Please remember that this article was written in the UK allcomments in ( ) are the posters. Given cannabis's medical potential, why was it criminalised atall? Jack Here, author of The Emperor Wears No Clothes, hasconstructed a powerful thesis to explain cannabis's fall fromfavour earlier this century, culminating in the 1937 MarijuanaTax in America. Cannabis, also known as hemp, is a prolificmfast-growing crop, useful for a wide range of industrialpurposes, and an economical source of fuel: it threatened tobankrupt the paper industry, destroy an emerging synthetic fibreindustry and even challenge the dominance of oil companies. In Harry Anslinger, head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics,imperilled interests in America found a messianic ally, "Ifthe hideous monster Frankenstein came face to face with themonster marijuana he would drop dead of fright," railedAnslinger. Through a rash of B movies such as Reefer Madness,Anslinger managed to convince the American public that cannabiscaused violent crimes and accelerated Uncle Sam's moral decline.Cannabis still unnerves a powerful axis of interests. Many of the4,000-odd "Families Against Marijuana"-styleorganisations in the US are funded by the tobacco, pharmaceuticaland alcohol lobbies. Cannabis revisionists now view the MarijuanaTax as an ecologocial crime. "We want the establishment toacknowledge that the reasons cannabis became illegal in the firstplace was because of the threat posed by it's commercialapplications. not its use as a drug," says Andy Waller ofthe UK-based House of Hemp, set up this year to promotecannabis's commercial use. Until the late 19th century, saysWaller, cannabis was one of the world's main agricultural crops. Today, it has an estimated 50,000 non-smoking commercial uses.According to the US Department of Agriculture research, hemp hasfour times as much cellulose fibre suitable for making paper aswood pulp. The original Levi's jeans were, in fact, 100 per centhemp (This has been debated) / others claim that cultivatingmarijuana in the Third World would save the rainforest purify theatmosphere and provide autonomy to Third World economies crippledby debt. In tacit recognition of marijuana's profit potential, inFebruary, the Home Office granted commercial licences to permitthe cultivation of 1,505 acres of cannabis in the UK. It is,however, unsmokeable, containing none of the psychoactiveingredient THC. The first crop is now being harvested. (Most ofthe hemp plants that were grown in the U.S. for hundreds of yearsprior to prohibition were this type. They grow 18-20 feet talland have stalks like tree trunks. This is where the fiber comesfrom.) Tamale part 6. Hemp FACT #30-U.K. Artcl.Pt.6 Date: 95-02-11 10:28:52 EDT From: ADBryan This is Part 6 of an article that appeared in the GuardianNewspaper on 9/18/93. Please remember that this article was written in the UK allcomments in ( ) are the poster's. In the Seventies, Dr Raphael Mechoulam, who first isolated THCat the University of Tel Aviv in 1964, predicted that marijuanawould become a major medicine by the mid-Eighties, replacing 10to 20 per cent of all prescription medicines. Dr Grinspoon arguesthat, since cannabis is inexpensive, it could significantlyreduce health service's enormous drugs bills. Used to combat stress, the world's number one killer, cannabiscould also curtail or replace hugely-profitable drugs such asValium, Librium and, indeed, alcohol, Grinspoon believes."I'm convinced," he says, " that cannibidiol (oneof 60 therapeutic compounds isolated in cannabis) will be thebest sleeping medicine and one of the best anti-anxiety drugswith the least toxic side-effects." Cannabidiol, which does not produce a high, could alsopossibly alleviate Britains's most serious drug problem:tranquiliser abuse, which is already responsible for moreemergency hospital admissions than all illegal drugs combined."Cannabidiol could do all these things," concursProfessor Ashton. "But not at any less cost than otherdrugs, in my opinion." At grass-roots level, cannabis's rehabilitation also reflectsa growing disaffection with orthodox medicine, borne out by theNineties' boom in alternative medicine. A common complaint, airedby MS sufferers in particular, is that cannibidiol research hasbeen woefully neglected. However, despite decades of marginalisation, there have beenspectacular breakthroughs. Pertwee points to the recent discoveryof anandamide (reported in a recent New Scientist), a substanceproduced by the brain that behaves like marijuana."Anandamide's discovery promises to open a door to how thebrain works. There may be possibilities of working on a memorydrug and the treatment of Alzheimer's disease." The exploitation of cannabis's medical benefits has alwaysbeen limited because of it's psychoactive properties. The holygrail of cannabinoid therapeutics has, therefore, been toeliminate cannabis's high. Drug companies have spent yearstrying, without success. But now, the discovery in Cambridge byDr Sean Munro of a receptor for THC, not in the brain, but inperipheral tissues, promise to solve this problem. Pharmaceuticalcompanies have already expressed an interest in Munro's findings,particularly as related to glaucoma. Yet it is the receptors inthe brain, points out Munro, "that are responsible for manyof cannabis's potential therapeutic effects." And it isprecisely the euphoria induced by marijuana which makes it suchan attractive drug for those with terminal illnesses. Part VII coming next (aren't y'all excited) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B21-5IA087-000625-B016-200http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf31_40.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043511 text/html 37364HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:34:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:15 GMTContent-length: 37146 Hemp Facts 31-40 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT #31-U.K. Artcl.Pt.7 Date: 95-02-12 12:30:25 EDT From: ADBryan This is Part VII of an article that appeared in the GuardianNewspaper on 9/18/93. Please remember that this article was written in the UK allcomments in ( ) are the poster's. According to Andy Waller, marijuana should"theoretically" cost less per acre than wheat to grow.Yet Nabilone, the only synthetic cannabinoid legally prescribedin the UK, costs the NHS [National Health Service] 39.70 [poundsabout 60-70 dollars?] for twenty capsules. "Thepharmaceutical industry and regulatory system are addicted to thecult of synthesis," complains Robert Randall. "It's asif every drug has to come out of a factory. God forbid that itmight be natural. There's an attitude that man can make a betterGarden Of Eden scientifically." In fact, Dr Grinspoon doubts whether synthetic compounds wouldbe as effective as the natural substance. "It's the synergyof so many cannabinoids in natural marijuana which may be thesecret to it's wide-ranging properties," says Grinspoon.However, he doubts whether straightforward cannabis will become aprescription drug. As a plant, cannabis cannot be patented and istherefore an uncommercial proposition for the drug companies. Legalized prescription would also need to cope with theproblems of standardization and leakage on to the market."There would be queues outside every GP's office,"jokes Mike Goodman of Release, the national drugs and legaladvice service. "If you can get marijuana for $10 an ouncefrom your doctor rather than $600 (poster's note--$600 ANOZ.--Must be some incredible stuff ;-)) on the street," saysGrinspoon, "it's obvious why prescription won't work.Cannabis must be given the same status as alcohol - legal, withappropriate limitations, for use by adults for any purpose." Robert Randall echoes others in vehemently disagreeing withGrinspoon's call for general legalization. "The idea thatsick people are the key to decriminalization is to hold thewelfare of the ill hostage to reformist fantasies. We want it onprescription, like morphine, to help people. Not so that a hippiecan have a good time in the afternoon." Once deemed the weed that propgated flowerpower, thesubversive dropout's favoured intoxicant, marijuana has sincemoved mainstream. It is no longer the narcotic of youthfulrebellion for baby-boomers of non-inhaler Bill Clinton'sgeneration. Mike Goodman insists more people now roll joints andeat hash brownies than attend football [soccer] matches, artgalleries or church. A survey to be published by two Manchestercriminologists next month suggests that close to 50 per cent ofteenagers aged 14-16 in urban areas use illicit drugs regularly[does this include alcohol underage?], most commonly cannabis.According to Peter McDermott, editor of the International JournalOn Drug Policy: "Cannabis can no longer be regarded asdeviant activity. It's part of our national social life." In a recent survey at a leading teaching hospital, the resultsof which one source admits to being asked to suppress, "over60 per cent of medical students were found to be marijuanausers." In the same survey, only 30 per cent admitted tosmoking cigarettes. Even senior police officers, such as Commander John Grieve ofthe Metropolitan Police, have proposed licensing a network ofdrug suppliers and dealers. Brian Hilliard, editor of PoliceReview, has called for the legalization of cannabis for severalyears. "Legalizing cannabis wouldn't do any harm toanybody," he says "We should be concentrating on theserious business of heroin and amphetamines." Part 8 of dis berry interesting article coming soon to amessage board near you. Hemp FACT #31-U.K. Artcl.Pt.8 Date: 95-02-13 11:02:01 EDT From: ADBryan This is the final part of an article that appeared in theGuardian Newspaper on 9/18/93. Please remember that this article was written in the UK allcomments in ( ) are the poster's. The conviction of 42,209 people in 1991 on marijuana chargescontributes to the clogging of the courts and the overcrowding ofprisons. Almost 90 per cent of drug offences involve cannabis.Yet the British government spends 500 million pounds (750,000,000dollars approx?) a year on "overall responses to drugs(international and national)" and receives no tax revenuefrom the UK's estimated 1.8 billion pound (2.7 billion dollars?)illicit drugs market. Increasingly, those pressing for marijuana's legalizationmirror Grinspoon's belief that, "since scientific scepticismof marijuana has all but collapsed", the chief opposition tocannabis rests on a moral and political, not toxicological,foundation. The real damage that cannabis causes, the argument goes, is tothe body politic. In his recent book, Food Of The Gods, TerenceMcKenna neatly encapsulates dope's lasting social potentcy:"It (cannabis) dimishes the power of ego, has a mitigatingeffect on competition. causes one to question authority, andreinforces the notion of merely relative importance of socialvalues." "It's clear that the government's war on drugs takesprecedence over medical rationality," says Nick Partridge ofthe Terrence Higgins Trust (A national UK charity dealing withAIDS (I think)). "At present we're criminalizing many peoplein massive pain at the end of their lives. Yet I don't expect themedical arguments to break through the political dogmasurrounding marijuana and that is deeply regrettable." "Marijuana has empowered many sick people for the firsttime," says Robert Randall. "For many, it is the onlydrug that works. The real problem with marijuana is perhaps itthreatens to put people in charge of their own medical lives. Thequestion is: who is going to control individual's biology - largecorporations, doctors and governments, or peoplethemselves?" ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Thanks go to ALEX KERSHAW who wrote this interesting andrevealing article for the Guardian Newspaper. If anyone is interested in the article in its entirety, emailthe poster. Hemp FACT #32-Buckley.Pt.1 Date: 95-02-14 11:01:23 EDT From: ADBryan This column by William F. Buckley was in The AlbuquerequeJournal June 9, 1993. It makes a good argument for marijuanalegalization. William Buckley's columns are copyright by theUniversal Press Syndicate. Legalization of Marijuana Long Overdue In a recent encounter, Edward Koch reminded his interlocuterthat many years ago, Rep. Edward Koch had sought backing for acongressional investigation into the marijuana laws. I had beenreminded by the former mayor of New York that along about1967-68, the typical congressman had to reflect that any lawrequiring one or five or 10 years in jail as a penalty for beingcaught using marijuana endangered his own sons and daughters incollege. Koch got the support he sought. But no meaningful reforms, if that is the word we arepermitted to use, were enacted. In 1967, all drug arrests came to121,000. Of these, marijuana arrests were one-half, 61,000. In1991, all drug arrests were 1 million, marijuana 285,000. Background data give us perspective. Sixty-six millionAmericans have smoked marijuana, and at least 10 million -perhaps many more - continue to do so regularly. Comparablefigures? Twenty-two million have used cocaine, 1.5 million stilldo; 150 million have used tobacco, 50 million still do. In 1976,12 percent of children age 12-17 had used marijuana during thepreceding month. By 1990, this figure was down to 5 percent. Overage 26, the percentage had not changed: 3.5 percent in 1976, 3.6percent in 1990. The social vectors within the drug-law-reform movement haveduring the period since Koch asked for an investigation offederal marijuana laws moved as follows: -The informed public is gradually willing to acknowledge adifference between marijuana and more lethal drugs. -It is, however reluctantly, acknowledged that marijuana canhave therapeutic uses, in particular to bring relief to thosesuffering from radiation or chemotherapy treatments for cancer. -There is a gradual awakening of the moral sensibilities ofthe alert members of the public. My own belated arrival on thescene stings in the memory. It came with a letter from a fatherin his early 30s who neither smoked nor drank, who had threechildren, was gainfully employed, and engaged in civic-mindedactivity - but liked on Saturday nights, to retreat to hiswoodshed and smoke a joint. He was caught at it, arrested, hishouse seized, and is now in jail, and sentenced to 10 years. Itis hard to understand the moral disposition of the prosecuter whoasked for that sentence, and the judge who imposed it. Part 2 Tomorrow. email the poster for complete copies ofarticles. Hemp FACT #33-Buckley.Pt.2 Date: 95-02-15 12:18:36 EDT From: ADBryan This is Part 2 of a column by William F. Buckley in TheAlbuquereque Journal June 9, 1993. It makes a good argument formarijuana legalization. William Buckley's columns are copyright by the Universal PressSyndicate. Legalization of Marijuana Long Overdue The National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws hasa program, which is to bring on the legalization of marijuana bythe year 1997. The president of NORML, as it is everywherereferred to, is a man of considerable literary and polemicalskills. Richard Cowan is a graduate of Yale and a co-founder ofYoung Americans for Freedom. He is here and there given tohyperbole, as when he cites the support given to the Partnershipfor a Drug Free America (PDFA) by corporate America as"reminiscent of the support given the Nazis by Germanindustrialists." But Cowen is on to something, the root credentials of whichare: -However one feels about legalizing cocaine, the case forlegalizing marijuana is an entire world removed from thatquestion. -The amount of money and of legal energy being given toprosecute hundreds of thousands of Americans who are caught witha few ounces of marijuana in their jeans simply makes no sense -the kindest way to put it. A sterner way to put it is that it isan outrage, an imposition on basic civil liberties and on thereasonable expenditure of social energy. -The point must surely come when the American peopleacknowledge that the drive against marijuana is not provinganything at all, given the continuing availability of the drugand its (relatively modest) patronage. Richard Cowan makes a telling point, namely that the media arenotoriously insensitive to the abuses of the narcocracy."Most people are unaware of the nature of the marijuanaprohibition in America today, the extent of its cruelty andinjustice, and the threat that it poses to everyone's freedom.Ironically, many of those who are aware of the extent of theproblem view it as being so great that they despair of being ableto end it. Consequently, as an act of triage, they abandon it asa lost cause, to work on something which they view as at leastpossible." Like what? The rehabilitation of PresidentClinton? More stuff manana -- Keep those cards and letters coming ;-) Hemp FACT #34-PFDFA Date: 95-02-16 11:39:03 EDT From: ADBryan This is Part 1 of an article that appeared in The HartfordCourant. It shows the lies perpetrated by the Partnership for aDrug Free America. "Untruths, unreliable data create obstacles in war ondrugs." It is a stark message designed to persuade youths to stay awayfrom marijuana. And it is a lie. The narrator tells television viewers they are watching thebrain waves of a normal 14-year-old. As he speaks, squiggly lineswith high peaks show an obviously active brain. The picture changes: The lines flatten. These, the narratorsays, are the brain waves of a 14-year-old on marijuana. The problem with this national television advertisement isthat the flatter "brain waves" are not those of ateenager on dope; they are not brain waves at all. Theelectroencephalograph was not hooked up to anyone. It is not just brain waves that are being manipulated in thewar against drugs. Truth has been a casualty in other areas aswell. For example: A study cited by presidents and business leaders todemonstrate the effect of drug use on worker productivity has noscientific validity according to the organization that conductedit. No one has been able to produce another widely quoted studythat purportedly showed drug users cost companies more inworker's compensation claims and medical benefits. A third study, used to show that marijuana could causelong-term impairment, was improperly conducted and reachedconclusions no other study has been able to duplicated, accordingto one of its authors. [article goes on to say that drugs are bad but that lyingabout it destroys the credibility of the anti-drug crusade.] "Part of the problem we have as drug educators today isthat kids don't believe us," said Dr. Lester Grinspoon, anassociate professor of psychiatry at the Harvard Medical Schoolwho has researched the effects of marijuana. "They've been told for so long that marijuana is very badfor them and then they go off to college and see a brilliantEnglish major that smokes dope and nothing's happened to his orher brain or heart. Then they use it themselves and discover it'sthe least harmful illegal drug. So they say that maybe they'vebeen lied to about cocaine or PCP, too." But such questions are not the foremost concern of theorganization that created the brain-wave advertisement. ThePartnership for a Drug-Free America wants, above all else, toprevent people from using drugs. Theresa Grant, public information director for the nonprofitorganization, said she doesn't see any problem with the ad."The marijuana brain-wave commercial was one of the ads thatwe used as a fact, rather than a fear-inducing ad," Grantsaid. later, she acknowledged: "It was a simulation. Theymanipulated the machine. It was not attached to any person. Itwas not scientific. At the time we created it in 1987, we weretold that it was an appropriate representation," by thegovernment's National Institute on Drug Abuse. ... She emphasized that the partnership has not conceded thatthe brain-wave representation was inaccurate ... "It's a flat lie," said Grinspoon. "Marijuanahas no clinically significant effect on theelectroencephalograph." ... Citing a Harvard Medical School study, he said, "Nobodyhas been able to demonstrate one iota of brain damage fromsmoking marijuana." Part 2. Tomorrow Hemp FACT #35-PFDFA Date: 95-02-17 11:18:52 EDT From: ADBryan This is part 2 of an article that appeared in The HartfordCourant in 90 or 91 "Untruths, unreliable data create obstacles in war ondrugs." It is a stark message designed to persuade youths tostay away from marijuana. And it is a lie. Social 'Studies' Last year President Bush declared that "drug abuse amongAmerican workers costs businesses anywhere from $60 billion to$100 billion a year in lost productivity, absenteeism,drug-related accidents, medical claims and theft." Where did he get those number? Bush, and President Reagan before him, have based theircomments about drugs and productivity on a study conducted by theResearch Triangle Institute, a nonprofit research organizationnear Raleigh, N.C., according to Henrick J. Harwood, who led thestudy and now is senior policy analyst in the White House drugpolicy office. ... "It was an inexpensive study done with inadequatedata," said Reid Maness, senior manager of communicationsfor Research Triangle Institute. "Unfortunately, therehasn't been attempt since then to do anything better. This stillremains the most recent and best study of its type. "When we see people being critical about it, we don't gettoo upset. RTI would agree that the study does not have a lot ofprecision. We never claimed that it did," Maness said. The study concluded: o People who had *ever* been heavy marijuana users cost thenation $34.2 billion in diminished worker productivity in 1980. o Adding the costs of drug-related health problems, crime andaccidents --figures that exist only in very rough estimates --the study concluded that all drug abuse, excluding alcohol, costthe country $47 billion in 1980. How did the institute come up with its figures? Using statistics from a 1982 household survey by the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, the institute compared the averageincome for households in which one person admitted to havingevery used marijuana daily to the average for households in whichno one admitted to having ever used marijuana daily. Households with former heavy smokers of marijuana had anaverage income 27.9 percent lower than similar households inwhich marijuana had not been used heavily, the institute said. The study concluded that, when the figures were extrapolatedto the general population, marijuana abuse caused an estimatedloss in income of $34.2 billion in 1980. In turn, the researchersequated the reduced income with reduced productivity. ... "The study is worthless," said Dr. John P. Morgan,medical professor and head of the pharmacology department at theCity University of New York Medical School. "It is obviouslyabsurd. It has to do with the fact that NIDA is functioningchiefly as a minister of propaganda in the war on drugs." The study did not prove any relationship between marijuana useand reduced household income. Despite its conclusion that"The [productivity] loss due to marijuana abuse wasestimated at $34.2 billion for 1980," the study elsewherenotes that the reduced income was not necessarily a result ofmarijuana use. Even if it were, income does not equal productivity. In an article in the University of Kansas Law Review, Morganwrite that if income were the same as productivity, then "ajudge is less productive than a practicing lawyer, a medicalschool professor is less productive than a practicing physician,a farmer is less productive than a florist and an elementaryschool teacher is less productive than an owner of a daycarecenter." The study arrived at one particularly curious conclusion: People who were *currently* abusing any illegal drug cost thenation nothing in diminished worker productivity. A 34-year-old who told researchers in 1982 that he had smokedmarijuana every day during the summer of 1966 and had not touchedan illegal drug since would be classified as a worker whoseproductivity was significantly diminished by drug use. Part 3. Tomorrow - The Study that Wasn't Hemp FACT #36-PFDFA Date: 95-02-18 11:46:22 EDT From: ADBryan This is Part 3 of an article from The Hartford Courant "Untruths, unreliable data create obstacles in war ondrugs." The study that wasn't. Shocking anti-drug statistics seem always to make headlines,regardless of what they are based upon. In 1983, Dr. Sidney Cohen, a clinical professor of psychiatryat UCLA, wrote in the Drug Abuse and Alcoholism Newsletter thatdrug users were five times as likely to file workers'compensation claims and that they received three times theaverage level of benefits for illness. His source was a study purportedly done by the Firestone Tireand Rubber Co. Many other drug fighters, particularly people infavor of widespread drug testing of employees, have quoted eitherthe Firestone study or the newsletter edited by Cohen, who hassince died. In fact, there appears to have been no such study. "About three people have asked me for that study,"said the Firestone medical director, Dr. E. Gates Morgan."I'm unaware of it. We had an [employee assistance program]man with us, but left the company in 1983 and died in 1987. I'velooked all over for the stuff he wrote, but we don't have anycopies of it at all." ... A life of their own Other widely quoted studies have even larger margins of error-- but you wouldn't know that by listening to the people whoquote them. "Marijuana does not wear off in a couple ofhours," said Rosanna Creighton, president of the nonpartisanlobbying group "Citizens for a Drug-free Oregon." "The pleasure high is gone, but the effect it has ... onmotor skills, eye-to-hand coordination, peripheral vision ... isnot gone. A Stanford University study showed that 24 hours aftersmoking marijuana, the ability of airplane pilots wasimpaired." Creighton was referring to a 1985 study paid for by theNational Institute on Drug Abuse and the Veterans AdministrationMedical Research Service. It has been used to show that evencasual marijuana use is dangerous -- despite many governmentstudies that have concluded the opposite. ... The study said that although the pilots were unaware they wereimpaired, their marijuana-induced errors could easily lead toairplane crashes. But a co-author of the study is not confident of thosefindings. "The results of the study were suggestive, nonconclusive," said Dr. Von Otto Leirer, an experimentalpsychologist. "We didn't have the appropriate controls forthe experiment. That was a real serious problem." Leirer said a follow-up study, using the proper controls andmethods, was conducted. That study was published in December, butattracted little notice. ... In the past 20 years, studies have shown marijuana to causebrain damage, paranoia, early senility, heart malfunction andsexual problems, Grinspoon said. In every case, he said,follow-up studies failed to confirm that marijuana caused any ofthose problems. Hemp FACT #37-DARE1 Date: 95-02-20 12:13:01 EDT From: ADBryan This is an article found on the "net" to addadditional insight on D.A.R.E. The Dark Side of DARE by Pastor Jaymes Douglass Fyr Police officers visiting schools - anti-drug programs -neither one is new. I remember being told as a child "thepoliceman is your friend." I still have the worn old bookpreaching against drugs and alcohol from high school. Thesethings have been ar ound for decades. Now they have come together. Former Los Angeles police chiefDaryl Gates created the Drug Abuse Resistance Education programin 1983 as a joint effort of the police department and the L.A.school district to fight drug use in the city's schools. It hassince spread nationwide and abroad, as far away as Australia andNew Zealand. Millions have been exposed to it. So what is DARE? In most forms it consists of 17 one hoursessions, held weekly and covering subjects ranging from refusalskills to alternatives to drug use. It is taught by uniformedpolice officers and usually begins with fifth graders. Fundingcomes from both governmental and private sources. Nothing is wrong with teaching anybody of any age to assertthemselves and think for themselves. Teens often have a hard timesaying "no." Breaking the back of peer pressure is hardto do. And this can also help reject pressure to engage inunwanted sex and other temptations. What makes DARE different is having police officers teach theclasses. That's kind of like having teachers arrest muggers.That's not their job - it's not what they have been trained todo. Why not have public health officials lecture about the harmful aspects of drugs? To be balanced, why not invite NORML membersor Native American shamans to tell how drugs can be used inbeneficial ways? Is the information presented truthful? Forexample, the discredited research of Dr. Gabriel Nahas is stilltouted about the supposed evils of marijuana use. Are alcohol,tobacco, caffeine and prescription drugs covered, or only"illegal" drugs? Is this an effort to promote awarenessof health and safety, or just another attempt to enforce blindobedience to the law? And finally, is DARE really out to fight the "drugproblem" by encouraging children to inform on people theyknow who use illegal drugs? The Wall Street Journal, in a front page article on April 20,1992, reported the case of Crystal Grendell, a fifth grader whowas asked if she knew anyone who used drugs. Crystal was takingDARE classes taught by Searsport, Maine, police chief James Gillway in the spring of 1991. She was worried because her parentsgrew and smoked marijuana. She didn't say anything at the time,but later went to Gillway and reported her parents. Six copsraided the family home, seized Crystal and 49 one foot highmarijuana plants and arrested the parents. The mother lost herjob and the father got one year's probation. Crystal's straightA's turned into C's, she now fears the police and frequently hasnightmares. The article also mentions other parents who have beenturned in by their children - at the instigation of DARE.Parents' anti-DARE groups are beginning to form. A lady from L.A.told me that her child had broken down under interrogation andadmitted that "mom smokes pot." This lady received astern lecture from local child protective "services." But DARE is wildly popular among politicians, schooladministrators and cops! Every cop car in town has a DARE bumpersticker on it. Lots of civilian cars have them too. You seepeople everywhere wearing DARE t-shirts. I even recently saw ablack city bus plastered with the DARE logo and slogan, in bigred letters. It's an election year, everybody! Climb onto thepolitically correct bandwagon! Part 2 on FACT 38 Hemp FACT #37-DARE2 Date: 95-02-20 12:15:32 EDT From: ADBryan Part 2 of the article from FACT 37. Didn't the Hitler Youth and the KGB indoctrinate children inNazi Germany and the Soviet Union? Weren't children encouraged tospy on their parents? Just because something is illegal doesn'tmean it's wrong and just because it's legal doesn't make itright. Wasn't Hitler elected to power according to German law?Weren't the laws persecuting Jews enacted by due process? The "War on Drugs" is now using our children as itseyes and ears, having failed with drug screenings and inaccuratepropaganda. It's not enough that they demand to analyze samplesof our hair and urine; not enough to fly helicopters over houseswith he at detectors to find hidden growrooms in attics; notenough that they seize utility records to see how muchelectricity we use. Now they deputize our kids to be their spies! All to coerce people into mindless compliance with racist lawsenacted long before most people now alive had even been born. The dark side of DARE. The dark side of our government. Thedark side of ourselves! Poster's note: There is an organization called Parents AgainstDare. email for address and phone # Hemp FACT #39-Police News Date: 95-02-21 11:12:11 EDT From: ADBryan Kinda got messed up on those numbers yesterday. It won'thappen again ;) This next series of posts were found while "surfing"and came from Police News. A World Gone Mad Part 1 By Ronald W. Rose United States Magistrate Judge In Police News Spring 94 Twenty years ago as a young prosecutor, my job was to putpeople in jail for dealing in drugs. As a result, many wereconvicted. I was absolutely certain that vigorous enforcement andlong jail terms was the way to go. I had every confidence thatthrowing resources, manpower, additional judges, mandatoryminimum sentences, life without parole, etc., etc., etc., wouldsoon solve the problem. Within a few months, I tried another drug case involving thelargest (at that time cocaine seizure in the history of Florida -23 pounds. It was front page news for days. These defendants werelikewise convicted and are probably still in prison. Has thissolved anything? In my opinion, absolutely nothing wasaccomplished, except I got to chalk up another victory at a costto the taxpayers of thousands of dollars each year, for clothingand feeding these dregs of society. Instead of seizing pounds of cocaine, we now seize buildingsfull of the stuff. The drug lords in South America are laughingat us all the way to the bank. They know that for every mule ormid-level dealer we take out, there are fifty more waiting totake their place. There is just so much money to be made that theslim chance of being caught is always worth the risk. Believe me,after twenty years as a prosecutor and judge, I can assure youthat we only catch the stupid ones. In disadvantaged neighborhoods, drug dealers are the localheroes. Every kid in the ghetto wants to be one. These childrensee it as a way out of their despair and poverty. They can makemore selling "crack" cocaine, in one afternoon, than ahard working person with a job can make in a week. I customarilyspeak with DEA agents who visit my office for search warrants.Their attitude is universally one of despair. They spend entirecareers believing each day they come to work that their presencemakes a difference, but the problem gets worse no matter whatthey do. It is getting worse in logarithmic proportions. Wealready have more people in jail, per capita, than any othercountry on earth (About five times as many per capita). We used to ignore the battlefield carnage of the street gangs,as they were only killing each other in their own neighborhoods.Now theses same gangs are coming out of their ghettos. They areincreasingly taking their act on the road. One new tactic is tocruise the freeways at night looking for wealthy individuals whothey can follow home, brutalize, rape and pillage, all for thesake of supporting a drug habit. Year after year we are treated to the same tired politicalsolutions. We now have a "drug czar." Whoop-de-do! Thefirst one got his picture taken a few hundred times, gave a fewspeeches, declared victory and resigned. We have spent decadesthrowing more judges into the system, adding prosecutors,investigators, building prisons (but not in my backyard), usingthe military, and in short spending an incredible bundle ofmoney. We have nothing to show for it but a bunch of photoopportunities where a few pounds of the stuff and some seizedcash are exhibited in grand style to demonstrate how well lawenforcement does its job. The carrot is always held out that weare turning the corner; there is a light at the end of thistunnel. Sure. By and large law enforcement is composed of men and womentruly dedicated to their profession - individuals who would laytheir lives on the line and often do. They have an unenviablejob. Yet their function has been reduced to stamping outcockroaches without any ability to get to the nest. A total wasteof time and energy. The drug lords love it. Part 2 of this article tomorrow Hemp FACT #40-Police News Date: 95-02-22 10:56:15 EDT From: ADBryan This next series of posts were found while "surfing"and came from Police News. A World Gone Mad Part 2 By Ronald W. Rose United States Magistrate Judge In Police News Spring 94 My solution is not politically correct and is certainly notacceptable to those upstanding politicians (oxymoron, sorry) wehave entrusted to make our decisions for us. It is, simply, todecriminalize the use and possession of drugs. Not onlydecriminalize them, hut actually give them away to anyone insaneenough to want them. Before anyone goes ballistic here, I do not advocate givingdrugs to children. This should always be a capital offense. Wehave to take the profit motive out of this Dante's Inferno thatis killing us like the Chinese "death from a thousandcuts." Prohibition did not work with alcohol and it is notworking with drugs. I harbor no illusions that this solution isperfect, but it is essentially the only one remaining. The Colombian cartels, the Jamaican gangs, the Ins Angelesstreet gangs, and our local drug lords make the Mafia look like atroop of girl scouts. The terror is coming to our shores, alittle bit at a time, and we just sit back and take it. Why can'twe realize what is happening to us before it is too late? If we used the money presently being squandered to lose thedrug war, funnel it into drug treatment and education, theproblem would largely disappear in a few years. There would be noprofit left. Drugs would be free, drug lords would lose theirmillions and millions in profits, corruption would all butdisappear (except maybe in the Savings and Loan industry), ourelderly would not feel trapped in their homes, and mostimportantly, our children would have a future free from thespecter of slaughter in their schools or having to endure thenightmare of addiction. The present generation of drug user isprobably beyond hope. Perhaps treatment will help, but we have tocut our loses and protect what is left. Coming Tomorrow to a Message Board near you: Our Drug Laws Have Failed By James P. Gray, U.S. Superior Court Judge Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B21-6IA087-000625-B016-216http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf41_50.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043525 text/html 36365HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:35:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:05 GMTContent-length: 36147 Hemp facts 41 - 50 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT #41-Police News Date: 95-02-23 11:11:31 EDT From: ADBryan Our Drug Laws Have Failed By James P. Gray, U.S. Superior Court Judge In Police News, Spring 94 What we are doing is not working We have focused ourattention, effort and resources upon intercepting heroin, cocaineand marijuana, and incarcerating those who sell and use them. Wehave been increasingly successful in seizing even largerquantities of these drugs, con`vichog greater numbers ofdefendants who are involved with them and sentencing thosedefendants to even longer terms in our jails and prisons. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the problem created by makingthese drugs illegal continues to grow. The only practicalresolution available to us is to revise our laws so that the useby adults of heroin, cocaine and marijuana, and the purchase byadults of these drugs generically at licensed commercialpharmacies is legal. Although under this proposal the purchase and use by adults ofheroin, cocaine and marijuana from the pharmacies would be legal,the sale, transfer or furnishing hy anyone of any quantity ofthese drugs to minors would he severely punished. Also, presentlaws concerning public drunkenness, driving a motor vehicle whileunder the influence, etc., would not he changed, and theunlicensed sale of these drugs would remain a violation of thelaw. The price of the drugs at the pharmacies would be set at anamount that would be continually adjusted so as to undercut thesales price of any illegal sale "on the street." Thiswould do away with the financial incentive to sell themillegally. Without a doubt, some people will continue to buy and abusethese drugs under this proposal. However, since there would be noincentive to "push" these drugs, they would never beadvertised or "on sale", and free samples would neverbe given to anyone, including non-users in order to get them"hooked", etc., the usage should not be above thepresent rate, and probably, after a possible initial surge, wouldbe materially reduced. All of the other results under this plan would be positive.Crime would he materially reduced. For example, there is noviolence now in the manufacture, distribution and purchase ofalcohol. Also, for those who would continue to burglarize insupport of their drug habit, they would do so less often becauseof the reduced price. Since part of the sales price at thepharmacies would be a tax, resources for the education about andtreatment of drug abuse would he substantially increased. Policeand society's other pressing needs. No new taxes would be neededfor jail or courthouse construction. Lower income areas would bereclaimed from the drug sellers. Monies obtained by juvenilegangs and other organized crime would be decreased. Violence andcorruption in our country and abroad would be significantlydecreased. Overdoses and other medical problems from the usage ofthese drttgs would be reduced because the Food and DrugAdministration would ensure that the strengths of these drugswould be accurately set forth on the labels. Drug treatment wouldbe encouraged because of warning labels outside, and literatureinside the packages, including toll-free numbers to call for moreinformation. Clean needles would reduce the spread of AIDS. Many good, honest and intelligent people may disagree withthis proposal on moral and/or other reasonable grounds. Inaddition, other people who have vested interests in the presentsystem may also oppose this plan. However, in my opinion, thechoice we have now is further to escalate our efforts and the spending of our limited resources in a losing or lost"war on drugs," or to face the reality that is upon usand legalize these drugs under a plan of regulated distributionsuch as this one. The sooner we make the change, the sooner wecan stop the bleeding. Tomorrow ??????????????? Stay Tuned Hemp FACT #41-Police News Date: 95-02-24 11:20:01 EDT From: ADBryan Quotables from Notables (was <--- that too cute or what)More stuff from Police News Views from the Front George Schultz, the former Secretary of State for Reagan, sayslegalization would destroy dealers profits and remove theirincentive to get young people addicted. He concedes, however,that such a proposal is unpopular. "Sometimes at a reception or cocktail party I advancethese views and people head for somebody else," saysSchultz. "Everybody is scared to talk about it. Nopolitician wants to say what I just said, not for a minute." Patrick Murphy: We over rely on law enforcement and interdiction. Only about30% of our spending is on treatment, prevention and education. InCanada the balance is about the exact opposite. Politicians get in a bidding war over who can talk thetoughest. It started when I was police commissioner of New Yorkwhen Rockefeller was governor. A lot of people have gone to prison since then and drug abusehas gotten worse. I think NAVPO's effort to show police officersanother way to look at this issue is a commendable and anenlightened approach. Jerry V. Willimas, Former Chief of Police, Washington D.C.: (Former) Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders' suggestion that westudy the idea of decriminalizing illicit drugs took me back tothe early 1970s, when people were talking seriously aboutdecriminalizing marijuana. One private conversation from thattime stuck in my mind. "Personally, I don't think thatmarijuana is any more dangerous than my favorite psychoactivedrug, the martini," the statement went. " But I'mafraid that decriminalization would send a signal to young peoplethat it is all right to use it." The words are not exact, for I did not make notes, but that isthe crux of what President Nixon said to me some two decades ago.Here we are 20 years later, and I wonder if anyone received thesignal Mr. Nixon was talking about. In 1992, local and state lawenforcement agencies reported nearly a million arrests for drugsviolations. Drug offenders make up one-third of the felonyconvictions in the state courts. In a nation where three-quartersof all robberies go unsolved and where violent offenders go freeon bail awaiting trial dates on overburdened court dockets, wechoose to clog the system with drug offenders. Coming Tomorrow -- Some actual Drug Usage Stats from TheNetherlands. Hemp FACT #42-Netherlands Date: 95-02-25 12:41:36 EDT From: ADBryan All Drug Warriors--Please Take Note--This is The Netherlandswhere soft drugs are legal and hard drug addicts are not thrownin jail--they are given treatment. This should go to add someproof to the argument that legalization SHOULD NOT lead to anincrease in drug usage. 1.2 DRUG MISUSE IN THE NETHERLANDS The Netherlands is one of the most densely populated countriesof Europe, with 15 million inhabitants. Appr. 90% lives in urbanareas. Amsterdam has 700,000 inhabitants. Estimate of total number of drug misusers/addicts Netherlands: 21,000 addicts. Sources: 1) assessments of municipalities; 2)recent research on all methadone programmes in the Netherlands(Bureau Driessen, 1990;1993). Amsterdam: 6,000 - 7,000 addicts. Source: capture/recapturemethod based on several data systems: Municipal Health Service,Municipal Police, local studies (1990)(1993).Prevalence/incidence_data_ Prevalence of drug use in 1990(population of 12 years and over inAmsterdam) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Ever used Used past year Used past month drug n % n % n % numsurv. drug ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 3010 67.7 2066 46.5 1899 42.7 4444 Tobacco 3820 86.0 3459 77.8 3073 69.1 4444 Alcohol 847 19.1 420 9.5 289 6.5 4442 Hypnotics 912 20.5 417 9.4 272 6.1 4439 Sedatives 1111 25.0 438 9.9 268 6.0 4442 Cannabis 245 5.5 57 1.3 17 0.4 4440 Cocaine 183 4.1 20 0.5 10 0.2 4440 Amphetamines 56 1.3 30 0.7 5 0.1 4442 Ecstasy 182 4.1 13 0.3 3 0.1 4430 Hallucinogens 42 0.9 6 0.1 2 0.0 4430 Inhalants 325 7.3 86 1.9 28 0.6 4425 Opiates 295 6.7 83 1.9 28 0.6 4425 Pharm. 48 1.0 5 0.1 1 0.0 4425 Heroin ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Source: Licit and illicit drug use in Amsterdam: report of ahousehold survey in 1990 on the prevalence of drug use among thepopulation of 12 years and over J.P. Sandwijk, P.D.A. Cohen, S.Musterd. Amsterdam: Instituut voor Sociale Geografie, Faculteitder Ruimtelijke Wetenschappen, Universiteit van Amsterdam. The table shows that even in Amsterdam (an urbanarea where drug use is always highest) cocaine use was very lowin 1990. The household survey will be repeated in 1994. Tomorrow--Haven't planned that far ahead yet. SuggestionsWelcome Hemp FACT #43-MoreNetherlands Date: 95-02-26 15:17:33 EDT From: ADBryan Sorry I'm late today. My wife decided the carpet cleaning wasmore important and I "had" to agree with her ;-) In keeping with the Netherlands theme from yesterday, I cameacross a column in today's Dallas Morning News Viewpoints sectionwritten by Joanne Jacobs who writes for the San Jose MercuryNews. Following are excerpts from her column. (Any typos are mine) Holland's Approach to Drugs Joanne Jacobs ...Contrary to what Americans think, drugs aren't legal in theNetherlands. It is just that drug laws aren't enforced. Marijuanaand hashish are tolerated, unless users or sellers causeproblems, in which case a coffeehouse may be closed down. Hard drug smugglers andvendors aren't tolerated. Occasionally, police sweep a neighborhood where drug use isout of hand. Otherwise addicts are offered help at rehabilitationor residential treatment centers. Addiction isn't criminal. A Baltimore grand jury recently came out for"medicalizing" rather than criminalizing--orlegalizing--drug abuse. It proposed offering users treatmentinstead of time behind bars. The idea is lifted from the Netherlands and other countries that try to reduce the harmcaused by drug abuse, rather than turning users into criminals. The grand jury concluded that legalizing drugs would increaseaddiction but suggested that doctors might be allowed toprescribe drugs to addicts. The goal isn't to make everyone cleanand sober--that isn't possible--but, rather, to lower the levelof street dealing and the crime that goes with it. "Removingthe profit from the drug trade may be the only way toresolve" the problem, the report says. According to the report, 80 percent of prisoners in Baltimorejails are in for drug-related crimes. Baltimore Circuit JudgeJoseph P. McCurdy Jr. had told the grand jury to considerdecriminalization, saying:"Many of us feel that the war ondrugs hasn't succeeded (my note: duhhh), that we are losingground with each passing day, that we are wasting resources andthat we have to look at the problem anew". ...The Dutch say that their relaxed approach hasn't boostedthe Dutch addiction rate and that marijuana use by teenagers isdeclining. Junkies steal car radios to finance their habits. Butthere is little violence. The streets are safe. The Dutch success with harm reduction policies may nottransplant easily to American society, which is more puritanicaland more violent. But we have to get serious about the trade-offsin confronting drug abuse. Protecting law-abiding citizens fromstreet violence should be our top priority. Making it harder fordrug abusers to harm themselves shouldn't take precedence. Medicalizing drugs wouldn't make the steets as safe as theyare in Amsterdam. But it could help. And it would make room inprisons for the real criminals. Talk to you folks manana, now back to my Web Browser (what atool) Hemp FACT #44-Interpol Date: 95-02-27 12:09:50 EDT From: ADBryan Following is a statement made by Raymond Kendall, secretarygeneral of the International Criminal Police Organization. Let'sall jump on his bandwagon. Head of Interpol advocates "drug"decriminalization On Wednesday, June 8, the head of the international policeagency Interpol stated his support for decriminalizing drugs. Raymond Kendall, secretary general of the InternationalCriminal Police Organization, responded to the British Police'scall to decriminalize drugs by saying, "I think we shouldaccept the reality of the situation... that there are many, manydrug users who are living in a situation of illegalityalready." Kendall's comment touched on one of the main arguments forending Marijuana Prohibition, namely that prohibition is notpreventing or dissuading people from consuming cannabis. Kendall also acknowledged that most British cannabis consumersare not even being dealt with by the law, probably because (1)most consumers go undetected by the law, and (2) many who areactually caught by the police are not arrested. This commenttouches on two more NORML tenets: (1) It is simply impossible toarrest and incarcerate every marijuana consumer, and (2)marijuana's illegality is causing widespread disrespect for thelaw and makes police the citizens 'enemies'. Many Supporters of Marijuana Prohibition repeatedly insistthat marijuana "legalization" will encourage people touse the drug. The truth is that millions are already consumingcannabis in complete disregard for the law. ... Civil Forfeiture is Government Theft --- DB 1.54/002827 * Origin: Elan Data Systems (1:147/1011.12) If anyone is interested in the internet sites I find all thisgood info, e-mail. Hemp FACT #45-Interpol#2 Date: 95-02-28 10:58:30 EDT From: ADBryan Another Interpol Article Date: 05-Oct-94 20:20 PDT RTw 10/04 Interpol head says drugs a threat to democracy By Melanie Goodfellow ROME, Oct 4 (Reuter) - The global drug problem is one of thebiggest threats to democracy and the scourge cannot be conqueredby law enforcement alone, one of the world's top police officialssaid on Tuesday. "I believe that the struggle between East and West hasbeen replaced by the world's struggle against drugs,"Interpol Secretary-General Raymond Kendall told reporters on thefinal day of the organisation's 63rd annual conference. "But there is an imbalance between the resources put intothe law enforcement side and that put into stemming the demand bywhich I mean the drug abuse side," he added. "Unless weaddress this we will not affect the problem." Kendall said that the United Nations' drugs commission hadrecommended a move away from law enforcement which hit supplierstowards an emphasis on more powerful health and educationcampaigns which would cut the demand for drugs. "Unfortunately there are very few countries which haveadopted these recommendations," added Kendall, whoseorganisation coordinates the work of 176 police forces worldwide. Over 500 top international policemen attended the six-dayconference at a police school on the outskirts of Rome. Money laundering, counterfeiting of currency and luxury goods,and environmental crime such as the dumping of toxic waste andtrafficking of nuclear products were also high on the agenda,Kendall said. Interpol also pledged to work closely with the Internationaltribunal set up to tackle crimes committed in former Yugoslavia. Next year's conference is to be held in Beijing in China,while Turkey and India are vying to host it in 1996. Interpol, which will have a budget of $28 million next year,elected Swedish national police commissioner, Bjorn Eriksson, asthe organisation's new chairman. "It's a great honour for me. There are few trade names sowell known as the concept of Interpol. Every little girl and boyin Sweden knows about Interpol because it's in all the detectivestories," the 48-year-old Eriksson. In his speech, Eriksson called for greater cooperation amongthe world's police forces and the need for public support. "It is vital that criminals should be unable to findrefuge in any part of the world," he said. REUTER Copyright Reuters America Inc. 1994. All rightsreserved. Poster's note: Drug addiction is a disease. There is nothingcriminal about the use of drugs. I can't help it if"uninformed" people are in charge of making laws andthe lawmakers that are "informed" are too"chicken" (haven't used that expression in a long time,but it seemed to fit) to do anything about it. Hemp FACT #46-Cancer Date: 95-03-01 12:19:13 EDT From: ADBryan Back to the medical stuff again. If you have cancer or knowsomeone that does, please read the following article. A quote from the July 6-12, 1991 issue of the Economist Drugs can be medicinal or recreational: marijuana is both. Fornearly 20 years advocates of its medicinal use- to relieve thenausea of chemotherapy, to treat glaucoma and to help AIDSpatients gain weighthave fought in the American courts to havethe drug reclassified so that doctors can prescribe it. Currentlymarijuana is grouped with the most disapproved of drugs, such asLSD and heroin. The government argues it must remain so becauseit has no "currently accepted medical use intreatment". A new study by researchers at Harvard refutesthis. Mainly because of its effectiveness in treating the vomitingcommon among cancer patients during chemotherapy,tetrahydrocannibinol (THC), the main psychoactive ingredient inmarijuana, was approved for medical use in America in 1985. Asynthetic form of THC is sold in pill form under the trade nameMarinol; last year almost 100,000 doses were prescribed. Smokablemarijuana, however, is available to just 34 people through a"compassionate use" programme. To the confusion of manya police officer, these patients are given a supply of marijuanacigarettes rolled by government hands at a research farm inMississippi. Proponents claim that smoking marijuana works better thantaking oral THC. In 1988 Francis Young, a judge who examinesadministrative issues for the Drug Enforcement Agency,recommended that marijuana be reclassified on the ground that"current acceptance" of a drug is present if a"respectable minority" of doctors endorse it. Theadministration disagreed, claiming that the vast majority ofdoctors believe oral THC is as reliable and effective as smokablemarijuana and produces fewer side-effects. Enter Rick Doblin and Mark Kleiman, two drug-policyresearchers at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government. To testthe administrations thesis, they conducted a random survey ofmembers of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. Some 1,035responded, about 10% of America's oncologists. The results,published in the July 1st issue of the Journal of ClinicalOncology, surprised even Mr. Doblin and Mr. Kleiman; nearly halfof the respondents said they would prescribe smokable marijuanaif it were legal. Indeed 44% of them said they had, in effect,done so already by recommending it to one or more of theirpatients, despite the possibility of prosecution. Nearly two-thirds of the oncologists agreed that marijuana wasan effective anti-emetic, while 77% of the 157 who expressed apreference said that smokable marijuana is more effective thanoral THC. A majority said that marijuana was no worse thanMarinol in terms of producing bad side-effects. Adios for today. Back again manana. Hemp FACT #47-Notables Date: 95-03-02 12:25:41 EDT From: ADBryan This is a column called "Notable People forLegalization". This column was published in the Daily Texan,the student paper at The University of Texas. Most of thecolumnist's research info came from Internet sources. ********* Support swells for legal drugs Gabriel Demombynes TEXAN COLUMNIST In recent months, discussion of drug legalization has vaultedfrom the pages of High Times and obscure academic journals ontothe front page of The New York Times. Prominent people aretalking seriously about changing the direction of America's drugpolicy. The shift in sentiment can be traced to an effort begun a yearago in California. Several notable names gathered at StanfordUniversity's Hoover institution to draft and sign a letterdemanding a fresh look at drug policy. The original signatories included Nobel-laureate economistMilton Friedman, former Secretary of State George Shultz,Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke and about 20 others. Since the initial meeting, hundreds of doctors, businessmen,attorneys, educators, judges and members of the clergy havesigned the resolution. Among them are the mayors and policechiefs of San Francisco, Oakland and San Jose; 20/20correspondent Hugh Downs; and members of the California MedicalAssociation. On Feb. 27, The New York Times printed a similar proclamationby another Nobel laureate, Gabriel Garcia Marquez. He's convincedmore than 2,000 of his Latin American intellectual buddies tosign the statement declaring that we must "focus on thevarious ways in which legalization can be administered. Thismeans putting an end to the self-seeking, pernicious, useless warthat the consuming countries have inflicted on us." To protest the inanity of our drug policy, roughly 50 of thenation's 680 federal judges now refuse to accept drug cases. Oneresearcher surveyed 450 judges, prosecutors, and defenseattorneys and found that 95 percent believe "the drug warhas failed and more innovative measures are needed." The Feb. 28 Time included a pro-legalization column byrespected writer Barbara Ehrenreich. Surgeon General JoycelynElders says that we would "markedly reduce our crimerate" by legalizing drug use. The Economist last yeareditorialized in favor of legalization. Conservative punditWilliam Buckley has said, "If you had all the facts, youwould agree like me that marijuana should be legal." This political change has begun to gather momentum because theHoover signatories explicitly shied away from advocating aspecific new policy. Some favor merely making marijuana availablefor medical uses. Others want comprehensive drug legalization. All are part of the movement -- which has made for somestrange bedfellows. Just imagine Friedman phoning up GarciaMarquez: Friedman: "Gabriel, it's Milt. What's say you and me andJoy Elders get together to discuss this drug legalizationstuff?" Garcia Marquez: "Last night I awoke from the desperateslumber of a man who has tasted his lover's tears. In my bliss Ifelt a prescient understanding. Next Tuesday two men and a womanwill meet on the zocalo in San Cristobal. While passionate mendie on the streets in the name of revolution, the three friendswill sip cafe con leche and whisper their desires." Friedman: "OK, so I'll see you Tuesday. But you'rebuying. I don't carry any of that Mexican funny money." The curious coalition shows no sign of breaking up. A proposalnow being considered in Congress would charge a nationalcommission with recommending a new national drug policy. Theresolution has 17 co-sponsors in the House and five backers inthe Senate. Mark Smith, UT assistant professor of American studies andhistory, teaches a class in the "Cultural History of Alcoholand Drugs." He says the hardliners "have beendiscredited because they've been in power and their results havebeen absurd." It's already possible to talk about legalization withouthaving a "Dope Fiend" label pasted across one's chest. More tomorrow. Hemp FACT #48-AncientUse Date: 95-03-03 12:05:37 EDT From: ADBryan Another interesting article I came across. This stuff's beenaround for a LONG time. USE OF MARIJUANA IN ANCIENT TIMES The use of marijuana is as old as the history of man and datesto the prehistoric period. Marijuana is closely connected withthe history and development of some of the oldest nations onearth. It has played a significant role in the religions and cultures of Africa, theMiddle East, India, and China. Richard E. Schultes, a prominent researcher in the field ofpsychoactive plants, said in an article he wrote entitled"Man and Marijuana": "...that early man experimented with all plant materialsthat he could chew and could not have avoided discovering theproperties of cannabis (marijuana), for in his quest for seedsand oil, he certainly ate the sticky tops of the plant. Uponeating hemp the euphoric, ecstatic and hallucinatory aspects mayhave introduced man to an other-worldly plane from which emergedreligious beliefs, perhaps even the concept of deity. The plantbecame accepted as a special gift of the gods, a sacred mediumfor communion with the spiritual world and as such it hasremained in some cultures to the present." The effects of marijuana was proof to the ancients that thespirit and power of the god(s) existed in this plant and that itwas literally a messenger (angel) or actually the Flesh and Bloodand/or Bread of the god(s) and was and continues to be a holysacrament. Considered to be sacred, marijuana has been used inreligious worship from before recorded history. According to William A. Embolden in his book Ritual Use ofCannabis Sativa L, p. 235: "Shamanistic traditions of great antiquity in Asia andthe Near East has as one of their most important elements theattempt to find God without a vale of tears; that cannabis playeda role in this, at least in some areas, is born out in thephilology surrounding the ritualistic use of the plant. WhereasWestern religious traditions generally stress sin, repentance,and mortification of the flesh, certain older non-Westernreligious cults seem to have employed Cannabis as a euphoriant,which allowed the participant a joyous path to the Ultimate;hence such appellations as "heavenly guide". According to "Licit and Illicit Drugs" by theConsumer Union, page 397-398: "Ashurbanipal lived about 650 B.C., but the cuneiformdescriptions of marijuana in his library "are generallyregarded as obvious copies of much older texts." Says Dr.Robert P. Walton, an American physician and authority onmarijuana, "This evidence serves to project the origin ofhashish back to the earliest beginnings of history." Berry interesting. Hemp FACT #49-DeathRates Date: 95-03-04 12:17:06 EDT From: ADBryan The following was posted to the Newsgroup alt.drugs Part 1 From: glo@globox.Eng.Sun.COM (Gary Owens) Newsgroups: alt.drugs Subject: Re: Death RATES among recreational drug users. Death RATES among recreational drug users. The exact numbers vary, depending on the source and theirmethodology. I have presented several sets of numbers here. Ingeneral you will see that the vast amount of money/energy/etc.applied to "illicit" drugs is quite misplaced if one iscounting deaths or death rate per user. You may have access inyour library to things like the Center for Disease ControlMortality and Morbidity reports and yearly summaries. The lastone I looked at listed 800 something deaths a year for aspirin(and more for acetominephin (sp?) and ibuprofen) - verses 0 forcannabis (hemp/pot/marijuana/...). ============ (on the back cover of The Emperor Wears No Clothes) "HowDangerous is Marijuana in Comparison to Other Substances?"Number of American Deaths per year that result directly orprimarily from the following (selected) causes nationwide,according to World Almanacs, Life Insurance Actuarial (death)Rates, and the last 18 years of the U.S. Surgeon General'sReports. Tobacco....................................340,000 to 395,000 Alcohol (not including 50% of all highway deaths and 65% of all murders).....125,000+ Aspirin (including deliberate overdose).... 180 to 1,000+ Caffeine (from stress, ulcers and triggering irregular heartbeats, etc.)........ 1,000 to 10,000 'Legal' drug overdose (deliberate or accidental) from legal, prescribed or patent medicines and/or mixing with alcohol e.g. Valium/alcohol... 14,000 to27,000 Illicit drug overdose (deliberate or accidental) from all illegal drugs................................ 3,800 to5,200 marijuana (including overdose)........................... 0(zero) ------------ The Emperor Wears No Clothes by Jack Herer available from: H.E.M.P. Publishing 5632 Van Nuys Blvd suite 210 Van Nuys CA 91401 (213) 392-1806 ============ >from Thinking About Drug Legalization by James Ostrowski Cato Institute Paper # 121, May 25, 1989 $2.00 to order or for information, write Policy Analysis Cato Institute 224 Second St. SE Washington DC 20003 pg 47 reprinted without permission (I didn't find"Copyright..." or circled-C, but they did say tocontact them... I guess if you want to reprint the whole thing -what the hey - at $2.00 for 64 pages why reprint, just buy thewhole thing from them! [ my (glo's) the posters notes in [] - glo] [ glo note: *xxx* used in place of underlines - glo] =============== pg 47 Table 4 presents the estimated per capita death rates for eachdrug. (While a number of people have died as a result ofmarijuana *enforcement*, there are apparently no confirmed deathstraceable to marijuana *use*.) The figures for cocaine and heroinhave been adjusted downward, in accordance with the previousanalysis, to include only those deaths due to drug use per se.The unadjusted death rate for these drugs is in parentheses. Estimated Per Capita Death Rates by Drugs ---------------------------------------------------------- Drug Users Deaths per Year Deaths per 100,000 ---------------------------------------------------------- Tobacco 60 million 390,000 (a) 650 alcohol 100 million 150,000 (b) 150 Heroin 500,000 400 (c) 80 (400) Cocaine 5 million 200 (c) 4 (20) ---------------------------------------------------------- (a) "Reducing the Health Consequences of Smoking: 25Years of Progress" Surgeon General's Report (1989). References "b" and "c" on following post. Hemp FACT #49-Pt2DeathRates Date: 95-03-04 12:19:25 EDT From: ADBryan These are references from the previous post. (b) Estimates vary greatly, depending upon whether all healthconsequences, or only those traditionally associated withalcoholism, are considered. The Fifth Special Report to the U.S.Congress on Alcoholism and Health from the Secretary of Healthand Human Services contains two references indicating a deathtoll of 200,000: The report states, first, that alcohol"plays a role in 10% of all deaths in the UnitedStates," which comes to about 200,000 deaths each year. P.vi. It further states that present estimates of the death tollfrom alcohol abuse are as high as 93.2 per 100,000. Ibid., p. x.This ratio translates into a total of about 210,000. (c) These figures were determined as follows: Drug AbuseWarning Network (DAWN) heroin and cocaine fatalities for 1984,1985, and 1986 were averaged. The number of suicides wassubtracted. The figures were discounted to account for deaths inwhich both heroin and cocaine played a role. Since DAWN coversabout one-third of the nation's population but almost all majorurban areas where drug use florishes, totals were doubled toarrive at yearly estimates of 2,000 for heroin deaths and 1,000for cocaine deaths. Finally, these figures were dis-counted by 80percent in accordance with the analysis presented in the text ========== end of table 4, pg 47====================== Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B21-7IA087-000625-B016-247http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf51_60.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043540 text/html 41428HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:35:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:56 GMTContent-length: 41210 Hemp facts 51 - 60 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT #51-1 Usage Pt.2 Date: 95-03-06 11:16:33 EDT From: ADBryan This here information ain't about none of that maryjeewannastuff, but I found it interesting. Maybe you will too. Ipersonally feel it goes to show that people that are addicted tosubstances are going to do them come hell or high water. Theothers try it and say adios. I'm sure the "drugwarriors" can make something else out of these FACTS. Theymight as well. They never seem to come up with any on there own. National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information Preliminary Estimates from the 1993 National Household Surveyon Drug Abuse Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Office of Applied Studies U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Public HealthServices 1993 National Household Survey Cocaine Use In 1992, an estimated 1.3 million Americans were currentcocaine users. This represents 0.6 percent of the population aged12 and older. The number of cocaine users did not change between 1992 and1993. It had been 5.3 million in 1985 (2.7 percent of thepopulation) and 1.9 million in 1991 (0.9 percent). Thisrepresents a significant decrease in use between 1985 and 1993and between 1991 and 1993. There were an estimated one-half million (476,000, or 0.2percent of the population) frequent cocaine users in 1993.Frequent use, defined as use on a weekly basis during the pastyear, was not significantly different than in 1992, when therewere an estimated 642,000. Since this measure of frequent cocaineuse was first estimated in 1985, no significant increases ordecreases have been detected by the NHSDA. It should be notedthat these estimates are subject to large sampling error andpotentially large nonsampling error. However, the estimated number of occasional cocaine users(people who used in the past year but less often than monthly)has sharply declined from 8.1 million in 1985 to 3.0 million in1993. The estimated number of current crack users was less thanone-half million in 1993 and there has been no indication of anyincreases or decreases in crack use since 1991. Approximately 60 percent of current cocaine users were age18-34 in 1993. As in the past, the rate of current cocaine use in1993 was highest among 18-25 year olds (1.5 percent) and 26-34year olds (1.0 percent). Rates were 0.4 percent for 12-17 yearolds and 0.4 percent for adults aged 35 and older. The past month cocaine use prevalence rate for the 12-17 yearold age group has decreased from 1.4 percent in 1985 to 0.4percent in 1993. Similarly, 18-25 year olds have seen dramaticdecreases in prevalence from 7.5 percent in 1985 to 1.5 percentin 1993. For the 26-34 year old age group, the rate has declinedfrom 5.9 percent to 1.0 percent. The rate for persons age 35 andolder has shown variability but remained virtually unchangedsince 1985 (0.4 percent in 1985 and 0.4 percent in 1993). The 1993 survey continued to show higher rates of cocaine useamong blacks (1.3 percent) and Hispanics (1.1 percent), comparedwith whites (0.5 percent) Fifty-nine percent of current cocaineusers were white in 1993. Blacks comprised 23 percent andHispanics another 16 percent. During the peak year for cocaineuse (1985), whites comprised 80 percent, blacks comprised 13percent, and Hispanics comprised 6 percent. Significant decreases in use have been seen since 1985 forwhites (2.8 percent in 1985 and 0.5 percent in 1993), blacks (3.1percent in 1985 and 1.3 percent in 1993) and Hispanics (2.3percent in 1985 and 1.1 percent in 1993). (See Appendix 2 for discussion of trends among blacks.) Men continued to have a higher rate of current cocaine usethan women (0.9 percent and 0.4 percent, respectively, in 1993). Significant decreases occurred for both men and women between1985 and 1993. Rates had been 3.6 percent for men and 1.9 percentfor women in 1985. In 1993 the rate of cocaine use was 0.8 percent in the Westregion, 0.7 in the Northeast region, 0.6 percent in the Southregion, and 0.5 percent in the North Central. Continued Hemp FACT #50-Drug Usage Date: 95-03-05 11:58:37 EDT From: ADBryan The next series of posts will deal with the actual numbers ofpeople using and abusing (and there IS a difference) of variousdrugs, both legal and illegal. It was obtained fromhttp://WWW.health.org. Maybe someday AOL will have their WebBrowser ready to go :-) Until then..... National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug InformationPreliminary Estimates from the 1993 National Household Survey onDrug Abuse Substance Abuse and Mental Health ServicesAdministration Office of Applied Studies U.S. Department ofHealth and Human Services Public Health ServiceAdvance Report Number 7 July 1994 1993 National Household Survey Marijuana and Hashish Use In 1993, an estimated 9 million Americans were currentmarijuana or hashish users. This represents 4.3 percent of thepopulation aged 12 and older. Marijuana is by far the most prevalent drug used by illicitdrug users, as about three quarters (77 percent) of current (pastmonth) illicit drug users were marijuana or hashish users in1993. Because of this, trends and demographic differences aregenerally similar for any illicit use and marijuana/hashish use.The number of marijuana and hashish users did not change between1992 and 1993 (9.0 million in both years). However, use hasdeclined significantly since 1985, when there were 17.8 millionusers. The rate of use declined from 9.3 percent in 1985 to 4.3percent in 1993. Frequent use of marijuana, defined as use on a weekly basisduring the past year, remained unchanged from 1991 through 1993at about 5.1 million weekly users (2.4 percent of the populationin 1993) but was significantly lower than in 1985, when therewere an estimated 8.9 million weekly users (4.6 percent of thepopulation). Trends in marijuana and hashish use by age group are similarto the trends for any illicit drug use. Rates for 12-17 yearolds, 18-25 year olds and 26-34 year olds were significantlylower in 1993 than for those age groups in 1985. There was nochange in the rate of use for the 35 and older age group. The rate of marijuana use for 12-17 year olds was 4.0 percentin 1992 and 4.9 percent in 1993. While this is not astatistically significant change, it is still noteworthy giventhe recently reported increase in marijuana prevalence among highschool students surveyed in the Monitoring the Future Study(levels of prevalence are different in the two studies because ofdifferent populations covered and different methodologies used).In fact, the NHSDA did find a significant increase in past yearmarijuana use among youths (8.1 percent in 1992 and 10.1 percentin 1993). Differences in rates of use between demographic groups werealso similar to the differences described above for any illicitdrug. Later on folks and have a great day, even you grammone ;) Hemp FACT #51-2 Usage Pt.2 Date: 95-03-06 11:18:17 EDT From: ADBryan ....continued from previous post. Since 1985, the difference in cocaine prevalence by populationdensity has narrowed. The rate dropped significantly in largemetropolitan areas from 3.6 percent in 1985 to 0.6 percent in1993, in small metropolitan areas from 2.3 percent to 0.7percent, and in non metropolitan areas (1.7 percent in 1985 and0.6 percent in 1993). Current cocaine use rates remained highly correlated witheducational status. Among 18-34 year olds in 1993, those who hadnot completed high school had a current use rate of 2.4 percent.The rate was 1.3 percent among those with just a high schooleducation, 0.7 percent among those with some college, and 0.8percent among college graduates. 66 percent of all adult (age 18 and older) current cocaineusers in 1993 were employed either full or part time. Thisreflects an estimated 0.8 million adult employed cocaine users. The rate of current cocaine use was highest among theunemployed, as 2.3 percent of unemployed adults were currentcocaine users in 1993, compared with only 0.7 percent of employedadults. Hemp FACT #52-1 Usage Pt.3 Date: 95-03-07 12:47:01 EDT From: ADBryan It seems like education has reduced the number of people usingAlcohol part-time. The full time drunks remain the same. Thesestatistics somewhat match the stats for the decrease in Cocaineuse. I conclude that the laws make no difference; only educationand drug abuse awareness work. Remember not all people that usealcohol are alcoholics. Not all people that use drugs are drugaddicts. And there are even people that only smoke cigaretteswhen they are drinking and are not cigarette addicts. 1993 National Household Survey Alcohol Use Estimates of the prevalence of alcohol use are presented interms of current use (any use in the past month) and heavy use.For this report, heavy alcohol use is defined as drinking five ormore drinks per occasion on 5 or more days in the past month. In 1993, approximately 103 million persons age 12 and over hadused alcohol in the past month, which was about 50 percent of thetotal population age 12 and older. About 11 million Americans(5.3 percent of the population) were heavy drinkers. Alcohol usage was significantly lower in 1993 than it was in1985 when 58 percent of the population (112 million) weredrinkers. Heavy alcohol use has changed little since 1985 whenthe rate was 6.3 percent and there were an estimated 12 millionheavy drinkers. Heavy drinkers were more likely to be illicit drug users in1993. Of the 11 million heavy drinkers, 25.5 percent (3 millionpeople) were current illicit drug users. Among the 92 millioncurrent drinkers who were not heavy drinkers, the rate of illicitdrug use was 7.6 percent. For 1993, the rate of drinking remained highest among the 18to 34 year olds with about 61 percent having used alcohol in thepast month. Current usage was 18 percent in the 12-17 age groupand 49 percent in the 35 and older age group in 1993. In 1993there were 3.8 million current drinkers in the 12-17 age group,16.8 million drinkers in the 18-25 age group, 23.3 milliondrinkers in the 26-34 age group, and 58.8 million drinkers age 35and older. The 18-34 year olds also had the highest rate of heavydrinking at 8.5 percent, with 10.4 percent of 18-25 year olds and7.3 percent of 26-34 year olds reporting heavy drinking. Following a decrease from 20.3 percent in 1991 to 15.7 percentin 1992, the rate of current alcohol use among 12-17 year oldsincreased to 18.0 percent in 1993. The 1993 rate is significantlylower than it had been in 1985, when it was 31.0 percent. In 1993, whites continued to have the highest rate of alcoholuse at 53 percent. Rates for Hispanics and blacks were 46 percentand 38 percent, respectively. Rates of heavy use showed nostatistically significant differences by race/ethnicity (5.7percent for whites, 5.2 percent for Hispanics, and 4.3 percentfor blacks). Fifty-seven percent of men were past month alcohol users,compared with 43 percent of women. Men were much more likely thanwomen to be heavy drinkers (9.5 and 1.5 percent, respectively). Asignificant decrease in heavy drinking among women was seen in1993. The rate of current alcohol use was 54 percent in theNortheast and West regions, 49 percent in the North Centralregion, and 45 percent in the South in 1993. Heavy alcohol usewas 5.9 percent in Northeast and North Central, 5.5 percent inthe West and 4.5 percent in the South. Since 1985, the difference in current alcohol prevalence bypopulation density has narrowed. The rate dropped significantlyin large metropolitan areas from 65 percent in 1985 to 52 percentin 1993 and in small metropolitan areas from 56 percent to 48percent, but has not significantly dropped in non metropolitanareas. Heavy alcohol use has dropped significantly in largemetropolitan areas (6.7 percent in 1985 and 4.1 percent in 1993)but changed little in other areas. The rate of heavy drinking waslower in large metropolitan areas than in small metropolitanareas (6.2 percent) and non metropolitan areas (6.5 percent) in1993. Continued.... Hemp FACT #52-2 Usage Pt.3 Date: 95-03-07 12:48:40 EDT From: ADBryan ...Continued In contrast to the pattern for illicit drugs, the higher thelevel of educational attainment, the more likely was the currentuse of alcohol. In 1993, 64 percent of adults with collegedegrees were current drinkers, compared with only 36 percent ofthose having less than a high school education. Among 18-34 yearolds, 69.6 percent of those with college degrees were currentalcohol users in 1993, compared with only 49.6 percent of thosehaving less than a high school education. However, the rate ofheavy alcohol use in this age group was 4.4 percent among thosewho had completed college and 11.3 percent among those who hadnot completed high school. Hemp FACT #53-2 Usage Pt.4 Date: 95-03-08 11:40:17 EDT From: ADBryan What's this? Do I see a trend? It appears that education isworking on lowering the rate of tobacco use in this country. Thesame as it has done with alcohol. And the same as it has donewith other drug abuse. If money were spent on education insteadof proping-up Columbian drug lords, we may see a greater decreasein drug abuse. For those that say the laws have reduced drug use,I say bollocks. The laws didn't stop anyone from starting theirillicit drug use. 1993 National Household Survey Tobacco Use An estimated 50 million Americans were current smokers in1993. This represents a smoking rate of 24 percent for thepopulation age 12 and older. Current cigarette smoking declined from 26 percent to 24percent between 1992 and 1993. In 1985, 31 percent of thepopulation, or 60 million Americans, had been smokers. Current smokers are more likely to be heavy drinkers andillicit drug users. Among smokers, the rate of heavy alcohol use(five or more drinks on five or more days in the past month) was11.1 percent and the rate of current illicit drug use was 12.3percent. Among nonsmokers, only 3.4 percent were heavy drinkersand 3.5 percent were illicit drug users. An estimated 6.1 million Americans (2.9 percent of thepopulation) were current users of smokeless tobacco in 1993. The rate of smoking was highest in the 26-34 year old agegroup (30 percent) and the 18-25 year old age group (29 percent).Rates were 24 percent among adults age 35 and older and 10percent among 12-17 year olds. More than 2 million 12-17 yearolds were smokers in 1993. Decreases in smoking since 1985 were apparent in every agegroup. However, rates for 12-17 year olds appear to havestabilized, as the rate was 9.6 percent in both 1992 and 1993. In 1993, no significant differences in smoking rates byrace/ethnicity were found. Smokeless tobacco use was moreprevalent among whites (3.5 percent) than among blacks (1.5percent) or Hispanics (1.1 percent). Among adults, men had somewhat higher rates of smoking thanwomen, but rates of smoking were similar for males and femalesaged 12-17. Since 1985, the rate of smoking decreased among men (35percent in 1985 and 26 percent in 1993), and among women (28percent in 1985 and 22 percent in 1993). The rate of smokeless tobacco use was significantly higher formen than for women in 1993 (5.9 percent vs. 0.2 percent). Over 96percent of smokeless tobacco users were men. The rate of current cigarette use was similar across regions,ranging from 23 percent to 25 percent in 1993. The rate ofsmoking was 22 percent in large metropolitan areas, 25 percent insmall metropolitan areas, and 28 percent in non metropolitanareas. Level of educational attainment was correlated with tobaccousage. Thirty-five percent of adults who had not completed highschool smoked cigarettes, while only 15 percent of collegegraduates smoked. Hemp FACT #54- FAMM Date: 95-03-09 11:16:14 EDT From: ADBryan This is an organization I came across. I will try to have thenext series of posts dedicated to the atrocities of minimumsentences. Remember, "Send a druggie to jail-- set a rapistfree". FAMM: Families Against Mandatory Minimums Who's on drugs? You or the Feds? The feds think you should spend more time in jail for doingdrugs than for rape or attempted murder. In 1986, Congress passed laws that forced judges to give fixedsentences to offenders convicted of drug crimes. In 1988,Congress added certain gun crimes to the list of offenses thatrequired a minimum number of years behind bars, without parole.These mandatory minimum sentences were determined solely by theweight of the drugs, or the presence of a firearm at a drugcrime. The sentences are mandatory in that judges must impose them,regardless of the defendant's role in the offense, hisculpability, likelihood of rehabilitation, or any othermitigating factors. Many states have adopted similar mandatoryminimum sentences (MMS). What's wrong with MMS? Mandatory minimum sentences undermine the basic traditions ofjustice that Americans have enjoyed for 200 years -- that thepunishment fit the crime. They strip judges of their power to determine the appropriatesentence based on all of the facts of the case. They givelow-level offenders longer sentences than most king-pins. Theonly way to avoid a mandatory minimum is to provide substantialassistance to the prosecutor in exchange for a reduction insentence. Unlike the organizer, the minor player seldom hasvaluable information to trade for a lower sentence. Sending low-level offenders to prison overloads the prisonsystem and costs taxes payers a lot of money. They createsentencing disparities based on race. Studies show that Blacksand Hispanics are more likely to receive mandatory minimumsentences more often than whites charged with the same crime.(U.S. Sentencing Commission Report, 1991). If anyone is interested in this organization, let me know andI will either post or e-mail address. Hemp FACT #55- FAMM2 Date: 95-03-10 11:05:59 EDT From: ADBryan I will get to atrocities later. This post may be a day lateand a dollar short, but it may not be too late to act on thesemandatory minimums. Maybe some "staffers" would be kindenough to pass this own to their bosses. :-) HELP Families against Mandatory Minimums REFORM MARIJUANA SENTENCING LAWS NOW! Congress has established that a marijuana plant be treated as1000 grams of marijuana for sentencing purposes involving 50 ormore plants even though it is stated in the SentencingGuidelines, that a mature marijuana plant produces on the averageonly 100 grams. In cases less than 50 plants the guidelines use100 grams per plant or the actual weight of useable marijuana,whichever is greater. This is a 10 to 1 disparity and it iswrong! PROPOSED MARIJUANA AMENDMENT The U.S. Sentencing Commission is considering various proposedamendments to the Federal U.S. Sentencing Guidelines. Among theseis Amendment #37, which proanging the weight equivalency formarijuana plants from the current 1000 grams per plant to 100grams per plant. Comment is sought on all proposals,alternatives, and any other aspect of the Sentencing Guidelines,policy statements, and commentary. If you support a change in the weight equivalency of marijuanaplants, please WRITE the Commission voicing your support ofAmendment #37. They are accepting Public Comment until March 7, 1995 (SorryI'm late with this). The Commission will make recommendations to Congress beforeMay 1, 1995. Some forms of communication are more powerful thanothers. Following is a list of the most effective to the leasteffective means of impressing members of the U.S. SentencingCommission. IT IS CRITICAL for people on the "outside"to do at least ONE of the Following: Best - Handwritten letter in your own words. 2nd Best - Handwritten letter copied from a form letter. 3rd Best - A form letter with your signature, address, and thedate in your own handwriting. 4th Best - A petition with the signatures and addresses of asmany people as possible. TELL them that the current guidelines are arbitrary andirrational. REQUEST that they be changed to 100 grams per plant ratherthan 1000 grams per plant now in effect. ASK that the mandatory minimums be changed to reflect this. REQUEST that the changes to the guidelines be madeRETROACTIVE. Also ask your friends to write. Send your comments to: U.S. Sentencing Commission One Columbus Circle, NE Suite 2-500 Washington, D.C. 20002-8002 ATTN: Public Information : Amendment #37 Hemp FACT #56- FAMM3 Date: 95-03-11 10:40:05 EDT From: ADBryan The Cost of Mandatory Minimums What do mandatory minimums cost taxpayers? The average cost of incarcerating a federal inmate is $20,804per year. (Bureau of Prisons, 1994) Sixty-two percent of federal inmates are drug offenders, andhalf of them are first offenders. (Bureau of Prisons testimony,May 1993). To feed, clothe, house, and guard the 54,000 federal druginmates costs taxpayers over $1.1 billion per year. The Bureaus of Prisons budget increased by 1,350 percentbetween 1982 and FY 1993, to a total of $2.3 billion annually.(National Drug Control Strategy Budget Summary, 1992). States spend more of their budgets on justice programs (6.4%)than on housing and he environment (3.8) and nearly as much as onhealth care (8.9%) (Bureau of Justice Statistics, September,1992). It costs more to send a person to prison for four years thanit does to send him to a private university for four years,including tuition, fees, room, board, books and supplies. (Bureauof Prisons). Poster's Note: What is not mentioned here is the fact that most of the peopleserving mandatory minimums were gainfully employeed before theymet their fate. This adds untold millions in lost tax revenuefrom these "inmates". Personally, I feel these peopleshould be let out and put back to work. I'm tired of my taxdollars going to support them when they are quite capable ofsupporting themselves. I rather the govt. spend my money feedingkids or helping the sick instead of on able-body ready-to-workpeople that were the victim of the govt's misguided logic.Remember, "Send a druggie to jail, set a rapist free." I wish the best to those in California. I hope your computersfloat and that sunny days return. Hemp FACT #57- Atl. Mthly-1 Date: 95-03-12 14:56:12 EDT From: ADBryan I am reposting this article from Atlantic Monthly. Just somemore enlightenment for those that need some. For those that are,it makes for some interesting reading. 8/94: REEFER MADNESS (part 1) 8/94: REEFER MADNESS Marijuana has not been de facto legalized, and the war ondrugs is not just about cocaine and heroin. In fact, today, whenwe don't have enough jail cells for murderers, rapists, and otherviolent criminals, there may be more people in federal and stateprisons for marijuana offenses than at any other time in U.S.history. by Eric Schlosser Copyright 1994, The Atlantic Monthly. In the state of Indiana a person convicted of armed robberywill serve about five years in prison; someone convicted of rapewill serve about twelve; and a convicted murderer can expect tospend twenty years behind bars. These figures are actually higherthan the figures nationwide: eight years and eight months inprison is the average punishment for an American found guilty ofmurder. The prison terms given by Indiana judges tend to be long,but with good behavior an inmate will serve no more than half thenominal sentence. Those facts are worth keeping in mind when considering thecase of Mark Young. At the age of thirty-eight Young was arrestedat his Indianapolis home for brokering the sale of 700 pounds ofmarijuana grown on a farm in nearby Morgan County. Young wastried and convicted under federal law. He had never before beencharged with drug trafficking. He had no history of violentcrime. Young's role in the illegal transaction had been that of amiddleman--he never distributed the drugs; he simply introducedtwo people hoping to sell a large amount of marijuana to threepeople wishing to buy it. The offense occurred a year and a halfprior to his arrest. No confiscated marijuana, money, or physicalevidence of any kind linked Young to the crime. He was convicted solely on the testimony of co-conspiratorswho were now cooperating with the government. On February 8,1992, Mark Young was sentenced by Judge Sarah Evans Barker tolife imprisonment without possibility of parole. (Poster'sNote--Remember, "Send a druggie to jail--set a rapist free") There was so much talk in the 1970s about thedecriminalization of marijuana, and the smoking of marijuana isso casually taken for granted in much of our culture, that manypeople assume that a marijuana offense these days will rarelylead to a prison term. But in fact there may be more people inprison today for violating marijuana laws than at any other timein the nation's history. Calculations based on data provided bythe Bureau of Prisons and the United States Sentencing Commissionsuggest that one of every six inmates in the federal prisonsystem--roughly 15,000 people--has been incarcerated primarilyfor a marijuana offense. The number currently being held in stateprisons and local jails is more difficult to estimate; aconservative guess would be an additional 20,000 to 30,000. AndMark Young's sentence, though unusual, is by no means unique. Adozen or more marijuana offenders may now be serving lifesentences in federal penitentiaries without hope of parole; ifone includes middle-aged inmates with sentences of twenty orthirty or forty years, the number condemned to die in prison mayreach into the hundreds. Other inmates--no one knows how many--are servinglife sentences in state correctional facilities across thecountry for growing, selling, or even possessing marijuana. More of this article to come over the next several days. Hemp FACT #58- Atl. Mthly-2 Date: 95-03-13 11:09:49 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 2. REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. The phrase "war on drugs" evokes images of Colombiancartels and inner-city crack addicts. In many ways that is amisperception. Marijuana is and has long been the most widelyused illegal drug in the United States. It is used here morefrequently than all other illegal drugs combined. According toconservative estimates, one third of the American population overthe age of eleven has smoked marijuana at least once. More than17 million Americans smoked it in 1992. At least three millionsmoke it on a daily basis. Unlike heroin or cocaine, which mustbe imported, anywhere from a quarter to half of the marijuanaused in this country is grown here as well. Although popularstereotypes depict marijuana growers as aging hippies in northernCalifornia or Hawaii, the majority of the marijuana nowcultivated in the United States is being grown in the nation'smidsection--a swath running roughly from the Appalachians west tothe Great Plains. Throughout this Marijuana Belt drug fortunesare being made by farmers who often seem to have stepped from apage of the old Saturday Evening Post. The value of America'sannual marijuana crop is staggering: plausible estimates start at$4 billion and range up to $24 billion. In 1993 the value of thenation's largest legal cash crop, corn, was roughly $16 billion. Marijuana has well-organized supporters who campaign for itslegalization and promote its use through books, magazines, andpopular music. They regard marijuana as not only a benignrecreational drug but also a form of herbal medicine and aproduct with industrial applications. Marijuana's opponents areequally passionate and far better organized. They considermarijuana a dangerous drug--one that harms the user's mental,physical, and spiritual well-being, promotes irresponsible sexualbehavior, and encourages disrespect for traditional values. Atthe heart of the ongoing bitter debate is a hardy weed that cangrow wild in all fifty states. The two sides agree that countlesslives have been destroyed by marijuana, but disagree about whatshould be blamed: the plant itself, or the laws forbidding itsuse. The war on drugs embraced by President Ronald Reagan beganlargely as a campaign against marijuana organized by conservativeparents' groups in the late 1970s. After more than a decade inwhich penalties for marijuana offenses had been reduced at boththe state and federal levels, the laws regarding marijuana weremade much tougher in the 1980s. More resources were devoted totheir enforcement, and punishments more severe than thoseadministered during the "reefer madness" of the 1930sbecame routine. All the legal tools commonly associated with thefight against heroin and cocaine trafficking--civil forfeitures,enhanced police search powers, the broad application ofconspiracy laws, a growing reliance on the testimony ofinformers, and mechanistic sentencing formulas, such as mandatoryminimums and "three strikes, you're out"--have beenemployed against marijuana offenders. The story of how Mark Younggot a life sentence reveals a great deal about the emergence ofthe American heartland as the region where a vast amount of thenation's marijuana is now grown; about the changing compositionof the federal prison population; and about the effects of thewar on drugs, a dozen years after its declaration, throughoutAmerica's criminal-justice system. Underlying Young's tale is asimple question: How does a society come to punish a person moreharshly for selling marijuana than for killing someone with agun? (Poster's Note--Remember: "Send a druggie, set aMURDERER free) Hemp FACT #59- Atl. Mthly-3 Date: 95-03-14 11:26:26 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 3 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. The Plant in Question "Marijuana" is the Mexican colloquial name for aplant known to botanists as Cannabis sativa. In various forms ithas long been familiar throughout the world: in Africa as"dagga," in China as "ma," in Northern Europeas "hemp." Although cannabis most likely originated inthe steppes of central Asia, it now thrives in almost anyclimate, spreading like milkweed or thistle, crowding outneighboring grasses and reaching heights of three to twenty feetat maturity. Marijuana has been cultivated for at least 5,000years; it is one of the oldest agricultural commodities not grownfor food. The stalks of the plant contain fibers that have beenwoven for millennia to make rope, canvas, and paper. Cannabis isdioecious, spawning male and female plants in equal proportion.The flowering buds of the female--and to a lesser extent those ofthe male--secrete a sticky yellow resin rich with cannabinoids,the more than sixty compounds unique to marijuana. Several ofthem are psychoactive, most prominentlydelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Lester Grinspoon, an associate professor of psychiatry atHarvard Medical School, believes that marijuana will someday behailed as a "miracle drug," one that is safe,inexpensive, and versatile. In his book Marihuana, the ForbiddenMedicine (1993) Grinspoon provides anecdotal evidence thatsmoking marijuana can relieve the nausea associated withchemotherapy, prevent blindness induced by glaucoma, serve as anappetite stimulant for AIDS patients, act as an anti-epileptic,ward off asthma attacks and migraine headaches, alleviate chronicpain, and reduce the muscle spasticity that accompanies multiplesclerosis, cerebral palsy, and paraplegia. Other doctors thinkthat Grinspoon is wildly optimistic, and that no "crudedrug" like marijuana--composed of more than 400chemicals--should be included in the modern pharmacopoeia. Theypoint out that effective synthetic drugs, of precise dosage andpurity, have been developed for every one of marijuana'spotential uses. Dronabinol, a synthetic form of delta-9-THC, hasbeen available for years, though some clinical oncologists findit inferior to marijuana as an anti-nausea agent. There have beenremarkably few large-scale studies that might verify or disproveGrinspoon's claims. Nevertheless, thirty-six states allow themedicinal use of marijuana, and eight patients are currentlyreceiving it from the Public Health Service. According toGrinspoon, the federal government has always been far moreinterested in establishing marijuana's harmful effects than indiscovering any of its benefits, while major drug companies havelittle incentive to fund expensive research on marijuana. AsGrinspoon explains, "You cannot patent this plant." The long-term health effects of chronic marijuana use, andmarijuana's role as a "gateway" to the use of otherillegal drugs, are issues surrounded by great controversy.Marijuana does not create a physical dependence in its users, butit does create a psychological dependence in some. People whosmoke marijuana are far more likely to experiment later withother psychoactive drugs, but no direct cause-and-effectrelationship has ever been established. Delta-9-THC is highlylipid-soluble and has a half-life of five days, which means thatit diffuses widely throughout the human body and remains therefor quite some time: an occasional user can fail a urine testthree days after smoking a single joint, and a heavy user maytest positive after abstaining from marijuana for more than amonth. Delta-9-THC's persistence within various cells and vitalorgans (also a characteristic of Valium, Thorazine, and quinine)suggests that it could have the ability to exert subtly harmfuleffects; few have yet been proved. Part 4 Tomorrow Hemp FACT #60- Atl. Mthly-4 Date: 95-03-15 11:14:05 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 4 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Studies of lifelong heavy marijuana users in Jamaica, Greece,and Costa Rica reveal little psychological or physiologicaldamage. Much more research, however, needs to be done in theareas of cognition, reproduction, and immunology. Adolescentusers in particular would be at risk if marijuana were found tohave pernicious systemic effects. Some studies have shown thatshort-term memory deficiencies in heavy smokers, thoughreversible, may endure long after the cessation of marijuana use.Other studies have demonstrated in vitro and in laboratoryanimals that marijuana may have a mild immunosuppressive effect,but no study has conclusively linked delta-9-THC to immune-systemchanges in human beings. Well-publicized horror stories from the1970s--that marijuana kills brain cells, damages chromosomes, andprompts men to grow breasts--were based on faulty research. Smoking marijuana does seem to damage the pulmonary system, insome of the ways that inhaling tobacco smoke does. In a study ofpeople who have smoked four or five joints a day for more thanten years, the physician Donald P. Tashkin, of the University ofCalifornia at Los Angeles Medical Center, has found substantialevidence that marijuana smoke can cause chronic bronchitis,changes in cells of the central airway which are potentiallypre-cancerous, and an impairment in scavenger-cell function whichcould lead to a risk of respiratory infection. A joint seems todeliver four times as much carcinogenic tar as a tobaccocigarette of the same size. Tashkin expects that some heavymarijuana users will eventually suffer cancers of the mouth,throat, and lungs, although none of his research subjects has yetdeveloped a malignancy. Oddly enough, the more potent strains ofmarijuana may prove less dangerous, since less of them needs tobe smoked. There is much less disagreement about the short-term healtheffects of marijuana. According to the physician Leo Hollister, aformer president of the American College ofNeuropsychopharmacology, who now teaches at the University ofTexas, the occasional use of marijuana by a healthy adult posesno greater risks than the moderate consumption of alcohol. For avariety of reasons, however, marijuana should not be smoked byschizophrenics, pregnant women, and people with heart conditions. Although the misuse of over-the-counter medications such asaspirin, acetaminophen, and antihistamines each year killshundreds of Americans, not a single death has ever been crediblyattributed directly to smoking or consuming marijuana in the5,000 years of the plant's recorded use. Marijuana is one of thefew therapeutically active substances known to man for whichthere is no well-defined fatal dose. It has been estimated that aperson would have to smoke a hundred pounds of marijuana a minutefor fifteen minutes in order to induce a lethal response. Part 5. Manana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B21-8IA087-000625-B016-275http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf61_70.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043556 text/html 39512HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:35:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:46 GMTContent-length: 39294 Hemp facts 61 to 70 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT #61- Atl. Mthly-5 Date: 95-03-16 11:27:48 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 5 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Criminalized, Decriminalized, Recriminalized The first American law pertaining to marijuana, passed by theVirginia Assembly in 1619, required every farmer to grow it. Hempwas deemed not only a valuable commodity but also a strategicnecessity; its fibers were used to make sails and riggings, andits by-products were transformed into oakum for the caulking ofwooden ships. Virginia, Pennsylvania, and Maryland eventuallyallowed hemp to be exchanged as legal tender, in order tostimulate its production and relieve Colonial money shortages.Although a number of the Founding Fathers, including GeorgeWashington and Thomas Jefferson, later grew hemp on theirestates, there is no evidence that they were aware of the plant'spsychoactive properties. The domestic production of hempflourished, especially in Kentucky, until after the Civil War,when it was replaced by imports from Russia and by other domesticmaterials. In the latter half of the nineteenth century marijuanabecame a popular ingredient in patent medicines and was soldopenly at pharmacies in one-ounce herbal packages and inalcohol-based tinctures as a cure for migraines, rheumatism, andinsomnia. The political upheaval in Mexico that culminated in theRevolution of 1910 led to a wave of Mexican immigration to statesthroughout the American Southwest. The prejudices and fears thatgreeted these peasant immigrants also extended to theirtraditional means of intoxication: smoking marijuana. Policeofficers in Texas claimed that marijuana incited violent crimes,aroused a "lust for blood," and gave its users"superhuman strength." Rumors spread that Mexicans weredistributing this "killer weed" to unsuspectingAmerican schoolchildren. Sailors and West Indian immigrantsbrought the practice of smoking marijuana to port cities alongthe Gulf of Mexico. In New Orleans newspaper articles associatedthe drug with African-Americans, jazz musicians, prostitutes, andunderworld whites. "The Marijuana Menace," as sketchedby anti-drug campaigners, was personified by inferior races andsocial deviants. In 1914 El Paso, Texas, enacted perhaps thefirst U.S. ordinance banning the sale or possession of marijuana;by 1931 twenty-nine states had outlawed marijuana, usually withlittle fanfare or debate. Amid the rise of anti-immigrantsentiment fueled by the Great Depression, public officials fromthe Southwest and from Louisiana petitioned the TreasuryDepartment to outlaw marijuana. Their efforts were aided by alurid propaganda campaign. "Murder Weed Found Up and DownCoast," one headline warned; "Deadly Marijuana DopePlant Ready For Harvest That Means Enslavement of CaliforniaChildren." Harry J. Anslinger, the commissioner of theFederal Bureau of Narcotics, at first doubted the seriousness ofthe problem and the need for federal legislation, but soon hepursued the goal of a nationwide marijuana prohibition withenormous gusto. In public appearances and radio broadcastsAnslinger asserted that the use of this "evil weed" ledto killings, sex crimes, and insanity. He wrote sensational magazine articles with titles like"Marijuana: Assassin of Youth." In 1937 Congress passedthe Marijuana Tax Act, effectively criminalizing the possessionof marijuana throughout the United States. A week after it wentinto effect, a fifty-eight-year-old marijuana dealer named SamuelR. Caldwell became the first person convicted under the newstatute. Although marijuana offenders had been treated lenientlyunder state and local laws, Judge J. Foster Symes, of Denver,lectured Caldwell on the viciousness of marijuana and sentencedhim to four hard years at Leavenworth Penitentiary. Part 6. Tomorrow Hemp FACT #62- Atl. Mthly-6 Date: 95-03-17 11:17:16 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 6 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Harry J. Anslinger is a central figure in the history ofAmerican drug policy. He headed the Federal Bureau of Narcoticsfrom its inception through five presidential Administrationsspanning more than three decades. Anslinger had much in commonwith his rival, J. Edgar Hoover. Both were conservative,staunchly anti-communist proponents of law and order who imbuednascent federal bureaus with their own idiosyncracies (Poster'sNote: The big question is --Did they both wear skirts?).Anslinger did not believe in a public-health approach to drugaddiction; he dismissed treatment clinics as "morphinefeeding stations" and "barrooms for addicts." Inhis view, strict enforcement of the law was the only properresponse to illegal drug use; he urged judges to "jailoffenders, then throw away the key." Anslinger's outlook wasconsistent with that of most Americans, though his opinionsproved more resistant to new scientific evidence. When the NewYork Academy of Medicine--after years of research--issued areport in 1944 concluding that marijuana use did not causeviolent behavior, provoke insanity, lead to addiction, or promoteopiate use, Anslinger angrily dismissed its authors as"dangerous" and "strange." America's drug problem often seemed the work of foreignpowers: during the Second World War, Anslinger accused theJapanese of using narcotics to sap America's will to fight; a fewyears later he asserted that Communists were attempting the sameploy. The Boggs Act, passed by Congress at the height of theMcCarthy era, specified the same penalties for marijuana andheroin offenses--two to five years in prison for first-timepossession. As justification for the long sentences contained inthat act and in the Narcotic Control Act, which followed in 1956,Anslinger stressed marijuana's crucial role as a"stepping-stone" to narcotics addiction. Like Hoover,he maintained dossiers on well-known entertainers whose behaviorseemed un-American. Anslinger disliked jazz and kept a specialfile, "Marijuana and Musicians," filled with reports onband members who played with Cab Calloway, Louis Armstrong, LesBrown, Count Basie, Jimmy Dorsey, and Duke Ellington, amongothers. For months Anslinger planned a nationwide roundup ofpopular musicians--a scheme that was foiled by the inability ofFBN agents to infiltrate the jazz milieu. Although Anslinger'sopposition to drug use was both passionate and sincere, he madeone notable exception. In his memoir, The Murderers, Anslingerconfessed to having arranged a regular supply of morphine for"one of the most influential members of Congress," whohad become an addict. Anslinger's biographer believes that addictwas Senator Joseph R. McCarthy (Poster's Note: Look at his(McCarthy's) personallity. It FITS). By 1962, when Harry J. Anslinger retired, many states hadpassed "little Boggs Acts" with penalties for marijuanapossession or sale tougher than those demanded by federal law. InLouisiana sentences for simple possession ranged from five toninety-nine years; in Missouri a second offense could result in alife sentence; and in Georgia a second conviction for sellingmarijuana to minors could bring the death penalty. As thepolitical climate changed during the 1960s, so did attitudestoward drug abuse. A series of commissions appointed byPresidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson repudiated some ofthe basic assumptions that had guided marijuana policy for morethan fifty years, denying a direct link between the drug andviolent crime or heroin use. As marijuana use became widespreadamong white middle-class college students, there was areappraisal of marijuana laws that for decades had imprisonedpoor Mexicans and African-Americans without much public dissent. Hemp FACT #63- Atl. Mthly-7 Date: 95-03-18 11:09:51 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 7 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Drug-abuse policy shifted from a purely criminal-justiceapproach to one also motivated by interests of public health,with more emphasis on treatment than on punishment. In 1970 theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act finallydifferentiated marijuana from other narcotics and reduced federalpenalties for possession of small amounts. As directed byCongress, President Richard Nixon appointed a bipartisancommission to study marijuana. In 1972 the Shafer Commissionissued its report, advocating the decriminalization of marijuanafor personal use--a recommendation that Nixon flatly rejected.Nevertheless, eleven states, containing a third of the country'spopulation, decriminalized marijuana in the 1970s, and most otherstates weakened their laws against it. President Jimmy Carterendorsed decriminalization, and it seemed that long prisonsentences for marijuana offenders had been consigned to thenation's past. But they had not. One of the seminal events in the creation ofthe modern American anti-drug movement was a backyard barbecueheld in Atlanta, Georgia, during August of 1976. In the aftermathof their daughter's birthday party, Ron and Marsha Manatt combedthrough the wet grass in their pajamas, at one in the morning,with flashlights, finding dozens of marijuana roaches,rolling-paper packets, and empty bottles of Mad Dog 20/20fortified wine discarded by their twelve- and thirteen-year-oldguests. Alarmed by these discoveries, the Manatts gathered localparents in their living room and formed what was soon known asthe Nosy Parents Association, a group dedicated to preventingteenage drug use. Marsha Manatt wrote to Robert DuPont, the headof the National Institute on Drug Abuse; he helped arrange herintroduction to Thomas Gleaton, a professor of health educationat Georgia State University. There soon arose the Parents'Resource Institute for Drug Education and the National Federationof Parents for Drug-Free Youth, two organizations backed by topofficials at NIDA and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)which would exert tremendous influence on the nation's drugpolicies. Thousands of other parents' groups soon formednationwide, and Ross Perot helped launch the Texans' War onDrugs. Marijuana use seemed epidemic: a survey in 1976 found that oneout of twelve high school seniors smoked pot on a daily basis. Inthe 1960s the youth counterculture had celebrated marijuana'sreputation as a drug for outcasts and freaks. One Yippie leaderhad confidently predicted that the slogan of the comingrevolution would be "pot, freedom, license." Theconservative parents' groups took such words to heart andsimilarly invested marijuana with great meaning. Robert DuPont,who at NIDA had once supported decriminalization, later decriedthe "tumultuous change in values" among theyoung--their pursuit of pleasure, their lack of responsibility tosociety--and argued that "the leading edge of this culturalchange was marijuana use." Part VIII Tomorrow (or maybe Mon. if my computer at the houseis still screwed up. Plus it's gonna be in the upper 80's heretomorrow and I'm headed for the lake.) Hemp FACT #64- Atl. Mthly-8 Date: 95-03-20 11:33:54 EDT From: ADBryan Back again. Sure was nice at the lake. Now back to theAtlantic Monthly article. REEFER MADNESS -- Part 8 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. The election of Ronald Reagan to the presidency brought thewar on drugs to the White House. In June of 1982 President Reagansigned an executive order creating a new post in hisAdministration--head of the White House Drug Abuse PolicyOffice--and appointed a chemist, Carlton Turner, to the job.Turner had for many years directed the Marijuana Research Projectat the University of Mississippi, running the government's onlymarijuana farm. Turner believed that marijuana was an extremelydangerous drug--one that, among other things, might have thepower to induce homosexuality. In 1977 the DEA had acknowledgedthat decriminalization was a policy worth considering; threeyears later it called marijuana the most urgent drug problemfacing the United States. Richard Bonnie, a professor at theUniversity of Virginia Law School who was an influential memberof the Shafer Commission staff, believes that advocates ofmarijuana-law reform were pushed out of the mainstream by thegrowing stridency and power of the parents' groups. Politicalmoderates soon abandoned the issue. Amid their silence,philosophies of "zero tolerance" and "useraccountability" revived the notion that what drug offendersdeserved most was punishment. The Comprehensive Crime Control Actof 1984, the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, and the Anti-Drug AbuseAmendment Act of 1988 raised federal penalties for marijuanapossession, cultivation, and trafficking. Sentences were to bedetermined by the quantity of the drug involved;"conspiracies" and "attempts" were to bepunished as severely as completed acts; and possession of ahundred marijuana plants now carried the same sentence aspossession of a hundred grams of heroin. The Caprice of Geography Marijuana is currently classified as a Schedule I controlledsubstance, implying that it has a high potential for abuse, noofficially accepted medicinal uses, and no safe level of useunder medical supervision. Heroin, LSD, and peyote are otherSchedule I drugs; cocaine and phencyclidine (PCP) are listed inSchedule II, allowing doctors to prescribe them. Under federallaw it is illegal to buy, sell, grow, or possess any amount ofmarijuana anywhere in the United States. Penalties for a firstoffense range from probation to life imprisonment, with fines ofup to $4 million, depending on the quantity of marijuanainvolved. Moreover, it is illegal to use the U.S. Postal Serviceor other interstate shippers for the advertisement, import, orexport of such marijuana paraphernalia as roach clips, waterpipes, and, in some instances, cigarette papers--a crime that canlead to imprisonment and fines of up to $100,000. Undercivil-forfeiture statutes real estate, vehicles, cash,securities, jewelry, and any other property connected with amarijuana offense are subject to immediate seizure. The federalgovernment need not prove that the property was bought with theproceeds of illegal drug sales, only that it was involved in thecommission of a crime--that marijuana was grown on certain landor transported in a particular vehicle. Property may be forfeitedeven after a defendant has been found innocent of the offense,since the burden of proof that applies to people--"beyond areasonable doubt"--does not apply in accusations againstinanimate objects. Property can be forfeited without its owner'sever being charged with a crime. On top of fines, incarceration,and forfeiture, a convicted marijuana offender may face therevocation or denial of more than 460 federal benefits, includingstudent loans, small-business loans, professional licenses, andfarm subsidies. In international smuggling cases the offender'spassport can be revoked. Part 9 of this never ending saga tomorrow. Hemp FACT #65- Atl. Mthly-9 Date: 95-03-21 11:28:03 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 9 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. State marijuana laws were also toughened during the 1980s andnow vary enormously. Some states classify marijuana with drugslike mescaline and heroin, while others give it a separate legalcategory. In New York state possessing slightly less than anounce of marijuana brings a $100 fine, rarely collected. InNevada possessing any amount of marijuana is a felony. In Montanaselling a pound of marijuana, first offense, could lead to a lifesentence, whereas in New Mexico selling 10,000 pounds ofmarijuana, first offense, could be punished with a prison term ofno more than three years. In some states it is against the law tobe in a room where marijuana is being smoked, even if you don'tsmoke any. In some states you may be subject to criminal chargesif someone else uses, distributes, or cultivates marijuana onyour property. In Idaho selling water pipes could lead to aprison sentence of nine years. In Kentucky products made of hempfibers, such as paper and clothing, not only are illegal butcarry the same penalties associated with an equivalent weight ofmarijuana. In Arizona, where marijuana use is forbidden, thecrime can be established by the failure of a urine test: a personcould theoretically be prosecuted in Phoenix for a joint smokedin Philadelphia more than a week before. Crossing an invisible state line with marijuana in your carcan result in vastly different punishments. If you are caughtwith three ounces of marijuana in Union City, Ohio, you willprobably be fined $100. But if you are caught in the town of thesame name literally across the road in Indiana, you could facenine months to two years in prison, a fine of up to $10,000, afelony record, suspension of your driver's license, forfeiture ofyour car, and charges of marijuana possession, of possession withintent to distribute, and of "maintaining a commonnuisance" (for the criminal use of an automobile). That onearrest in Indiana might cost you the $10,000 fine and at least$5,000 in legal fees, plus the value of your forfeited car. Wide discrepancies in punishment occur not just between states butalso from county to county within a given state. In La SalleCounty, Illinois, a first-time offender arrested with 300 poundsof marijuana might be sentenced to four months in boot camp.Sixty-five miles to the south, in McLean County, the same personconvicted of the same crime would more likely receive a prisonsentence of four to eight years. In 1992 more than 340,000 people were arrested nationwide forviolating marijuana laws. Almost three quarters of those arrestswere for simple possession, a crime that generally does not leadto incarceration. But possession of more than an ounce--roughlyequal to the amount of tobacco in a pack of cigarettes--is inmany states a felony. Conviction may lead to a few months or afew years behind bars and the loss of a house or a job. Peoplewho use marijuana as medicine must either buy it from drugdealers or grow it themselves, often in violation of the law.James Cox, a cancer patient in St. Louis, was found guilty ofgrowing marijuana and sentenced to fifteen years in prison; afterthe verdict both he and his wife attempted suicide. OrlandFoster, an AIDS patient in North Carolina, served fifteen monthsfor growing marijuana; one of his cellmates served less time forkilling a woman. Now on probation, Foster must either give upmarijuana and risk losing weight, or violate the terms of hisrelease and risk going back to prison. Part 10 Tomorrow. If anyone wants this article in itsentirety, please email your request and specify text or MicrosoftWord format. Hemp FACT #66- Atl. Mthly-10 Date: 95-03-22 11:36:32 EDT From: ADBryan CAUTION--Reading this section may lead to a bad attitude. :-( REEFER MADNESS -- Part 10 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. In perhaps the most extraordinary case of this kind, JimMontgomery, a paraplegic immobilized from the waist down, whosmoked marijuana to relieve muscle spasms, was arrested in Sayre,Oklahoma, when sheriffs found two ounces of pot in the pouch onthe back of his wheelchair. Montgomery was tried and convicted in1992, by a jury, for possession of marijuana with intent todistribute, for possession of paraphernalia, for unlawfulpossession of a weapon during the commission of a crime (twohandguns inherited from his father, a police officer), and formaintaining a place resorted to by users of controlledsubstances. His sentence was life in prison, plus sixteen years.Both the judge and the local prosecutor were disturbed by thesentence chosen by the jury; the judge subsequently reduced it toten years. Montgomery spent ten months in a prison medical unit,where he developed a life-threatening infection, before beingreleased on bond. His appeal is now pending. "I'll never goback to that prison," he says. "I'd rather put a bulletin my head." His case has already cost him more than $30,000in legal fees. The government's effort to seize Montgomery'shome, shared with his widowed mother, proved unsuccessful. Oklahoma today has a well-deserved reputation for being theworst place in the United States to be caught with marijuana. OnJune 11, 1992, Larry Jackson, a small-time crook with a lengthyrecord of nonviolent offenses, was arrested at a friend's Tulsaapartment. On the floor near Jackson's right foot a policeofficer noticed a minuscule amount of marijuana--0.16 of a gram,which is 0.005644 of an ounce. Jackson was charged with felonypossession of marijuana, convicted, and given a life sentence. InOklahoma City, Leland James Dodd was given two life sentences,plus ten years, for buying fifty pounds of marijuana fromundercover officers in a "reverse sting." Oklahoma isnot alone in handing out life sentences for buying marijuana fromthe government. In Tuscaloosa County, Alabama, William StephenBonner, a truck driver, was sent away for life withoutpossibility of parole after state narcotics agents deliveredforty pounds of marijuana to his bedroom. Raymond Pope, aresident of Georgia, was lured to Baldwin County, Alabama, in1990 with promises of cheap marijuana; he bought twenty-sevenpounds from local sheriffs in a reverse sting, was convicted, andwas sentenced to life without possibility of parole. Pope'scriminal record consisted of prior convictions for stealingtelevisions and bedspreads from Georgia motels. He is nowimprisoned 400 miles from his family. He has three youngchildren. Although the penalties for buying, selling, or possessingmarijuana are often severe, the penalties for growing it can beeven more severe. In Iowa cultivating any amount can lead to afive-year prison sentence, in Colorado to an eight-year sentence,in Missouri to a fifteen-year sentence. In the state of Virginiathe recommended punishment for growing a single marijuana plantis a prison term of five to thirty years. Part 11 Tomorrow. Hemp FACT #67- Atl. Mthly-11 Date: 95-03-23 11:15:07 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 11 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. A Farm in Morgan County In November of 1988 Claude Atkinson and Ernest Montgomery metat a Denny's near the airport in Indianapolis to discuss settingup a large-scale marijuana-growing operation. Atkinson, afifty-nine-year-old Indiana native, was by all accountscharismatic and highly skilled at cultivating marijuana.Ostensibly a used-farm-implements dealer, Atkinson had organizedhuge marijuana farms in Illinois, Indiana, and Kentucky. Hisknowledge of growing techniques was much more impressive than hisskill at eluding capture. In 1984 law-enforcement authorities hadlinked him to a pot farm in Paragon, Indiana; the following yearhe was caught growing marijuana with artificial light in animmense Indianapolis warehouse; and in 1987 a deer hunterstumbled upon thousands of his marijuana plants in an Indianafield. Claude Atkinson had cut a series of deals with thegovernment, informing on others after each arrest and servingbrief terms in prison, where he recruited employees for futureventures. Now fresh out of custody and broke, he was ready to getback into the growing business. Ernest Montgomery was anunemployed truck driver in his early forties who wanted to makebig money. They agreed to form a partnership, with Montgomerysupplying the capital and Atkinson the expertise. Soon aftertheir meeting Claude Atkinson went to the Indiana statehouse andformed a dummy corporation, R.P.Z. Investments, using one of hismany pseudonyms, Arno Zepp. That fall Atkinson supervised the construction of a large"grow room" in the basement of a secluded cabin thatMontgomery owned in Gosport. Montgomery enlisted his youngerbrother, Jerry, a gravedigger with a slight drinking problem, tohelp with the task. Together the three men drilled holes in theconcrete floor for drainage, built a cooling system, assembledballasts and reflectors, suspended grow lights with thousand-watthalide bulbs from the ceiling, and planted marijuana seeds insmall pots. They installed a generator so that the operationwould not be detected through an incongruously high electricbill. Montgomery invited David Lee Haynes, a young lumberyardripsaw operator from Louisville, Kentucky, and the son of an oldfriend, to come live at the cabin and tend the plants. Afterdigging graves all day, Jerry Montgomery would visit the darkbasement in the evenings. By spring the group had approximately12,500 seedlings of marijuana, contained in sixteen plywoodflats. What they needed next was a farm. In May of 1989 Martha Brummett, an elderly woman hard ofhearing, agreed to lease her farmhouse halfway between Eminenceand Cloverdale, in Morgan County, to R.P.Z. Investments. It camewith about forty acres, a barn, and an option to buy. MarthaBrummett was surprised that when a "Charlie Peters"arrived to sign the lease, the woman with him remained in the carand never entered the house. Nevertheless, Brummett innocentlysigned over her farm for $10,000 in cash, which she then tookstraight to her bank. Part 12 next Hemp FACT #68- Atl. Mthly-12 Date: 95-03-24 10:41:43 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 12 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. A Farm in Morgan County (cont.) After Ernest Montgomery and his wife, Cindy, obtained thehouse, David Haynes moved into it, to babysit the operation,having obtained a sham rental agreement from R.P.Z. Investmentsas a legal buffer against what was about to happen on the land.The group plowed and tilled the field, fertilized it, and plantedcorn. Once the corn had reached a good height, they plantedmarijuana, hiding it amid the stalks. Over the summer they walkedthe fields, "sexing" the marijuana--eliminating all themales. The females, left unpollinated, would produce a muchhigher level of delta-9-THC in their buds, and would thus becomea much more valuable crop: sensimilla. In late September, beforethe corn leaves turned golden, the group harvested the marijuanaand then cured it in the barn for two weeks and cut it into"books" about a foot wide and three feet long. Thebooks were hauled into the farmhouse or driven to the cabin inGosport for manicuring: the stems, orphan leaves, and fan leaveswere separated from the precious buds. So far the operation hadgone smoothly. Soon there would be about 900 pounds ofhigh-quality marijuana to sell. Now the group needed buyers.Ernest Montgomery thought that Mark Young, a man whom he had meta few times with Cindy, might know the right people to call. Mark Young was thirty-six and had been smoking marijuana on adaily basis since his late teens. He grew up in Christian ParkHeights, a middle-class neighborhood on the east side ofIndianapolis. His father left the family when Mark was two; heand his sister, Andrea, were raised by their mother, Mary, whoworked as a waitress or a hostess to pay the bills. Young was awillful, stubborn, charming boy, always getting into trouble. Heseemed to have, throughout his pranks and petty thefts, the sortof bad luck that is almost uncanny--often he would get caughtwhile his friends got away. Young dropped out of high schoolafter a year, became a father at the age of sixteen, married togive the child his name, divorced, worked as a carpet-layer,washed dishes, laid concrete, tended bar, sold used cars, andrebuilt Harley-Davidson motorcycles. He kept an album filled withpictures of his favorite Harleys. He knew all the local bikergangs, but remained apart; Young seemed to get into enoughtrouble on his own. He dated many attractive women, lived a fastlife, and slowly acquired a criminal record--nothing violent,just misdemeanors for driving without a license, for possessionof marijuana, for taking a girlfriend's stereo. He also earnedtwo felony convictions: one at the age of twenty-one, forattempting to pass a fraudulent prescription, and the other atthe age of twenty-five, for possession of a few amphetamines andQuaaludes. Each felony brought a suspended sentence, probation,and a one-dollar fine. When Ernest Montgomery called, Mark Youngwas rebuilding motorcycles, selling used cars wholesale, andlooking for new income. He had held a financial interest in anumber of massage parlors, which were now closed. His dream wasto get some money, move to Florida, build custom Harleys, andwork part-time as a fishing guide on Lake Okeechobee. Part 13 comin' atcha tommory Hemp FACT #69- Atl. Mthly-13 Date: 95-03-25 10:52:57 EDT From: ADBryan And now -- Hot of the Cut 'n Paste Press it's REEFER MADNESS -- Part 13 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. A Farm in Morgan County-cont. Claude Atkinson, Ernest Montgomery, and Mark Young met in thefamily room of Young's house in early October. The price of themarijuana was set at $1,200 a pound. If Young found buyers, hewould receive a commission of $100 for every pound sold. Not longafter, Atkinson and Montgomery returned to Young's house, wherethey were introduced to two men from Florida who were acting onbehalf of someone seeking to buy all the marijuana the groupcould supply. Atkinson offered a hundred pounds a week; themarijuana was still being manicured and could not be deliveredall at once. Within days a man from New York arrived at Young'shouse with $120,000 in a cardboard box. While the New York buyerinspected the marijuana at Montgomery's Indianapolis house,Atkinson remained behind, counting the money. The deal wascompleted, and Young was handed $10,000 in cash. The New Yorkbuyer eventually paid for 600 more pounds, in transactions thattook place at Montgomery's house. By Christmas all thehigh-quality marijuana was gone, the last 200 pounds eitherdistributed to workers who had helped with various tasks or soldto an acquaintance of Montgomery's in Illinois. The town of Eminence, Indiana, is about twenty-five miles westof Indianapolis. Near its only intersection is a Citizens Bank, asmall church, a convenience store, and a post office built ofconcrete blocks and painted royal blue. The town boasts 180inhabitants and looks as though it has not seen much newconstruction since the interval between the world wars. There arecountless small towns like Eminence across the Midwest, slightlyfaded but still eulogized as the heartland of this country. Toreach the farm used by R.P.Z. Investments, one must leaveEminence on a narrow country road and then turn onto a dirt roadand drive for a long stretch, past fields of fifty to a hundredacres where corn, hay, soybeans, and wheat are grown, past modestfarms with collapsing outbuildings, an occasional trailer home,and rusted cars on cinder blocks. Farther west the land is flat,the acreage of each plot enormous, but here the countryside feelslong settled, with hedges and trees marking boundary lines. Aftercleaning out the barn, Atkinson and Montgomery allowed the leaseon Martha Brummett's property to expire. The one-story farmhousehas been painted beige by its latest occupants; the barn remainsbright red. There is a porch on the front of the house, anenclosed patio on one side, and a swing set on the lawn. Lookingat this humble farm, one would hardly believe that more than amillion dollars' worth of marijuana had been grown there in thespace of about three months. Hemp FACT #70- Atl. Mthly-14 Date: 95-03-27 11:19:14 EDT From: ADBryan O.K. Back again. Got the hail damage claim to my car turned inthis a.m. Whatta storm we had in Dallas Saturday. Looked like ahurricane blowing through. REEFER MADNESS -- Part 14 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Inside The Industry Steve White looks like an ordinary Indiana farmer, withslightly unkempt hair, a graying beard, teeth stained bynicotine, and strong hands. The day we met, he wore an oldflannel shirt, gray pants, and battered work boots. His voice hasa low rural twang. He seems to belong in an old pickup, ridingthrough a vast dusty field. White is the Indiana coordinator forthe Drug Enforcement Administration's CannabisEradication/Suppression Program. Of his twenty-six years infederal law enforcement, twenty-one have been spent in Indiana,working undercover. He knows the state backwards andforwards--has walked it, driven it, and flown low over it everysummer, scrutinizing hills and farmland. Nobody ever thinks he isa cop. He gets along well with rural people. He grew up in NewYork City and attended P.S. 20; his father worked on Wall Street.He travels to London each year to indulge a passion forcollecting English antique toy soldiers. Special Agent Whitewould be an implausible character in any work of fiction. Savvy,articulate, self-deprecating, and blunt, he defies easycategorization and probably knows more about growing marijuanathan most of the people he arrests. Claude Atkinson was an extremely talented grower with a"good product," White says--and "a supersalesman." The operation near Eminence was of average sizefor its time. It is difficult, even from the air, to findmarijuana hidden in corn: "Remember North byNorthwest?" White says. "Cary Grant in the cornfield?We don't have cornfields like that anymore, with wide rows. Theybroadcast the stuff, and it's just thicker than hell."Sometimes patches of marijuana will be distributed here and thereamid hundreds of acres. Discovering one may not lead to theothers. Growers tend to be much more concerned about hiding theirmarijuana from thieves than from the government. A ruralunderworld has emerged around marijuana, secretive and unknown tooutsiders; booby traps are laid in cornfields. There is now agroup of people in the Marijuana Belt, known as "patchpirates," who earn a living solely by stealing marijuanafrom growers, whom they follow. White acknowledges that the boobytraps are usually aimed at patch pirates, not his own men;nevertheless, fishhooks strung at eye level on fishing line arenondiscriminatory. Outdoor marijuana farms have become smaller inthe past few years, though last summer White's agents found"60,000 beautiful plants" on a farm in TippecanoeCounty. The case proved a disappointment: the DEA never found thegrower. "What I want is bodies," White explains."I don't give a damn about the dope--that's just somethingwe're going to burn up." His job involves a dailycat-and-mouse pursuit of marijuana growers, with both sideschanging tactics, adopting new technologies, and often, after anarrest, amicably discussing tricks of the trade. White harbors noanimosity toward his prey. "These are not heroin or cocainedealers," he says. "They're not violent. I find a lotof them personally engaging." What they are doing is againstthe law, however, and White loves tracking them down. He has hada good deal of success lately. In 1992 Indiana led the nation infederal arrests for marijuana. Last year it ranked third. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B21-9IA087-000625-B017-1http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf71_80.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043610 text/html 39415HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:36:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:35 GMTContent-length: 39197 Hemp facts 71 - 80 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT #71- Atl. Mthly-15 Date: 95-03-28 10:50:19 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 15 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Inside The Industry--cont. Take a map of the United States and draw a circle, includingwithin its circumference Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan, withportions of Ohio to the east, Kentucky and Tennessee to thesouth, and Missouri, Iowa, and Nebraska to the west. The regionwithin that circle, Steve White believes, is producing themajority of the marijuana grown in the United States. Thehighest-quality marijuana is cultivated indoors on the WestCoast, but for sheer volume, no other area surpasses the U.S.heartland. White does not find this surprising. During the SecondWorld War the U.S. government encouraged farmers throughout theCorn Belt to plant almost 300,000 acres of marijuana, in thehopes of replacing fiber supplies from Asia which had been cutoff by the Japanese. The program, whose slogan was "Hemp forVictory," turned out to be a financial disaster and leftmarijuana growing wild throughout the region. Known as ditchweed,this marijuana now blankets tens of thousands of acres. For yearsit had a negligible delta-9-THC content, and was used mainly asfiller by drug dealers, but there is evidence that the ditchweedmay be cross-pollinating with the potent marijuana now cultivatedoutdoors. The same growing conditions and soil that are ideal forcorn are also ideal for marijuana. Most local sheriff'sdepartments employ only three to five officers, with moreimportant things to do than hunt for marijuana. And over the pastfifteen years there have been a lot of people with strongagricultural skills who have badly needed money--or have wantedmore of it than almost any other job in the region could provide.A bushel of corn sells for roughly $2.50, a bushel of manicuredmarijuana for about $70,000. White thinks that marijuana is thelargest cash crop in the United States, and if not the largest inIndiana, then right up there with corn and soybeans. Though he isproud of what his office has accomplished, White has noillusions: "There's more than we think." During the 1960s and early 1970s nearly all the marijuanasmoked in the United States was imported, mainly from Mexico,Colombia, and Jamaica. Domestic production rose in reaction to anumber of events. The spraying of an herbicide, paraquat, overMexican marijuana fields, begun in 1975, created uneasiness aboutthat nation's product. Successful interdiction efforts by theU.S. Border Patrol and the Coast Guard made smuggling marijuanamore difficult. And the tougher legal sanctions againsttrafficking led some foreign drug dealers to switch frommarijuana, a bulk agricultural good with a strong smell, tococaine, which is easier to conceal and brings a far higherreturn per pound. As marijuana prices rose, American growersresponded to consumer demand. Mark A.R. Kleiman, an associateprofessor at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government,finds this to be a rare instance in which protectionism actuallyworked. The anti-drug movement and the burgeoning Americanmarijuana crop led the DEA to devote more of its resources tomarijuana investigations. Kleiman estimates that by 1988 federalanti-marijuana efforts totaled approximately $970 million--about20 to 25 percent of all federal drug-enforcement expenditures. By1992 federal convictions for marijuana outnumbered those forheroin, crack cocaine, and LSD combined. The DEA's CannabisEradication/Suppression Program began in 1979 in two states,California and Hawaii; it now looks for marijuana-farmingoperations--called "grows" or "gardens" bymembers of the trade--in all fifty states. Hemp FACT #71- Atl. Mthly-16 Date: 95-03-29 11:14:36 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 16 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Inside The Industry--cont. No one knows exactly how much marijuana is cultivated in theUnited States. The numbers published by the government--or anyoneelse--are largely speculative. In 1992 the DEA eradicated 3,405metric tons of cultivated marijuana in the United States, anamount the DEA says represents more than half the total domesticoutput. Critics believe that the DEA actually finds only 10 to 20percent of the marijuana being grown in this country. With pricesranging from $500 a pound, for low-quality New Mexican marijuana,to more than $5,000 a pound for "boutique" strains likeNorthern Lights and Afghan Kush, it can be confidently statedthat the black market for American marijuana, whatever the actualtonnage, is immense. Growers are increasingly moving their crops indoors, usingartificial light and hydroponics, to avoid theft, reduce the riskof detection, control the growing process, and profit from up tosix harvests a year. Thirty mature plants can easily be grown inan area the size of a bathtub. I asked Steve White to list someof the places where he has discovered indoor grow operations. Helaughed. "It would be tough for me to say places we haven'tfound them." Often a false wall hides a grow room in ahouse, or a house's foundation doesn't match its basement, whichseems oddly smaller, or there are second stories with nostairwells, or crawl spaces are hidden beneath floors. Once Whiterummaged through a child's closet and found the entrance to agrow area behind the toys. Without need of a search warrant, theDEA employs thermal-imaging devices, mounted on helicopters andlow-flying airplanes, to detect abnormal heat sources that mayindicate the presence of an indoor growing operation--or apottery kiln, or a Jacuzzi. What is found depends upon the skillof the technician. White has learned that one of the best ways tofind an indoor grow area is with his nose: no matter howwell-vented the operation, and despite electronic devices thatcan neutralize odors in the air, marijuana will exude a powerfulscent. A few years ago indoor grows were often huge. A group ofjanitors in Anderson, Indiana, who had traveled to Israel tostudy hydroponics, were caught with 8,100 plants in a buildingwith walls constructed a foot thick to thwart infrared detection.Nowadays growers rent storage units and apartments, using phonynames and paying in cash, and build small grow operations atdifferent locations, with timing devices and automatic controls.The authorities may find one or two--a loss anticipated in thegrower's business plan--without being able to trace ownership. White has smoked marijuana once, while working undercover, anddid not enjoy the experience. He chain-smokes cigarettes, regretsit, and sees no need to add marijuana to the nation's list oflegal drugs. "We've got tobacco, we've got alcohol," hesaid. "Jesus Christ, do we need another hallucinogenic,carcinogenic substance on the market?" What disturbs himmost about marijuana is the phenomenal sums of money it funnelsinto an underground economy, and the great resulting potentialfor corruption among public officials. I asked whether a sense offutility ever creeps into his work, given the extent ofcultivation in his state. "I'm not such a fool as to sithere and tell you that we're going to wipe out marijuana,"he replied. But there is no doubt in his mind that the DEA exertsa deterrent effect. "Every time we have a helicopter go upon a mission," White said, "there's someone down belowwho sees it and thinks, 'Maybe I better not.'" Part 17 tommorow. Anyone wishing entire text of article,email. Request Word or Text format. Hemp FACT #72- Atl. Mthly-17 Date: 95-03-30 10:55:19 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 17 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Inside The Industry--cont. Ralph Weisheit, a professor of criminal justice at IllinoisState University, does not know Steve White but has come to manyof the same conclusions about marijuana cultivation in theMidwest. Weisheit first became interested in the subject eightyears ago, when he saw, on the television news, an old Illinoisfarmer being arrested for cultivating marijuana. The farmer andhis son never smoked marijuana; they grew it to save their farmfrom foreclosure. Weisheit was intrigued. With a grant from theresearch arm of the U.S. Justice Department, he conducted atwo-year study of marijuana cultivation, interviewinglaw-enforcement officials in five states and dozens of Illinoisgrowers who had been caught and convicted. The book based on thatstudy, Domestic Marijuana: A Neglected Industry (1992),chronicles the rise of marijuana production in the United Statesand offers a fascinating portrait of the growers. Weisheit agreesthat the majority of marijuana grown in America probablyoriginates in the nine-state region described by Steve White. Healso thinks that marijuana is the nation's largest cash crop, bya very wide margin. Estimates of how many Americans grow marijuana range from oneto three million, of which anywhere from 100,000 to 200,000 arecommercial growers. Weisheit found that aside from beingpredominantly white and male, marijuana growers generally do notfit any common stereotypes. Some are pragmatists, growing thedrug purely for the money; during the farm crisis of the 1980smany farmers in the Marijuana Belt started cultivating marijuanaout of desperation. They found it not only easy money but alsoeasy work. As one farmer told Weisheit, "You know, I spentmost of my life trying to kill weeds, so trying to keep one alivewas hardly a challenge." Other growers are hustlers bynature, classic American entrepreneurs; they might as well beselling time-shares in a vacation condominium. They try to buildmarijuana empires. The risks of the trade only add to its appeal.Other growers are less competitive, giving away marijuana tofriends or selling it at slightly above cost, sharingagricultural techniques, comparing their crops the way neighborsmight compare homegrown tomatoes. Marijuana growers are educatedand uneducated, liberal and conservative. They are extremelysecretive, worrying more about thieves than about the police. Fewbelong to NORML (the National Organization for the Reform ofMarijuana Laws) and few read High Times magazine or add theirnames to any list that might arouse suspicion. Indoor growingoften attracts people who love gizmos. There are endlesscontraptions that can be added to a grow room, fromcomputer-controlled watering systems to electric tables thatdistribute nutrients evenly by tilting back and forth. Somegrowers become connoisseurs, producing high-quality marijuana insmall quantities, manipulating not only the level of delta-9-THCthrough cross-breeding but also the proportions of all the othercannabinoids to subtly--or not so subtly--affect the nature ofthe high. Weisheit met growers and law-enforcement officers alikewho were extraordinarily passionate about marijuana, eager todiscuss its arcane details for hours. He was surprised, after thepublication of his book, by how little controversy it generatedin either camp. His mother was disturbed, however, by one of itscentral implications: "She's very anti-drug," Weisheitsays, "and her comment was, 'The thing I don't like aboutthis book is that it makes these people seem so normal.'" Hemp FACT #73- Atl. Mthly-18 Date: 95-03-31 10:40:47 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 18 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Inside The Industry--cont. Late one night I met a commercial marijuana grower whointroduced himself as "Dave." He has been growingmarijuana on and off for more than a decade, beginning outdoorsand graduating to a series of increasingly complex indoor growsystems. Understandably paranoid and suspicious, Dave is alsoquite proud of his work and regrets being unable to discuss itwith friends. His grow operation had to be built surreptitiously,over a period of weeks, like a factory assembled by hand. Itutilizes about $50,000 worth of high-tech hydroponic equipment.When the construction was complete, the whole thing looked sobeautiful that Dave wanted to throw an opening-night party, buthe decided that would not be a good idea. Though he always hatedgardening and never passed a science class in his life, he nowhas a grasp of marijuana botany, plant biology, and advancedgreenhouse-management techniques which only Special Agent Whitecould fully appreciate. As he smoked some of his most recentharvest, Dave shared with me some of the pleasures, risks,rewards, and bizarre phenomena associated with his profession. Hidden behind a fake wall, entered through a secret door, in aneighborhood where you would never, ever, expect to find it,Dave's operation is much larger than most. There are hundreds ofmarijuana plants in long rows, growing from cubes of rock wool, asoil-less medium spun from synthetic fibers, connected through anintricate system of white plastic pipes. Suspended above them areextremely bright high-pressure sodium lights, which require asurge of power from special ballasts to start up. On the ceilingis the bluish flame of a carbon-dioxide generator burning naturalgas. The windows have been sealed and blacked out. The room isquite warm, the air thick and humid, the whole place filled witha pungent smell reminiscent of fresh hay. Like a greenhousewithout glass, it feels very still and quiet, except for thesound of water rushing through narrow pipes. When everything is running smoothly, Dave controls theelements necessary for his plants: air, light, heat, and water.In a closed chamber there is no wind; here a ventilation systemprovides it, circulating air rich in carbon dioxide. When outdoortemperatures drop too low, Dave uses the CO2 generator on theceiling--in effect "fertilizing the air." Pumps andtimers automatically water the plants, also delivering nutrientssuch as nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, which would normallybe derived from soil. One of the critical factors in growingmarijuana is the proportion of darkness to light. SometimesDave's high-pressure sodium lights burn eighteen hours a day,raising the temperature in the grow room to as high as 110degrees. During the female plant's reproductive stage there mustbe long periods of total, uninterrupted darkness. As little astwo footcandles of light can disrupt the delicate process bywhich delta-9-THC accumulates in the buds. Turning on aflashlight at the wrong moment, Dave says, is enough to ruin hisplants. He is truly a connoisseur, growing an expensive strain ofmarijuana from the northern Hindu Kush. As he describes how someoutdoor growers stuff marijuana into plastic garbage bags whileit is still wet, he grimaces, like a master vintner appalled bythe improper handling of grapes. The buds are very fragile, hesays: "You're trying to coax this mature flower to retainits essence--and then store it and seal it at that instant intime." His finished product is deep green and aromatic, likesome rare, exotic spice. Hemp FACT #74- Atl. Mthly-19 Date: 95-04-01 11:03:34 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Part 19 REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. Inside The Industry--cont. Growing marijuana indoors requires much more work thancultivating it outdoors. There is also more potential fordisaster. A splash of liquid on a hot light will cause it toexplode. A broken pipe can flood the room with hundreds ofgallons of water. A power outage shuts the whole system down. Thenutrient solution, if improperly monitored, can quickly turn tooacidic and, as Dave puts it, "give the plants a heartattack." More common, and yet somehow more surreal, areinsect infestations that can harm valuable young plants. Dave hasbattled spider mites, greenhouse whiteflies, and aphids.Insecticides are not an option in an enclosed room, with a cropthat will be smoked. Dave uses biological controls, unleashinghungry young predators upon unwanted bugs. Recently he releasedthousands of miniature wasps. This is insanity, he thought; butit worked. Inside a nearby refrigerator he always keeps 500ladybug eggs, next to the soda, in case of an emergency. At themoment Dave is contending with gnats, who leave his plants alonebut swarm and bite him as he walks about the grow room in thedark. Someone At The Door On March 18, 1990, a pair of deputy sheriffs in JohnsonCounty, Indiana, spotted a red Jeep being driven erratically andsignaled for its driver to pull off the road. Behind the wheelthey found Jerry Montgomery, obviously intoxicated; littering thetruck were three empty vodka bottles, a five-gallon bucket fullof marijuana, and a gray box containing more than $13,000 incash. After obtaining a warrant, sheriffs searched Montgomery'shouse, finding more marijuana and a locked briefcase hidden underhis bed. Deputy John Myers pried it open with a screwdriver. Inthe briefcase were receipts for farm equipment; documentsmentioning R.P.Z. Investments, Claude Atkinson, and ErnestMontgomery; an option to buy a property owned by Martha Brummett;and a number of books suggesting that this arrest was thebeginning, not the end, of a trail: Indoor MarijuanaHorticulture, The Primo Plant, and How to Grow Marijuana IndoorsUnder Lights. The investigation eventually led authorities to a 500-acrefarm close to Solsberry, in Greene County, owned by Arno Zepp, ofInvestment Holdings, Inc. On August 22 federal, state, and locallaw-enforcement agents arrested Claude Atkinson, raided the farm,and, with the help of volunteers from the Indiana National Guard,destroyed 10,000 marijuana plants. Atkinson soon began to talk.In May of 1991 Ernest Montgomery was arrested at his Gosportcabin, where 7,000 marijuana seedlings sat in little pots, readyfor planting. Early that same morning Mark Young was awakened bysomeone at the front door. Unlike his former business associates,Young was not growing anything. He and his girlfriend, Patricia,were in the process of moving to Florida. When he saw a man witha badge and a gun, Young had no idea what was happening, butassumed that it must have something to do with unpaid taxes. Tomorrow (or Mon.) will be the final part of this article, butdon't worry I have more :-) Hemp FACT #75- Atl. Mthly-Finale Date: 95-04-03 10:40:31 EDT From: ADBryan REEFER MADNESS -- Finale REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. More than a dozen law-enforcement officers surrounded thehouse. Their commander, a DEA agent, treated Young politely,allowing him to get dressed and agreeing not to handcuff him infront of the neighbors. At the station Young read his indictment.He was being charged, under federal law, not only for his role indistributing 700 pounds of marijuana but also for conspiring tomanufacture all 12,500 marijuana plants grown on MarthaBrummett's farm. Young was unaware of the punishment he mightface until later that day. John Hollywood, a bail bondsman inIndianapolis, arrived in the afternoon to secure his release. Butthe government refused to set bail. Under Indiana's strict statelaw, the same charges would bring a maximum sentence oftwenty-eight years--at most, fourteen years served in prison, andprobably much less. But under federal law Young's two prior statefelony convictions, one of them more than seventeen years old,classified him as a career drug offender. This arrest could provehis third strike. At the U.S. attorney's discretion, he faced apossible mandatory-minimum sentence of life imprisonment withoutpossibility of parole. Hemp FACT #76- A True Story Date: 95-04-04 11:19:51 EDT From: ADBryan This next series of posts will be a sad, but true story. It'snot near as long as the Atlantic Monthly article. From: delisle@eskimo.com (Ben Delisle) Date: Thu, 27 May 1993 05:19:52 GMT [Forwarded] "Justice Goes To Pot" by B. J. Oppenheimer As you read this, I'll probably be behind bars, serving apossible five to 40 years in federal prison with no hope ofparole. My house will have been confiscated by the government,and a fine of $340,000 will have been levied against me. I'm a nonviolent offender with no prior record. Married for 20years with two small children, I'm a college graduate andpublished writer. I have a good reputation in the community andhave been involved in many charitable organizations. My onlycrime was planting a handful of marijuana seeds... When I was first arrested for growing pot last August, Ifreely admitted my guilt, fully expecting to receive therelatively minor sentence usually meted out in marijuana cases.Until recently, marijuana use and cultivation was decriminalizedin many places, and even now it's only a misdemeanor in moststates (including my own). It usually warrants nothing more thana suspended sentence and a small fine when prosecuted at thestate level. Last year a man in Upstate New York was convicted ofgrowing 154 plants - many more than I am charged with - and hisonly punishment was a $100 fine - less than a dollar a plant. My penalty probably would have been similar - if I'd beentried in state court. But more and more, these cases are beingturned over to the federal government for prosecution, wherepenalties are much stiffer. What would've earned me, at most, afine and probation in state court carries a mandatory minimumsentence of five years (and a maximum of 40) when prosecuted atthe federal level. It's all because of recently enacted mandatoryminimum-sentencing laws. They impose statutory minimums for alldrug crimes and prohibit the judge from any exercise of judicialdiscretion in arriving at a sentence. The judge is enjoinedagainst taking into account things like my reputation in thecommunity, charitable works, or lack of prior record. Sincethere's no such thing as parole in federal prison anymore, if I'msentenced to five years (assuming I lose my case), that's howmany I'll serve. Chalk it up to the government's "get tough on crime"policy: So what if a few undeserving people serve inflatedsentences? It's worth it to keep the streets free from crime. Theproblem is, rather on being tough on crime, the net effect ofmandatory minimums is to be soft on crime - violent crime. Sincethe are no mandatory minimum sentences for offenses like rape,child molestation, murder, aggravated assault, et cetera, violentcriminals are often released early to make room for nonviolentfirst offenders like me. The average murderer now serves only sixand a half years in jail (versus the five years minimum I'llserve). But if our jail terms are similar, there's one importantdifference between the murderer and me: He doesn't lose hishouse. Even though my house was bought with legitimate earnings, andthere was no marijuana grown on my property, it was confiscatedby the police shortly after I was arrested. The primary reasongiven was that fertilizer was found in my basement. My house wasthus considered a "facilitator" of the crime, whichjustifies its forfeiture. When I learned that the government hadseized my property on such flimsy pretenses, it infuriated me,but what bothered me even more was that they did it without eventrying me first. cont. Tomorrow. Hemp FACT #77- A True Story-2 Date: 95-04-05 10:34:53 EDT From: ADBryan Part 2. of the sad story From: delisle@eskimo.com (Ben Delisle) Date: Thu, 27 May 1993 05:19:52 GMT [Forwarded] "Justice Goes To Pot" by B. J. Oppenheimer Since passage of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984,property can be seized if one is merely suspected of using it ina crime. It's not even necessary to be charged, much lessconvicted. It's up to the individual to prove that he didn't useit illegally. And since this is a civil forfeiture, and publicdefenders are only provided in criminal cases, he's forced tofoot the bill for a lawyer. Often he also must put up a bond,sometimes as much as $10,000, which usually makes fighting theforfeiture cost-prohibitive. In the majority of cases, the government simply steps in andtakes the property without even bothering to charge anyone with acrime, and there's not a thing to be done about it. Since 1984almost two and a half billion dollars in property has been seizedthis way. There's another difference between the murderer and me.He isn't subject to penalties for tax-stamp violation. Eventhough marijuana is illegal, in many states you're required bylaw to buy tax stamps for its cultivation - at a cost of $1,000per plant - something that's virtually impossible to do withoutincriminating yourself. Yet even if you are somehow able topurchase the stamps without getting arrested but don't actuallyaffix the stamps to the plants - in the wind and rain - you'restill liable for a heavy fine. And they don't just count theliving, growing plants. They count the dead ones and even thecutoff stems from plants that were thinned from the garden andthrown away earlier. Even though the total weight of marijuana in my case was underfive pounds, with all these other factors added in, the fine was$340,000. When I asked my lawyer how the government expected meto pay such an astronomical fine, he said, "They don't. Theywant to wipe out your assets. Then when - and if - you get out ofjail, they intend to garnish your wages for the remainder. Ofcourse, by that time there'll be all that interest...." But the fine is just part of my penalty for tax-stampviolation. It also carries criminal (versus civil) penalties ofup to five years in state prison. That's on top of the five to 40years I'll already be serving in federal prison. All for the crime of putting a handful ofmarijuana seeds in the ground. If this seems like a violation ofthe Eighth Amendment ("Let the punishment fit thecrime"), it's not the only time the Constitution's beenignored when it comes to drug law. Confiscation of propertywithout due process is a violation of the Fifth Amendment. Policecan now obtain search warrants based on anonymous tips, which isa violation of the Fourth Amendment. And a defense attorney'slegal fees can be seized in drug cases, a violation of the SixthAmendment. But if drug laws are chipping away at the Constitution,they're wreaking havoc on our prison system. Federal prisons arecurrently at 146 percent of capacity, and drug offenders servingmandatory minimum sentences make up 57 percent of the population(more than half had no prior arrests). At the current rate ofincarceration, nearly 70 percent of all federal inmates will bedrug offenders serving mandatory minimums by 1995. The United States now imprisons more of its citizens percapita than any other country in the world (455 per 100,000people). That's compared to the No. 2 country, South Africa, with311 per 100,000. As stated earlier, violent offenders often mustbe granted early release to make room for this influx. In arecent four-year period in Florida more than 130,000 inmates(including muggers, armed robbers, et cetera) were released, andone out of three went on to commit new crimes. The F.B.I. reportsthat the rate of violent crimes in America increased by 24percent from 1987 to 1991, and many people feel that mandatoryminimums have a lot to do with it. cont. tomorrow Hemp FACT #78- A True Story-3 Date: 95-04-06 10:40:59 EDT From: ADBryan The final part of the "Sad Story". What a waste!!!!!What a disgrace!!!! Don't it make you proud to be an American? Myfamily came to this land in 1637. They would probably turn aroundand go home if they saw the travesty of the American injusticesystem today. From: delisle@eskimo.com (Ben Delisle) Date: Thu, 27 May 1993 05:19:52 GMT [Forwarded] "Justice Goes To Pot" by B. J. Oppenheimer But apart from the hypothetical increase in violent crime dueto mandatory minimums, there's the undeniable increase intaxpayer costs. The National Institute of Corrections estimatesthat in 1992, the United States built facilities for 2,000 cells(at a cost of $100 million) per week to accommodate the explodingprison population - and construction costs were only a part ofthe total. It's been estimated that in five years, the financialobligations incurred by U.S. corrections could be double thecurrent national deficit. On top of that, it costs on averageover $20,000 a year to house, feed, clothe, and guard each of the81,426 federal prisoners. And this is to say nothing of the increased cost of socialservices of inmates' families, which were previously beingprovided for by the inmates themselves. Over 30 million Americansregularly smoke marijuana, so it's not surprising that a lot ofpeople in this country feel that it should be decriminalized. I'msure that many people would disagree, but I doubt they'd disputethe fact that the penalties for marijuana use are not only unjustand illogical, but make an unconscionable waste of taxpayerdollars. With violent crime making us all live like prisoners,it's time to stop freeing murders to make room for marijuanausers. Stayed tuned tomorrow as I search the vastness of the Internetfor more info. Hemp FACT #79- G. Washington Date: 95-04-07 10:53:57 EDT From: ADBryan Way to go ABC!!. A very good show. I thought it might beappropriate to go back to the Father of Our Country for thispost. Looks like old George may not have grown all of his hempfor fiber. ;-) From _Licit & Illicit Drugs_, by Consumer Reports, p. 403: ...In 1762, "Virginia awarded bounties for hempcultureand manufacture, and imposed penalties upon those who did notproduce it." George Washington was growing hemp at Mount Vernon three yearslater--presumably for its fiber, though it has been argued thatWashington was also concerned to increase the medicinal orintoxicating potency of his marijuana plants.* The asterisk footnote: * The argument depends on a curious tradition, which may ormay not be sound, that the quality or quantity of marijuana resin(hashish) is enhanced if the male and female plants are separated*before* the females are pollinated. There can be no doubt thatWashington separated the males and the females. Two entries inhis diary supply the evidence: May 12-13 1765: "Sowed Hemp at Muddy hole by Swamp." August 7, 1765: "--began to seperate (sic) the Male fromthe Female Hemp at Do--rather too late." George Andrews has argued, in _The Book of Grass: An Anthologyof Indian Hemp_ (1967), that Washington's August 7 diary entry"clearly indiactes that he was cultivating the plant formedicinal purposes as well for its fiber." [7] He might haveseparated the males from the females to get better fiber, Andrewconcedes--but his phrase "rather too late" suggeststhat he wanted to complete the separation *before the femaleplants were fertilized*--and this was a practice related to drugpotency rather that to fiber culture. ---------------------------------------------------------------- That's all for today. A nice short one parter. I might go outof town this weekend and if so, I'll be back Monday. Same hemptime...Same hemp station.. -- Hemp FACT #80- D. Miller pt.1 Date: 95-04-10 11:47:27 EDT From: ADBryan Wow, what alot of catching up on all the boards. Mucho goodtalk, especially in the ABC news area. Had a wonderful trip toAustin. The fields all looked like they were painted blue , redand yellow. No, I wasn't doing drugs, it was the wildflowers inbloom and man were they bloomin'. My wife was amazed. Here's an old standby I've had saved for a time when I didn'thave time to search the net for more useful info. ----------------------------------------------------------------- Part 1. From "Dennis Miller Live" on HBO, Friday, Nov.11, 1994, 10:00 pm [ After joking about recent DC Mayoral elect Marion Barry] "Maybe he deserves a second chance, I mean who did hereally hurt besides himself? Maybe it's time that we as a nationstart staying out of people's personal problems and vices. Whatare we doing spending billions of dollars trying to keep people'sprivate lives in order? And I'm talking about legal ageconsenting adults here, not kids, we obviously have to takespecial precautions to protect kids. But what is this Orwellianhang-up of ours of sticking our nose into other grown-up'saffairs? What concern is it of ours if some mindless stoner wantsto spend his his life hooked up to a Turkish skull bong? Now, I'mnot pro-drug, they obviously cause a lot of damage, but I ampro-logic and you're never going to stop the human need forrelease through altered consciousness. The government can takeaway all the drugs in the world and people will just spin aroundon their lawn until they fell down and saw God. "Now I don't want to get off on a rant here, but it seemsto really enrage the vast cheese dog and beer quaffing nation outthere when someone decides to waste his own life chasing downchemical euphoria and I'm not sure why. Our displeasure withsomeone hell-bent on self-ruination through drug use seems reallydisproportionate to its direct impact on us. And as a matter offact, I believe we amplify that impact when we attempt to enforceunenforceable laws. It not only costs us billions of dollars, butit puts us in harms way as addicts are driven to crime as a meansto an end. Why do we chase druggies down like villagers afterKarlov? Let them legally have what they already have and defusethe bomb. You know, I think the hysteria about drugs is oftentimes baseless. And this comes from me, a man who has never donecocaine in his life, although I did smoke dope upon occasionduring my stint as a student at Oxford in the late 60s. And youknow, the war on drugs is more often than not fruitless andpatently hypocritical, be honest with yourselves now. What drugsare the most dangerous to the most Americans? Its a no brainer:cigarettes and alcohol. Those are the statistical champions byhundreds of thousands of deaths. And wouldn't you rather shoot agame of pool with a guy smoking a joint than a guy drinkingwhisky and beer? Someone smoking a joint doesn't all of the sudden rear backand stab his partner in the eye socket with a cue stick, ok? He'stoo busy laughing at the balls. "And you know as far as harder drugs go, if somebodywants to shoot up and die right in front of you, more power tohim, you know? It's his call. And you know the herd always has away of thinning itself out. We aren't stupid people here inAmerica, no more than anyone else in the world, so why are weobsessing on habits that harm no one but the habitual, while welet real problems slip ever further out of reach. We seem to bewillfully turning away from reality, and from logic might I add,to punish people, who in many instances are doing an extremelyfine job of punishing themselves, thank you. And in some casesthey're not even punishing themselves, but rather just followingage old spawning instincts that are as woven as deeply into theirbrain as their need to watch Home Improvement. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B21-10IA087-000625-B017-21http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf81_90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043624 text/html 38077HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:36:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:22 GMTContent-length: 37859 Hemp facts 81 - 90 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT #81- D. Miller Pt.2 Date: 95-04-11 10:48:04 EDT From: ADBryan Part 2. From "Dennis Miller Live" on HBO, Friday, Nov.11, 1994, 10:00 pm "Is their anything more fruitless than trying tolegislate sexual behavior? You know according to the law, youcan't even get a blow job in Georgia? No wonder Sherman hustledthrough there. And really if you stop to think about it, who ishurt by the time honored unavoidable trade of prostitution? Onlythe guys who pay extra to be hurt. There is no sane reason tocling to this archaic legal attempt to curtail an activity thatwill be around until the end of time. You know, you could comeback to this planet ten thousand years from now and man couldhave evolved to the point where he doesn't even take in nutritionfrom a hole in head anymore, but I guarantee you that he'll stillbe cruising ninth avenue trying to get a knob-shine from somebodynamed Desiree. "What sort of perfect harried experiment society are westriving for folks? One where you will be forced by thepuritanical mentality of your pin-headed Gladys Kravitz neighborsinto a tightly constricted, over-regimented existence? A lifesafe from the temptations and rewards of the flesh? If that'syour kink - go for it. But for the rest of us, let's save themoney we're wasting trying to regulate other people's privatelives. If an individual wants to smoke a joint, or shoot up, ormunch blotter like tic-tacs and drop out, let them. All right?Let's put the billions we're wasting on a drug war, fought byfitness fanatics on steroids and three-martini senators rollingin pork, let's put it back in the educational system. Let's freethe courts and jails of lonely men and broken women who feel theneed to buy and sell sex. Let's let hookers and their johns havea safe building somewhere off the streets, inspected medicallyand taxed up the wazoo. Let's go on from there to tax liquor andcigarettes so that those industries can pay for safe one-lanedrunk-proof highways and air purification systems. Mostimportantly, let's stop retending that people are going to leadthe lives that we tell them to lead. Let's stop pretending that afew simple prohibitions on substances and activities will yieldup a nation of Beaver Cleavers: polite, clean, sexless, and readyto serve their fellow man, no questions asked. People are people.They're going to with their lives what they want to do, whetheryou like it or not. There is nothing you can do about them thatwon't break the bank, overcrowd the prisons, or corrode analready oxidized judicial system. People are perennially going to get f***** up and f***, and wewill continue to get f***** over if we don't concede the factthat there is absolutely f***-all we can do about it. "Of course, that's just my opinion, I could bewrong." Dennis Miller ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- If anyone has suggestions for topics, let me know here oremail. Hemp FACT #82- Drug Test-pt.1 Date: 95-04-12 11:16:24 EDT From: ADBryan his article may be a little old, but it's still worthy. From the Baltimore Sun 5-9-1991 SURPRISE ! HORROR STORIES OF DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE DON'THOLD UP By David Morris St. Paul Minnesota It has been a while since drugs made the front page. So let mebring you up to date on recent findings about drug use thatdidn't make it to prime-time news. The National Institute on Drug Abuse reported that the giantutility Utah Power and Light, "spent $215 per employee peryear less on the drug abusers in health insurance benefits thanon the control group." Employees that tested positive fordrugs at Georgia Power Company had a higher promotion rate thanthe company average. Workers testing positive only for Marijuanaexhibited absenteeism some 30 percent lower than average. Scientific American, after exhaustive research, found that thestudies usually cited to prove the dangers of drug use in theworkplace were either shoddy or misinterpreted. Astonishingly,the magazine could identify only one study on workplace drug usethat has passed through the standard peer review process forscientific evaluation. That one, published in the Journal of General InternalMedicine, studied 180 hospital employees, 22 of whom had testedpositive after being hired. It found "no difference betweendrug-positive and drug-negative employees" with respect tosupervisor valuations or performance. Except for one intriguingitem: Eleven of the negatives had been fired during their first yearon the job, but none of the positives. More recently the American Psychologist, a peer-reviewedscientific journal, reported on a 15 year study of the SanFrancisco-area children by researchers Jonathan Shedler and JackBlock of the University of California at Berkley. Their report reveals that adolescents who occasionally usedrugs are healthier than both drug abusers and drug abstainers.Moreover, those who abuse drugs as teen-agers have distinctbehavioral problems that were identifiable years before theredrug use began. Drug use is a symptom, not a cause. Says Mr. Shedler, "the most effective drug preventionprograms might not deal with drugs at all." In an interview published in the National Review, Michael S.Gazzaniga, professor of psychiatry at Dartmouth Medical School,discussed several studies that found that drug use increases ingroups under stress, but that "the rate of addiction doesn'tgo up no matter what the degree of stress. Most people can walkaway from high drug use if their lives become more normal." The British journal New Scientist reports research that foundthe majority of those who become dependant on Cocaine return tomoderate use or total abstinence without treatment. Finally, Florida State University conducted a study for theFlorida legislature of 45,096 people arrested for drug possesionin 1987. Eighty-eight percent had never been arrested forproperty crimes like burglary. Says professor David Rasmussen,"this study suggests we are incarcerating people for the useof drugs when they do not commit other crimes and tend not tocommit other crimes." What are we to conclude ? Relying on these and many other studies, the Washington-basedDrug Policy Foundation, a beacon of reason in a sea of hysteria,offers the following framework. Stress causes drug use. The vastmajority of those who use drugs are casual users. Those who usedrugs tend not to commit other crimes. Drugs in the workplace arenot a serious burden on productivity. Which isn't to say there is no problem. There is. But it's aproblem caused more by making drug use a crime than by the useitself. Part 2 comin' at ya tomorrow. Hemp FACT #83- Drug Test-pt.2 Date: 95-04-13 10:14:06 EDT From: ADBryan Part 2. From the Baltimore Sun 5-9-1991 SURPRISE ! HORROR STORIES OF DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE DON'THOLD UP By David Morris St. Paul Minnesota "There is little argument that drug trafficking hasplayed crucial role in spawning the rise of violent crime,"the Washington Post recently observed. Gangs have spread from alocalized phenomenon to nationally franchised businesses,financed by drug money and armed with ever-higher caliberweaponry. We're fueling a level of violence rarely seen before, aviolence now spilling over into areas that don't involve drugs. We can't build new prisons fast enough to house all the drugusers we want to put in them. In some states, education budgetsare declining to guarantee sufficient money for jails. In ourpanic about drugs, we are willing to sacrifice not only ourschools but our liberty. Forfeitures of property by drug users isrising into the hundreds of millions of dollars, and virtuallyall this revenue goes back into drug enforcement, creating anunhealthy symbiotic relationship between drug dealers and thepolice. Last year, for the first time, military troops were used onMarijuana raids. Strip-searches of high school students in Kansasand Missouri elicit little protest, even when no drugs are found.Anderson County, S.C., billboards announce, "Need cash? Turnin a drug dealer." Informers recieve as much as 25 percentof the assets seized from drug raids. Public pronouncements notwithstanding, the evidence is pilingup that the collateral damage from our War on Drugs far exceedsthe damage from drug use itself. David Morris is a columnist for the St. Paul PioneerPress..... ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Hemp FACT #84- Food for Thought Date: 95-04-14 10:38:06 EDT From: ADBryan Well this info is a little different. It came from the HungryBear Hemp Home Page at www.hempbc.com. These guys even sell hempseed nutrition bars. Hemp Seed is one of the most nutritionally complete andbalanced foods on the planet in the following regard: Protein---Second to soybeans in protein content (25%), andcontains all eight essential amino acids in amounts andproportions necessary for the production of immune-enhancingantibodies (such as gamma globulin). Essential Fatty Acids (EFA's)---Hemp Seed is the richest plantsource of EFA's (80% of total oil volume). They are essential tochildren for proper growth, used to perform various metabolicrolds, indispensible in the structure and functioning of cellmembranes, regulators of cholesterol metabolism, and raw materialfor hormone-like substances which regulate nearly all bodyprocesses.* * Rudin, Donald O. and Felix, Clara, The Omega=3 Phenomenon,Rawson Associates, NY 1987 pp. 9, 10. Content of all three EFA's in Hemp Seed Oil Alpha Linolenic acid (LNA;Omega=3)...25% Alpha Linoleic acid(LA;Omega=6)......55% Arachididic acid....................0.5%* *Sufficient amounts of this EFA are naturally converted fromLA in our bodies. Linoleic acid is abundant in many of our common foods, yet LNAand other Omega=3's are seldom found in sufficient amounts. Asyou see above, Hemp Seed is very rich in thes EFA. EFA deficiency (especially Alpha Linoleic Acid) symptomsinclude the following: skin problems, hair loss, easy bruising,inflammation of joints, fatigue, infertility, kidney problems, avariety of neurological, gastrointestinal and cardiovascularproblems, and a whole range of chronic degenerative disease. Being a plant that can grow nearly everywhere humans inhabitplus having a seed with a hull that seals in all these vitalproteins and oils for extended periods, Cannabis Hemp is theideal crop for famine-stricken bioregions (and anywhere else,wouldn't you agree?). May we also be aware of Hemp as our planet's most valuablenatural resource for industrial fiber, medicine and biomass fuel. More tommorow, same Hemp time (and we all know Hemp time doesnot mean the same time ;-), same Hemp Message Board. Hemp FACT #85-Christian Sacremnt Date: 95-04-15 10:48:24 EDT From: ADBryan Let me wish all of you a safe and happy Passover, Easter orWeekend (your pick). Since this is a religous time of your, Ithought I'd bring this article out. This will be another of thosethat goes on for several days. If anyone wants this in it'sentirety, email and request M.S. Word or text format. MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT According to Jack Herer in The Emperor Wears No Clothes orEverything You Wanted to Know About Marijuana But Were Not Taughtin School, "The Essenes, a kabalistic priest/prophet/healersect of Judaism dating back to the era of the Dead Sea Scrolls,used hemp, as did the Theraputea of Egypt, from where we get theterm 'therapeutic'." The Theraputea of Egypt were Jewish ascetics that dwelt nearAlexandria and described by Philo (1st century B.C.) as devotedto contemplation and meditation. Alexandria is where St. Mark istraditionally held to have established the Coptic Church in 45A.D. The Coptic Church has been neglected by Western scholarsdespite its historical significance. This has been due to thevarious biases and interest of the Catholic Church which claimedChristianity for its own. The result is that for the CopticChurch there is very little history. It is however assumed thatthe Coptic religious services have their roots in the earliestlayers of Christian ritual in Jerusalem and it is known that theCoptic church is of ancient origin going back to the time of thefirst Christian communities and even before. Tradition states that "Coptic" was derived from"Kuftaim", son of Mizraim, a grandchild of Noah whofirst settled in the Nile valley, in the neighborhood of Thebes,the ancient capital of Egypt. At one time Thebes was the greatestcity in the world and history records that by 2200 B.C. the wholeof Egypt was united under a Theban prince. The splendor of Thebeswas known to Homer, who called it "the city with a hundredgates". (Richard Schultes states that in ancient Thebesmarijuana was made into a drink.) According to E.A. Wallis Budge in The Divine Origin of theHerbalist, page 79, "The Copts, that is to say the Egyptianswho accepted the teachings of St. Mark in the first century ofour era, and embraced Christianity, seem to have eschewed medicalscience as taught by the physicians of the famous School ofMedicine of Alexandria, and to have been content with the methodsof healing employed by their ancestors." The Essenes were an ascetic sect closely related to theTheraputea that had established a monastic order in the desertoutside of Palestine and were known as spiritual healers. It hasbeen suggested that both John the Baptist and Jesus may have beenof the Essene sect as they were both heavily dependent on Esseneteachings. The scripture makes no mention of the life of Jesusfrom the age of 13 to 30. Certain theologians speculate thatJesus was being initiated by the Essenes, the last fraternity tokeep alive the ancient traditions of the prophets. Every prophet, however great, must be initiated. His higherself must be awakened and made conscious so that his mission canbe fulfilled. Amongst the Essenes' ritual lustrations precededmost liturgical rites, the most important one of which wasparticipation in a sacred meal_an anticipation of the Messianicbanquet. Throughout the ancient world sacrifice was a sacramentalcommunal meal involving the idea of the god as a participant inthe meal or as identical with the food consumed. The communionsacrifice was one in which the deity indwells the oblation sothat the worshippers actually consume the divine. The originalmotive of sacrifice was an effort toward communion among themembers of a group, on one hand, and between them and their god,on the other. At its best, sacrifice was a "sacrament"and in one form or another life itself. Next part tomorrow or Monday. Hemp FACT #86-Sacrement-2 Date: 95-04-17 11:15:48 EDT From: ADBryan Hope everyone had a safe holiday. MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT - Part 2. The central focus of the early Christian church was theEucharist or the "body and blood" of the Lord. This wasinterpreted as a fellowship meal with the resurrected Christ. Inmeeting the Resurrected One in the Eucharist meal the Christiancommunity had the expectation of the Kingdom of God andsalvation. Christ communicated life to his disciples through theEucharist or Christian sacrament. Christ said in describing thesacrament, "Take, eat, this is my body, this is my blood. Dothis as often as you will in remembrance of me." (ICorinthians 11:24-25) Baptism is defined as the Christiansacrament used in purification and the spiritual rebirth of theindividual. I Corinthians 10:1 makes it clear that the smokingcloud of incense was directly related to baptism. I Corinthians 10:1 "Moreover, brethren, I would not thatye should be ignorant, how that our fathers were under the cloud,and all passed through the sea; 2 And were all baptized untoMoses in the Cloud and in the sea; 3 And did all eat the samespiritual meat: for they drank of that Spiritual Rock thatfollowed them: and that Rock was Christ. In the Biblical story of Creation, God said, "Behold, Ihave given you every herb bearing seed and to you it will be formeat." (Genesis 1:29) Marijuana is technically an herb andwas considered a spiritual meat in the ancient world. From thispassage in Corinthians we see that the spiritual cloud resultingfrom the burning of incense was instrumental in the baptism ofthe Israelites. This baptism is also compared to the "eatingand drinking" of the spirit of Christ. Spirit is defined as the active essence of the Deity servingas an invisible and life-giving or inspiring power in motion.Scripture makes it abundantly clear that the sacrificial cloud orsmoke contained the Spirit of God (Christ) and was instrumentalin inspiring, sanctifying, and purifying the patriarchs. InNumbers 11:25 the cloud results in the Spirit resting upon Mosesand the seventy elders. This passage indicates that theyprophesied ecstatically. "Prophesy" is defined asfollows: to utter or announce by or as if by divine inspiration;to speak for God or a deity; to give instruction in religiousmatters. Throughout the Holy Bible prophets of God spake as theywere moved by the Holy Spirit. The smoking burning cloud ofincense contained the spirit and was instrumental in bringingabout the spiritual revelations of the prophets. In the ancientworld marijuana was used to reveal the future. The virtues ofmarijuana include speech-giving and inspiration of mental powers."Psychoactive" is defined as effecting the mind orbehavior. When we of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church think of mind orbehavior we think of that inward essence or element that makes upthe individual. This is the person's spirit. We are all spiritualbeings. It is just as important to keep the spiritual part of aperson healthy as it is to keep the physical body healthy and infact they are related. Hence marijuana and its relationship tospiritual food. In the Apocrypha (Book of Jubilees), Chapter 10, God tells anangel to teach Noah the medicines which heal and protect fromevil spirits. Surely God taught Noah about marijuana. In theancient world marijuana played an important role in purificationand protecting from evil influences. Part tres manana, amigas y amigos. Hemp FACT #87-Sacrament-2 Date: 95-04-18 09:39:23 EDT From: ADBryan Poster's note--All of the information contained in theSacrament (and yes I've been spelling it wrong) comes from: -- The University of Massachusetts at Amherst Cannabis Reform Coalition S.A.O. Box #2 415 Student Union Building UMASS, Amherst MA 01003 Part 3. MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT Note the following concerning the transfiguration of Christ: St. Matthew 17:1 "And after six days Jesus taketh Peter,James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into a highmountain apart. 2 And he was transfigured before them: and hisface did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as light. 3And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talkingwith him. 4 Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it isgood for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here threetabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias. 5When yet he spake, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them; andbehold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my belovedSon, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." The Bible Dictionary by John McKenzie, page 898, saysconcerning the transfiguration that the cloud and the formula ofthe utterance of the Father are derived from the baptism ofJesus. He says that the change described in the appearance ofJesus suggests the change which is implied in the resurrectionnarratives. Some of the synonyms for transfiguration are transformation,metamorphosis, transubstantiation, and avatar. These terms implythe change that accompanies resurrection or deification. Acrossthe world, legends of godlike men who manage to rise, in a stateof perfection go back to an era before human beings had cast awayfrom the divine source. Hence the gods were beings which oncewere men, and the actual race of men will in time become gods.Christ revealed this to the people of his day when he told themto whom the word of God came, "Ye are gods." (St. John10:34) St. Matthew 17:2 says that during the transfiguration ofChrist that his face did shine as the sun. The face of Moses alsoshone when he returned from the cloud on Mt. Sinai (Exodus30:34). The shining countenances are the result of theirresurrections, of their being spiritually illumined in the cloudof smoking incense. Most people are under the impression that Christ baptized withwater. As you can see from the following account of John theBaptist this isn't so. John the Baptist baptized with water andChrist baptized with fire. St. Matthew 3:11 "I indeed baptize you with water intorepentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whoseshoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the HolySpirit and with fire." It is only logical that this baptism with the Holy Spirit andwith fire is related to the baptism of Christ in the burning,smoking cloud of incense and to the baptism of the patriarchs inwhich the patriarchs did all eat of the same spiritual meal(incense). In the section dealing with the "HolySpirit" the Encyclopedia Britannica states that Christianwriters have seen in various references to the Spirit of Yahwehin the Old Testament an anticipation of the doctrine of the HolySpirit. It also says that the Holy Spirit is viewed as the mainagent of man's restoration to his original natural state throughcommunion in Christ's body and, thus, as the principle of life inthe Christian community. ------------------------------------ Part 4. Tomorrow. Anyone wishing the full text of this articlecan email me. Specify MS Word or text format. Hemp FACT #88-Sacrament-4 Date: 95-04-19 10:01:06 EDT From: ADBryan Just finished watching "Texas" (had to tape it).Surely they could have done better than Bobby Ewing playing thepart of my 5th great uncle Stephen F. Austin. Part 4. MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT The patriarchs were recipients of a revelation coming directlyfrom the Spirit (incense) and this was expressed in theheightening and enlargement of their consciousness. It is clearfrom Scripture that this spiritual dimension was also evident inthe life of Jesus, in whom the experience of the Hebrew prophetswas renewed. Through the Eucharist Christ passed this spiritualdimension on to his apostles. One of the apostles even makesmention in Philippians 4:18 of a sweet smelling sacrifice that iswell pleasing to God. Christ compares this baptism to the drinking of a cup. St. Mark 10:38 "But Jesus said unto them, Ye know notwhat ye ask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and bebaptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" This cup is referred to as the cup of salvation in Psalms116:12. Psalms 116:12 "What shall I render unto the Lord for allhis benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and callupon the name of the Lord. It is called the cup of blessing in connection in connectionwith the eucharist. 1 Corinthians 10:16 "The cup of blessing which we bless,is it not the communion of the blood and the body of Christ? 17For we being many are one bread, and one body; for we are allpartakers of one bread. Here we see a connection between the cup of blessing and thecommunion of the blood of Christ. Blood is the life-givingsubstance of the living being. Christ communicated life to hisdisciples through the Eucharist or Christian sacrament. In I Corinthians 10:16 we note the mention of bread as thecommunion of the body of Christ and that we are all partakers ofone bread. This is the spiritual bread or food used by Christ andhis disciples. (A synonym for the Eucharist or the Body and Bloodof the Lord is the bread of life.) It is interesting to note thatthe finest marijuana in Jamaica is called Lamb's bread. 1 Corinthians 12:13 "For by one Spirit are we allbaptized into one body, whether we be Jew or Gentiles, whether webe bond or free; and have all been made to drink into one Spirit. 1 Corinthians 11:25 "After the same manner also he tookthe cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the NewTestament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, inremembrance of me. 26 For as often as ye eat this bread and drinkthis cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come. If these passages are compared to 1 Corinthians 10:1-4, it isplain that the "eating of one bread" is the same as thepatriarchs "eating the same spiritual meat" and the"drinking of one Spirit" (the cup) is the same as thepatriarchs "drinking of the Spiritual Rock that followedthem: and that Rock was Christ." By making this comparisonwe see that the terminology of the Eucharist is directly relatedto the smoking cloud of incense used in the baptism of Christ andthe patriarchs. It is interesting to note that smoking was referred to as"eating" or "drinking" by the early AmericanIndians. Peter J. Furst in Hallucinogen and Culture states thefollowing: "Considering its enormous geographic spread in theAmericas at the time of European discovery, as well as theprobable age of stone tobacco pipes in California, the inhaling(often called "drinking" or "eating") oftobacco smoke by the Shaman, as a corollary to therapeuticfumigation and the feeding of the gods with smoke, must also beof considerable antiquity." In Licit and Illicit Drugs, page 209, the following is quoted: "Columbus and other early explorers who followed him wereamazed to meet Indians who carried rolls of dried leaves thatthey set afire_and who then "drank the smoke" thatemerged from the rolls. Other Indians carried pipes in which theyburned the same leaves, and from which they similarly "drankthe smoke". Hemp FACT #89-Sacrament-5 Date: 95-04-20 10:00:06 EDT From: ADBryan Wow, what a night!! Actually heard a tornado passing by.Luckily it didn't touch down in my part of town. MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT -- Part 5 The Encyclopedia Britannica states in the section on"Sacrifice" that the interpretation of sacrifice andparticularly of the Eucharist as sacrifice has varied greatlywithin the different Christian traditions because of thesacrificial terminology in which the Eucharist was originallydescribed became foreign to Christian thinkers. We (Poster's Note--The poster is not a member of any organizedreligion) of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare that thetrue understanding of the Eucharist has been passed down fromgeneration to generation so that we are able to give an accurateinterpretation of the sacrificial terminology used to describethe Eucharist. We have shown, using history and Biblicalpassages, that his terminology is directly related to burningsmoking incense. We have shown that the "eating" or"drinking" contained in the terminology concerning theEucharist is associated with the inhalation of smoke. We haveshown that marijuana was used as incense and that it was thenumber one spiritual plant of the ancient world. We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare that the cupthat Christ baptized his disciples with in the baptism of theHoly Spirit and fire was in fact a pipe or chillum in whichmarijuana was smoked. This is a bottomless cup and soon as it isemptied, it is filled again and passed in a circle. There is apicture of this cup or pipe below, as well as on the cover. Likethe pipe of the ancient North American Indians, this cup was aportable altar. Christ was the Father of the doctrine of the Eucharist whichis the communion that Jesus gave his brethren. Jesus taught thatthe communion is his body and blood. Jesus was not speaking ofHis physical body and blood. He was speaking of His spiritualbody and spiritual blood that was the communion of his holychurch. The supper that Jesus celebrated with his disciples"on the night that he was betrayed" (1 Corinthians11:23) inaugurated the heavenly meal that was to be continued. 1 Corinthians 11:23 "For I have received of the Lord thatwhich also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the samenight in which he was betrayed took bread: 24 And when he hadgiven thanks, he brake it and said, Take, eat, this is my body,which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. 25 Afterthe same manner also he took the cup, which he had supped,saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood; this do ye, asoft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. 26 For as often as yeeat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye do shew the Lord'sdeath till he come. 27 Wherefore whosoever shall eat of thisbread, and drink of this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall beguilty of the body and blood of the Lord. 28 But let a manexamine himself, and let him eat of the bread, and drink of thatcup. 29 For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth anddrinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. Christ said, "Do this in remembrance of me." Herethe original unity of man with God is restored. In general thereception of the Holy Spirit is connected with the actualrealization, the inward experiencing of God. Marijuana has been referred to as a mild euphoric (theproducer of a feeling of well-being) that produces a profoundreligious experience of a mystical and transcendental nature.This religious experience is said to be brought about by thestirring of deeply buried, unconscious sensitivities so that oneexperiences ultimate reality or the divine and confirms thefeeling of the worshipper that he has been in the presence of Godand has assimilated some of His powers. Part 6. Tomorrow -- Pass it on ;-) Hemp FACT #90-Sacrament-6 Date: 95-04-21 10:26:00 EDT From: ADBryan MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT-- Part 6. To be lifted above sense to behold the beatific vision andbecome "incorporate" in God is the end sought inecstasy. The priest or mystic in enthusiasm or ecstasy enjoys thebeatific vision by entering into communion with God and byundergoing deification. The experience of ecstasy, states MirceaEliade, one of the foremost authorities on religion, is atimeless primary phenomenon. Psychological experience of rapture,he continues, are fundamental to the human condition and henceknown to the whole of archaic humanity. (Some of the synonyms ofrapture are bliss, beatitude, transport, exaltation.) Baudelaire, a member of the Club Des Hashichins (Hashish Club)founded in Paris around 1835 and writer of Artificial Paradisesstates the following about hashish: Hashish is the unadulteratedresin from the flowering tops of the female hemp plant. "One will find in hashish nothing miraculous, absolutelynothing but an exaggeration of the natural. The brain andorganisms on which hashish operates will produce only the normalphenomena peculiar to that individual increased, admittedly, innumber and force, but always faithful to the original. A man willnever escape from his destined physical and moral temperament:hashish will be a mirror of his impression and private thoughts amagnifying mirror, it is true, but only a mirror. He cautions that the user must be in the right frame of mindto take hashish, for just as it exaggerates the natural behaviorof the individual, so too does hashish intensify the user'simmediate feelings. Baudelaire describes three successive phasesa hashish user will pass through. He says the final stage ismarked by a feeling of calmness, in which time and space have nomeaning, and there is a sense that one has transcended matter. Hesays that in this state, one final supreme thought breaks intoconsciousness. "I have become God." Realization of one's union with God is necessary inunderstanding the true Christian sacrament. The understanding ofman's relationship to God and God's relationship to man (God inMan and Man in God) was quite prevalent in the ancient world,particularly among the religions that utilized marijuana as partof their religious practice. Said the great Hindu sage, Manu, "He who in his own soulperceives the Supreme Soul in all beings and acquires equanimitytoward them all, attains the highest bliss." To recognizeoneness of self with God was contained in all the teachings ofGautama Buddha. In the Liturgy of Mithra (the Persian god oflight and truth) the suppliant prays "abide with me in mysoul; leave me not," and "that I may be initiated andthe Holy Spirit may breathe within me." The communion becameso intimate as to pass into identity: "I am thou and thouart I." Athanasius, a theologian, ecclesiastical statesman,and Egyptian national leader who was closely tied to the CopticChurch in Egypt said, "Even we may become gods walking inthe flesh," and "God became man that man might becomeGod." Western theology (Catholic and Protestant) teaches that thespirit created matter but remained aloof of it. In Hinduism andother Eastern religions, the spirit is the inside, the matter isthe outside; the two are inseparable. Eastern theologians hiverightly perceived that the God one worships must posses all theaspects of his worshippers' nature as well as his own divinenature. Otherwise, how can he create beings whose nature isentirely foreign to his own? What, then, would be the meaning ofthe Biblical phrase: "God made man in his own image"? Part 7 Tomorrow--Pass it on :-) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B21-11IA087-000625-B017-48http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf91_100.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043639 text/html 41240HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:36:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:12 GMTContent-length: 41022 Hemp facts 91 - 100 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Hemp FACT #91-Sacrament-7 Date: 95-04-22 09:55:50 EDT From: ADBryan I haven't read this many Bible verses since Sunday school. Forthose that attend church, synagogue, temple, etc-- Are you goingto cut-n-paste this article and give it to your pastors, rabbis,shaman and the like? ;-) MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT-- Part 7. The fact that modern Christendom has no sense of union withGod has led to numerous churches without the understanding forbuilding a Christian culture and kingdom to replace the confusionof modern politics. This lack of understanding was not lacking inthe ancient church and was a major source of enthusiasm for theprophets of old. In fact, the power of the early church wasmanifested due to this understanding of the spirit of Goddwelling in man, the temple of God. To the ancient prophets itwas not a God above, nor a God over yonder, but a God within."Be still and know that I am God" for the visionariesand mystics of every time and place, this has been the first andgreatest of the commandments. In 1 Corinthians 11:28 Christ said, "Let a man examinehimself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of thecup." Probably the most relevant study to date about whatmight be considered typical marijuana experience concludes thatmarijuana gives spontaneous insights into self (Dr. Charles Tart,"On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study of MarijuanaIntoxication", Science and Behavior, 1971). The sacramentality of marijuana is declared by Christ himselfand can be understood only when a person partakes of the naturaldivine herb. The fact is communion of Jesus cannot be disputed orbe destroyed. Marijuana is the new wine divine and cannot becompared to the old wine, which is alcohol. Jesus rejected theold wine and glorified the "new wine" at the weddingfeast of Cana. Cana is a linguistic derivation of the present daycannabis and so it is. (Some Biblical scholars and there is acertain amount of support in early tradition of the view havelooked upon the miracle of Cana as a sign of the Eucharist.) Note the references to new wine in the Bible: Isaiah 65:8 "Thus saith the Lord, As the new wine isfound in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for ablessing is in it; so will I do for my servant's sake" Acts 2:13 "Others mocking said, "These men are fullof new wine." Isaiah 65:8 declares that the new wine is found in the clusterand that a blessing is in it. When one mentions clusters, onethinks of clusters of grapes. Webster's New Riverside Dictionary,Office Edition, defines marijuana: 1. Hemp 2. The dried flowerclusters and leaves of the hemp plant, esp. when taken to induceeuphoria. The Encyclopedia Britannica says the following about hemp: Seed producing flowers form elongate, spike like clustersgrowing on the pistillate, or female plants; pollen producingflowers form many branched clusters or staminate, on male plants.Here and in Webster's, marijuana fits the description of the newwine and as history has shown a blessing is in it. Baudelaire said the following about the effects of hashish: "This marvelous experience often occurs as if it were theeffect of superior and invisible power acting on the person fromwithout...This delightful and singular state...gives no advancewarning. It is as unexpected as a ghost, an intermittent hauntingfrom which we must draw, if we are wise, the certainty of abetter existence. This acuteness of thought, this enthusiasm ofthe senses and the spirit must have appeared to man through theages as the first blessing." In the books of Acts the apostles were accused of being fullof new wine. Acts 2:13 was the time of pentecost when the HolySpirit descended upon the apostles. Numerous outpourings of theSpirit are mentioned in the Acts of the apostles in whichhealing, prophesy, and the expelling of demons are particularlyassociated with the activity of the Spirit. Incense (marijuana)was used by the ancients for healing, prophesy, and the expellingof demons. Part 8. Tomorrow, pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #92-Sacrament-8 Date: 95-04-23 09:55:59 EDT From: ADBryan Now this is ridiculous. It's late April and the wind chillhere in Dallas is in the upper 20's this morning. :-o O.K. younortherners, quit laughing, we're spoiled down here. A SPECIAL NOTE-- There is a 60 Minutes program on tonight thatis supposed to be critical of DEA/FBI. Don't know any details. MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT--Part 8. When Christ ascended into heaven in the cloud (Acts 1:9-11) hesent his disciples the Holy Spirit with the "gift oftongues" (Acts 2:3) and there appeared unto them cloventongues like as a fire, and it sat upon each of them, and theywere filled with the Holy Spirit and were given the power toprophesy or witness. (Marijuana has been credited with speechgiving and inspiration of mental powers.) The first two gifts of the Holy Spirit are traditionally saidto be wisdom and understanding, which no doubt are the two thingsmost needed by the human race. In Jamaica today marijuana isreferred to as the "weed of wisdom" and is reputed tobe the plant that grew on Solomon's grave, a man known for hisgreat wisdom. Marijuana expands consciousness and enhances thecapacity for mystical and creative inspiration. In Acts 2:3 Firespeaks figuratively of the Holy Spirit. Fire was also a meanswhich to transport a saint to heaven. 2 Kings 2:11 "And it came to pass, as they still went on,and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, andhorses of fire, and parted asunder; and Elijah went up by awhirlwind into heaven." Recent writers have speculated that this passage was inreference to flying saucers. That is because they look at thispassage physically. This ascension of Elijah like the ascensionof Christ in the cloud into heaven is the "withdrawal"from the external or physical world, to be the inmost reality ofall. This can be referred to as ecstasy, rapture, or transportand is a result of the Holy Spirit. Ecstasy, rapture, ortransport therefor agree in designating a feeling or state ofintense, often extreme mental and emotional exaltation. Raptureis defined as ecstatic joy or delight; joyful ecstasy. Some ofthe synonyms of rapture are bliss, beatitude, transport, andexultation. The true rapture is therefore one in which one isspiritually transported to the heavens. Don't expect to float upinto the sky. Marijuana as history has shown is the catalyst used to achievethe spiritual journey into the heavens. That is why in India itwas referred to as the Heavenly-Guide, the Poor Man's Heaven, andthe Sky-flier. That is why Professor Mircea Eliade, perhaps theforemost authority on the history of religion, suggested thatZoroaster may have caused hemp to bridge the metaphysical gapbetween heaven and earth. One dictionary defines marijuana as the leaves and floweringtops when taken to induce euphoria. Euphoria is defined by thesame dictionary as great happiness or bliss. (In India, marijuanahas been referred to as the joy-giver and the soother of grief.)Bliss is defined as the ecstasy of salvation, spiritual joy. Someof the synonyms of bliss are beatitude, transport, rapture,ecstasy, paradise, heaven. Throughout the ancient world there is mention of "magicalflight", "ascent to heaven", and "mysticaljourney". All these mythological and folklore traditionshave their point of departure in an ideology and technique ofecstasy that imply "journey in spirit". Part 9. Tomorrow..Pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #93-Sacrament-9 Date: 95-04-24 10:10:01 EDT From: ADBryan MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT--Part 9. The pilgrimage from earth to heaven is not a journey to someother place or some other time, but is a journey within. One mustrealize that "death" through which we must pass beforeGod can be seen does not lie ahead of us in time. Rather it isnow that we have a man of sin within us that must be killed and anew man free from sin that must be born. This is actualized inbaptism and the sacramental life in the church. For as many ofyou as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ(Galatians 3:27). The effect of baptism is spiritual regenerationor rebirth, whereby one is "enChristened", involvingboth union with Christ and remission of sins. In Titus 3:5baptism is the "bath of regeneration" accompanyingrenewal by the Spirit. Some of the synonyms of regeneration arebeatification, conversion, sanctification, salvation,inspiration, bread of life, Body and Blood of Christ. Sara Benetowa of the Institute of Anthropological Sciences inWarsaw is quoted in the Book of Grass as saying: "By comparing the old Slavic word 'Kepati' and theRussian 'Kupati' with the Scythian 'cannabis' Shrader developedand justified Meringer's supposition that there is a link betweenthe Scythian baths and Russian vapor baths. "In the entire Orient even today to 'go to the bath'means not only to accomplish an act of purification and enjoy apleasure, but also to fulfill the divine law. Vambery calls'bath' any club in which the members play checkers, drink coffee,and smoke hashish or tobacco." St. Matthew's account of the institution of the Eucharistattaches to the Eucharist cup these words: "Drink of it, allof, for this is the blood of the covenant, which is poured outfor many for the remission of sins (st. Matthew 26:27). Drinkingthe sacramental cup therefor serves like baptism (Acts 2:38)where Peter said unto them, "Repent, and be baptizedeveryone of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission ofsins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. We of theEthiopian Zion Coptic Church declare a three-part doctrine of theHoly Herb, the Holy Word, and the Holy Man (Woman). The present and future benefits to the individual communicanthave their importance given them by Jesus, who said, "He whoeats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I willraise them up at the last day." (John 6:54) As such we mustsee that the divine person who is active in creation, in renewal,and in human rebirth and resurrection, is also active in theEucharist. There was a profound change in America when marijuana smokingstarted on a large scale in the late 1960's. A large number ofpeople resisted the draft, resisted the war ... started lettingtheir hair and beards grow ... became interested in naturalfoods... the ecology and the environment. What we really saw wasthe awakening of our generation to the beginning of Christianmentality through marijuana smoking. The earmarks of thismentality are: I don't want to go to war; I really don't want tobe part of the political-military-economic fiasco you callsociety. Like the Indians Hemp Drug Commission three quarters of acentury earlier, the Canadian Le Dain Commission conducted aninquiry into the use of marijuana. On page 156 of the report isthe following: Part 10. Tomorrow--Pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #94-Sacrament-10 Date: 95-04-25 10:16:13 EDT From: ADBryan Didn't mean to leave a cliffhanger yesterday or am I the onlyone that noticed it. MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT--Part 10. "In the case of cannabis, the positive points which areclaimed for it include the following: It is a relaxant; it isdisinhibiting; it increases self-confidence and the feeling ofcreativity (whether justified by creative results or not); it increases sensual awareness andappreciation; it facilitates self acceptance and in this waymakes it easier to accept others; it serves a sacramentalfunction in promoting a sense of spiritual community among users;it is a shared pleasure; because it is illicit and the object ofstrong disapproval from those who are, by and large, opposed tosocial change, it is a symbol of protest and a means ofstrengthening the sense of identity among those who are stronglycritical of certain aspects of our society and value structuretoday." On page 144 of the Report, marijuana is associated with peace. "In our conversation with (students and young people)they have frequently contrasted marijuana and alcohol effects todescribe the former as a drug of peace, a drug that reducestendencies to aggression while suggesting that the latter drugproduces hostile, aggressive behavior. Thus marijuana is seen asparticularly appropriate to a generation that emphasizes peaceand is, in many ways, anticompetitive." In a magazine article by G. S. Chopra entitled "Man andMarijuana" on page 235 is a section dealing with HumanExperiments. One hundred persons with an established marijuanasmoking habit smoked marijuana. They described the symptoms asfollows: "I have done things today which I usually dislikebut which I rather enjoyed doing today." "Nothingseemed impossible to accomplish." "I assumed a cool andcomposed attitude and forgot all mental worries." "Ibehaved in a childish and foolish manner." "It relievessense of fatigue and gives rise to feelings of happiness.""I feel like laughing." "My head is dizzy.""I feel like taking more food." "The world is gayaround me." "I feel inclined to work." "I ama friend to all and have no enemy in the world." According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, in the section on"Roman Catholicism": "To understand the meaning and use of the Eucharist wemust see it as an act of universal worship, of cooperation, ofassociation else it loses the greater part of its significance.Neither in Roman Catholic nor in Protestant Eucharistic practicedoes the sacrament retain much of the symbolism of Christianunity, which clearly it has. Originally, the symbolism was thatof a community meal, an accepted social symbol of communitythroughout the whole of human culture." Marijuana has been used as sacrifice, a sacrament, a ritualfumigant (incense), a good-will offering, and as a means ofcommuning with the divine spirit. It has been used to sealtreaties, friendships, solemn binding agreements and tolegitimize covenants. It has been used as a traditional defenseagainst evil and in purification. It has been used in divinations(1. the art or practice that seeks to foresee or foretell futureevents or discover hidden knowledge; 2. unusual insight;intuitive perception.) It has been used in remembrance of thedead and praised for its medicinal properties. Most Christians agree that participation in the Eucharist issupposed to enhance and deepen communion of believers not onlywith Christ but also with one another. We must therefor ask thequestion, "What substance did the ancients use as acommunity meal to facilitate communion with the Lord?" Theanswer to that question is marijuana. Hemp as originally used inreligious ritual, temple activities, and tribal rites, involvedgroups of worshippers rather than the solitary individual. Thepleasurable psychoactive effects were then, as now, communalexperiences. Part 11.--The Final Part of Sacrament Tomorrow--Pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #95-Sacrament-11 Date: 95-04-26 10:11:03 EDT From: ADBryan I was wondering how this series of posts on the sacramentwould be viewed. I have received more request for the completetext of this article than I have of any other. When I first readit, I thought it was going to be boring. I personally do notsubscribe to organized religion because it all seems sohypocritical. After reading this, it looks like the roots ofreligion are in the right place. Inner peace, respecting othersand all that stuff. Well, here's the final part of: MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT-Part 11. (I didn't realize there was this little left when I postedyesterday) Practically every major religion and culture of the ancientworld utilized marijuana as part of their religious observance.Marijuana was the ambrosia of the ancient world. It was the food,drink, and perfume of the gods. It was used by the Africans, theEgyptians, the Assyrians, the Asians, the Europeans, and possiblythe Indians of the Americas. Would it be too much to suggest thatthe ancient Israelites also utilized marijuana? The following information was taken from the mostauthoritative books dealing with the history of marijuana. Theyare mentioned at the end of this work. -- This article came from, but was NOT written by: The University of Massachusetts at Amherst Cannabis Reform Coalition S.A.O. Box #2 415 Student Union Building UMASS, Amherst MA 01003 Now I'm off to the WWW to find more relevant info. See youtomorrow. Pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #96-Reefer Madness-1 Date: 95-04-27 11:23:45 EDT From: ADBryan The following post was taken from: Newsgroups: alt.hemp Subject: Reefer Madness??? Date: 9 Jun 1994 04:27:08 -0400 Part 1. Essay: Reefer Madness? By Dune Hartsell For thousands of years, Hemp (Cannabis Sativa) has been one ofthe most useful plants known to man. It's strong, stringy fibersmake durable rope and can be woven into anything from sails toshirts; it's pithy centers, or "Hurds," make excellentpaper; it's seeds, high in protein and oil, have been pressedinto lighting or lubricating oils and pulped into animal feed;and extracts of it's leaves have provided a wide range ofmedicines and tonics. Hemp also has a notable place in American history: -Washington and Jefferson grew it. -Our first flags were likely made of hemp cloth. -The first and second drafts of the Declaration ofIndependence were written on paper made from Dutch Hemp. -When the pioneers went west, their wagons were covered withhemp canvas (the word "canvas" comes from canabacius ,hemp cloth). -The first "Levis" sold to prospectors were sturdyhemp coveralls. -Abraham Lincoln's wife, Mary Todd, came from the richest hempgrowing family in Kentucky. After the Civil War, however, hemp production in the Statesdeclined steeply. Without slave labor, hemp became too expensiveto process. Besides, cotton ginned by machines was cheaper.Still, hemp fabric remained the second most common cloth inAmerica. The plant's by-products remained popular well into thiscentury. Maple Sugar combined with Hashish (a resin from hempleaves) was sold over the counter and in Sears Roebuck catalogsas a harmless candy. Hemp rope was a mainstay of the Navy. Two thousand tons ofhemp seed were sold annually as birdfeed. The pharmaceuticalindustry used hemp extracts in hundreds of potions and vigorouslyfought attempts to restrict hemp production. And virtually allgood paints and varnishes were made from hemp-seed oil and/orlinseed oil. In the 1920's and '30s the American public became increasinglyconcerned about drug addiction-----especially to Morphine and a"miracle drug" that had been introduced by the BayerCompany in 1898 under the brand name "Heroin." By themid-1920's, there were 20,000 heroin addicts in the U.S. alone. Most Americans were unaware that smoking hemp wasintoxicating; however, until William Randolph Hearst launched acampaign of sensational stories that linked "the killerweed" to everything from Jazz to "Crazedminorities," and even unspeakable crimes. Hearst's papersfeatured headlines like: MARIJUANA MAKES FIENDS OF BOYS IN 30 DAYS: HASIESH GOADS USERS TO BLOOD LUST and NEW DOPE LURE, MARIJUANA, HAS MANY VICTIMS In 1930 Hearst was joined in his crusade against hemp by HarryJ. Anslinger, commissioner of the newly organized Federal Bureauof Narcotics (FBN). Hearst often quoted Anslinger in hisnewspaper stories, printing sensational comments like: "Ifthe hideous monster Frankenstein came face to face with themonster marijuana he would drop dead of fright." Not everyone shared their opinion. In 1930, the US governmentformed the Siler Commission to study marijuana smoking byoff-duty servicemen in Panama. The Commission found no lastingeffects and recommended that no criminal penalties apply to it'suse. Nonetheless, Hearst's and Anslinger's anti-hemp campaign hadresults. By 1931, twenty-nine states had prohibited marijuana usefor nonmedical purposes. In 1937, after two years of secrethearings and based largely on Anslinger's testimony, Congresspassed the Marijuana Tax Act, which essentially outlawedmarijuana in America. Because Congress was not sure it was constitutional to banhemp outright, it taxed the plant prohibitively instead. Hempgrowers had to register with the government; sellers and buyershad to fill out cumbersome paperwork; and, of course, it was afederal crime not to comply. Part 2. Tomorrow--Pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #97-Reefer Mdnss-2 Date: 95-04-28 10:31:09 EDT From: ADBryan The following post was taken from: Newsgroups: alt.hemp Subject: Reefer Madness??? Date: 9 Jun 1994 04:27:08 -0400 Part Duex. Essay: Reefer Madness? By Dune Hartsell For selling an ounce or less of marijuana to an unregisteredperson, the federal tax was 100 dollars. (To give some sense onhow prohibitive the tax was, "legitimate" marijuana wasselling for $2 a pound at the time. In 1994 dollars, the federaltax would be roughly 2,000 dollars an ounce.) The Marijuana Tax Act effectively destroyed all legitimatecommercial cultivation of hemp. Limited medical use waspermitted, but as hemp derivatives became prohibitively expensivefor doctors and pharmacists, they turned to chemically deriveddrugs instead. All other nonmedical uses, from rope to industriallubricants, were taxed out of existence. With most of their markets gone, farmers stopped growing hemp,and the legitimate industry disappeared. Ironically, though, hempcontinued to grow wild all over the country, and its"illegitimate" use was little affected by Congress. Was a viable hemp industry forced out of existence because itwas a threat to people's health or because it was a threat to afew large businesses that would profit from banning it? Here are some facts, hemp was outlawed just as a newtechnology would have made hemp paper far cheaper than wood-pulppaper. Traditionally, hemp fiber had to be separated from the stalkby hand, and the cost of labor made this method uncompetitive.But in 1937, the year that hemp was outlawed, the decoricatormachine was invented; it could process as much as three tons ofhemp an hour and produced higher quality fibers with less loss offiber than wood-based pulp. According to some scientists, hempwould have been able to undercut competing products overnight.Enthusiastic about the new technology, Popular Mechanicspredicted that hemp would become America's first "billiondollar crop." The magazine pointed out that "10,000acres devoted to hemp will produce as much paper as 40,000 acresof average [forest] pulp land." According to Jack Herer, an expert on the "hempconspiracy," Hearst, the Du Ponts and other "industrialbarons and financiers knew that machinery to cut, bale,decoriticate (separate fiber from the stalk) and process hempinto paper was becoming available in the mid 1930's." (TheEmperor Wears No Clothes ) Hearst, one of the promoters of the anti-hemp hysteria, had avested interest in protecting the pulp industry. Hearst ownedenormous timber acreage; competition from hemp paper might havedriven the Hearst paper-manufacturing division out of businessand cause the value of his acreage to plummet. (ibid) Herer says that Hearst was even responsible for popularizingthe term "marijuana" in American culture. In fact, hesuggests, popularizing the word was a key strategy of Hearst'sefforts: "The first step in creating hysteria was tointroduce the element of fear of the unknown by using a word thatno one had ever heard of before...'marijuana.'" (ibid) The DuPont Company also had an interest in the pulp industry.At this time, it was in the process of patenting a new sulfuricacid process for producing wood-pulp paper. According to thecompany's own records, wood-pulp products ultimately accountedfor more than 80% of all of DuPont's railroad car loadings forthe next 50 years. (ibid) But DuPont had even more reasons to be concerned about hemp.In the 1930's, the company was making drastic changes in itsbusiness strategy.Traditionally a manufacturer of militaryexplosives, DuPont realized after the end of World War I thatdeveloping peacetime uses for artificial fibers and plasticswould be more profitable in the long run. So it began pouringmillions of dollars into research, Which resulted in thedevelopment of such synthetic fibers as rayon and nylon. Part 3 Final Part of this article tomorrow. Pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #98-Reefer Mdnss-3 Date: 95-04-29 10:34:26 EDT From: ADBryan The following was taken from: Newsgroups: alt.hemp Subject: Reefer Madness??? Date: 9 Jun 1994 04:27:08 -0400 Final Part. Essay: Reefer Madness? By Dune Hartsell -Two years before the prohibitive hemp tax, DuPont developed anew synthetic fiber, nylon, which was an ideal substitute forhemp rope. -The year after the hemp tax, DuPont was able to bring another"miracle" synthetic fabric onto the market, rayon.Rayon, which became widely used for clothing, was a directcompetitor to hemp cloth. -"Congress and the Treasury Department were assured,through secret testimony given by DuPont, that Hemp-seed oilcould be replaced with synthetic petrochemical oils madeprincipally by DuPont." These oils were used in paints andother products.(ibid) The millions spent on these products, as well as the hundredsof millions in expected profits from them, could have been wipedout if the newly affordable hemp products were allowed on themarket. So, according to Herer, DuPont worked with Hearst toeliminate hemp. DuPont's point man was none other than Harry Anslinger, thecommissioner of the FBN. Anslinger was appointed to the FBN byTreasury Secretary Andrew Mellon, who was also chairman of theMellon Bank, DuPont's chief financial backer. But Anslinger'srelationship to Mellon wasn't just political; he was also marriedto Mellon's niece. Anslinger apparently used his political clout to swaycongressional opinion on the hemp tax. According to Herer, theAmerican Medical Association (AMA) tried to argue for the medicalbenefits of hemp. But after the AMA officials testified toCongress, "they were quickly denounced by Anslinger and theentire congressional committee, and curtly excused." Five years after the hemp tax was imposed, when Japaneseseizure of Philippine hemp caused a wartime shortage of rope, thegovernment reversed itself. Overnight, the U.S. government urgedhemp cultivation once again and created a stirring movie called"Hemp for Victory" then, just as quickly, itrecriminalized hemp after the shortage had passed. While U.S. hemp was temporarily legal, however, it saved thelife of a young pilot named George Bush, who was forced to bailout of his burning airplane after a battle over the Pacific. Atthe time he didn't know that: -Parts of his aircraft engine were lubricated with hemp-seedoil. -100% of his life-saving parachute webbing was made from U.S.grown hemp. -Virtually all of the rigging and lines of the ship thatrescued him were made of hemp. -The flightsuit on his back was a rubberized hemp-cloth. -The fire hoses on the ship were woven from hemp Ironically,President Bush consistently opposed decriminalizing hemp grown inthe United States. Does the hemp conspiracy continue? in March 1992, RobertBonner, the chief of the Drug Enforcement Agency, effectivelyrejected a petition to permit doctors to prescribe marijuana forpatients as medication for chronic pain. Bonner said:"Beyond doubt the claims that marijuana is medicine arefalse, dangerous and cruel." But, according to a federaladministrative law judge, Francis Young, "The record clearlyshows that marijuana has been accepted as capable of relievingthe distress of great numbers of very ill people and doing sowith safety under medical supervision." ( The New YorkTimes) There WILL be a Sunday post, now that I have a new computer atthe house. Can't believe I'm almost to FACT 100. I hope those ofyou that read my daily post are sharing the information withothers. I have no clue as to how many people read this post, butI've heard it's quite a few. See ya manana.. Pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #99-Organizations Date: 95-04-30 11:28:45 EDT From: ADBryan Just in case anyone is interested in joining the fight forTruth, Justice and The American Way :-). RELEGALIZE IT!!! REGIONAL, NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DEDICATEDTO PERSONAL FREEDOM, SOCIAL CHANGE AND DRUG LAW REFORM NATIONAL GROUPS To call or write a NORML chapter, contact the national office: NORML 1001 Connecticut Ave., NW Suite 1010 Washington, DC 20036 Alabama TEACH 3103 Susan Moore Road Blountsville, AL 35031 Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics and Marijuana-AIDS Research PO Box 21210 Kalorama Station Washington, DC 20009 (202) 483-8595 American Anti-Prohibition League 4017 Southeast Belmont St., Box 103 Portland, OR 97214 (503) 235-4524 Fax (503) 234-1330 American Cannabis Society PO Box 9208 Madison, WI 53715 (800) 256-7424 American Civil Liberties Union 132 W. 43rd St. New York, NY 10036 (212) 944-9800 Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp (BACH) PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 (310) 288-4152 Cannabis Action Network (CAN) 4428 South Carrollton New Orleans, LA 70119 (504) 482-4094 Cannabis Research Institute PO Box 11008 Portland, OR 97211 (503) 282-9388 Cannabis Action Network (CAN) 2560 Bancroft Way, #46 Berkeley, CA 94704 (510) 486-8083 Clergy for Enlightened Drug Policy St. Luke's Methodist Church Wisconsin Avenue and Calvert St., N.W. Washington, DC 20007 Drug Policy Foundation (DPF) 4455 Connecticut Ave., N.W. Suite B-500 Washington, DC 20008-2302 (202) 537-5005 Emergency Coalition for Medical Cannabis 1001 Connecticut Ave., N.W. Suite B-500 Washington, DC 20036 Families Against Mandatory Minimums (FAMM) 1001 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. Washington, DC 20004 (202) 457-5790 The Future of Freedom Foundation PO Box 9752 Denver, CO 80209 Green Panthers! PO Box 31231 Cincinnati, OH 45231-0231 (513) 522-6264 Help End Marijuana Prohibition (HEMP) Box 42, Student Organization Southeast Missouri State Univ. I University Plaza Cape Girardeau, MO 63701 Help End Marijuana Prohibition (HEMP) 5632 Van Nuys Blvd., #210 Van Nuys, CA 91401 (310) 392-1806 Hemp Advocates PO Box 10176 South Bend, IN 46680 Illinois Marijuana Initiative PO Box 2242 Darien, IL 60559 Institute for HEMP PO Box 65130 St. Paul, MN 55165 (612) 222-2628 Libertarian Party 1528 Pennsylvania Ave., S.E. Washington, DC 20003 (202) 543-1988 Maine Vocals PO Box 189 Anson, ME 04911 Massachusetts Cannabis Reform Coalition (MASS CAN) One Homestead Rd. Marblehead, MA 01945 (617) 944-CANN Medical Hemp University Box 1322 Buda, TX 78610 Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, Inc. 1801 Tippah Avenue Charlotte, NC 28205 (704) 358-9830 National Coalition Against Prohibition 187 Acalanes Drive, Apt. 14 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-5520 (415) 964-3655 National Drug Strategy Network 1899 L St., Suite 500 Washington, DC 20036 (202) 835-9075 New Yorkers for Drug Policy Reform, Inc. 226 West 4th St., Suite 4 New York, NY 10014 (718) 392-5036 North Idaho TEACH PO Box 155 Sagle, ID 83860 Partnership for Responsible Drug Information, Inc. 226 West 4th St., Suite 4 New York, NY 10014 (718) 392-5036 Progressive Action Alliance! PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826-4935 TEACH PO Box 1297 Youngstown, FL 32466 Texas Hemp Campaign PO Box 13549 Austin, TX 78711 (512) 837-4674 U-Mass at Amherst Cannabis Reform Coalition S.A.O. Mailbox #2 Student Union Bldg., UMASS Amherst, MA 01003 Vermont Civil Coalition Against Prohibition 63 George St. Burlington, VT 05401 (802) 864-7107 Vermonters for Pot Peace PO Box 237 Underhill, VT 05489 Vermont Grassroots Party PO Box 537 Waitsfield, VT 05673 (802) 496-2387 Vermont Vocals RFD 1, Box 148 Newport, VT 05855 Virginia BACH Route 1, Box 2142 Crewe, VA 23930 (804) 645-1038 Washington Cannabis Movement 7219 120th Street Seattle, WA 98178 (206) 548-8043 Tomorrow--Hemp FACT 100--Review and Preview--Pass it on :-) Hemp FACT #100-Personal Views Date: 95-05-01 09:27:12 EDT From: ADBryan HEMP FACT OF THE DAY #100 (fireworks, cheers, etc. ;-) --My Personal Feelings. What an education I have had since I started these posts. Iknew many of the FACTS, but I didn't know all of them especiallyall of the medical and industrial uses for hemp. I realize there are many under age 18 on AOL. I DO NOTADVOCATE THE USE OF ANY SUBSTANCE THAT MIGHT BE HARMFUL TO ANYONEUNDER THE AGE OF 18. (Wait until you're in college to experiment.I did. It'll give you something to look forward too ;-) I would like to thank those of you that have been reading HempFACTS over the past few months. I can't believe this is #100. Istill have no idea how many of you are reading this information.I have tried to get the numbers from AOL, but was told they arenot available. The best guess I have is anywhere from 100-200 onthe low side to maybe a few thousand. The information posted here is meant to be shared with others.Make copies of the documents and post them to other boards(something other than AOL) or email them to people that NEED toread them. One of the things I would like to see from the ones ofyou that frequent the "chat areas", is to engage peoplein meaningful discussion on how the WOD has failed miserably.Then direct them to this or any of the other areas where the WODis discussed. The more people that become familiar with theFACTS, the better chance we have of ending the WOD. My company writes software for insurance companies and agents,and I will engage the "ties" on this subject. I havenever had ONE disagree with me after I laid out the FACTS. Ofcourse I don't talk to every single one of them about it, but anytime I can manipulate the conversation in that direction, I makemy point. Many people fear to publically speak of ending the WOD forfear of being labeled as a drug user. One of the things I tellthe insurance people, is that is people want to go knockthemselves out on drugs, that's their problem. For thoseaddicted, it's a medical problem. When someone says that if drugsare legal, there will be rampant drug use, ask them if they aregoing to be 1st in line at the cocaine counter. They will usuallyget your point. Another thing to point out is the mandatorysentences for drug offenders. This is why our jails areovercrowded. It pushes the violent offenders back on the streets,'cause there's no room for them in prison. Remember, "Send a druggie to jail, set a rapistfree." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B21-12IA087-000627-B013-164http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/stlaws.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050709 text/html 3045HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:06:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:45:43 GMTContent-length: 2828 State Statutes Recognizing Marijuana's Medical Value State Statutes Recognizing Marijuana'sMedical Value Alabama Code SS 20-2-110 to -120 (1984) Arizona Rev. Stat. Ann. SS 36-2601 to -2606 (supp. 1975-1984) Arkansas Stat. Ann. SS 82-1007.1 to -1052 (supp. 1985) California Health & Safety Code SS 11260-11270; S 11480(West supp. 1985) Colorado Rev. Stat. SS 25-5-901 to -907 (1982) Connecticut Gen. Stat. Ann. SS 21a-240 to -308 (West 1985) Florida Stat. Ann. S 402.36 (West Supp. 1985), repealed by Laws 1984, ch. 84-115, S 9 (1984) SS 893.01-.15 (West 1976 & Supp. 1985) Georgia Code Ann. SS 43-34-120 to -126 (1984) Illinois Rev. Stat. ch 56 1/2, SS 701-719 (Supp. 1985) Louisiana Rev. Stat Ann. SS 40:1021-:1026 (West Supp. 1985) Maine Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 22, SS 2401-2420 (1964 & Supp.1984-1985) Michigan Rev. Stat. Ann. SS14.15(7335)-(7336) (Callaghan Supp1985-1986) Minnesota Stat. Ann. S152.21 (West Supp. 1985) Montana Code Ann. SS 50-32-101 to -405 (1983) Nevada Rev. Stat. SS453.740-.810 (1983) New Hampshire Rev. Stat. Ann. S318-B:10 (1984) New Jersey Pub. Health Law SS 26:2L-1 to -9 (West Supp 1985) New Mexico Stat. Ann. SS 26-2A-1 to -7 (supp. 1983) New York Pub. Health Law SS 3397-a to -g (McKinney 1984-1985) North Carolina Gen. Stat. S 90-101 (1981) Ohio Rev. Code Ann. SS 3719.85-.87 (Page Supp. 1984), repealed by 138v.S.184, S 4 (1984) Oklahoma Stat. Ann. SS 2-101 to -610 (West 1984 and Supp.1984-1985) Oregon Rev. Stat S 475.515 (1983) Rhode Island Gen. Laws SS 21-28.4-1 to -11 (1982) South Carolina Code Ann. SS 44-53-610 to -660 (Law Co-op.1985) Tennessee Code Ann. SS 44-53-610 to -660 (Law Co-op. 1985) Texas Stat. Ann art. 4476-15, SS 7.0-1-.10 (Vernon Supp.1985) Vermont Stat. Ann. tit. 18, S 4471 (1982) Virginia Code S 18.2-251.1 (1982) Also: Massachussets Senate Bill 1582, passed by both houses andsigned by Governor William Weld on December 31, 1991 Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-13IA087-000627-B013-193http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/apha.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050720 text/html 11781HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:07:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:48 GMTContent-length: 11563 Resolution on Medical Marijuana - American Public HealthAssocia Resolution on Medical Marijuana by the American Public Health Association November, 1995 Attached is the full text of last November's resolution bythe American Public Health Association, an organization with50,000 members nationwide. This resolution was approved much morequickly than most and by a wider majority than typical. The address is: American Public Health Association 1015 Fifteenth Street, NW --- Suite 300 Washington, DC 20005 Phone: 202-789-5600 Fax: 202-789-5661 or 5681 My contact has been Jeff Jacobs of the GovernmentAffairs/Affiliate Relations unit. His direct number is202-789-5645. Note: The underbars (_) are used to bracket boldface oritalicized text. Within the references, they represent italics;in the titles, they represent boldface. Also, items in brackets[] are reference numbers, which are superscripted in the originaltext. _9513: Access to Therapeutic Marijuana/Cannabis_ The American Public Health Association, Being aware that cannabis/marijuana has been used medicinallyfor centuries and that cannabis products were widely prescribedby physicians in the United States until 1937 [1,2]; and Being aware that "marijuana" prohibition began withthe Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 under false claims despitedisagreeing testimony from the AMA's representative [3,4]; and Being further aware that the Controlled Substances Act of1970 completely prohibited all medicinal use of marijuana byplacing it in the most restrictive category of Schedule I,whereby drugs must meet three criteria for placement in thiscategory: 1) have no therapeutic value, 2) are not safe formedical use, and 3) have a high abuse potential [5]; and Being cognizant that the Drug Enforcement Administration'sown administrative law judge ruled in 1988 that marijuana must beremoved from Schedule I and made available for physicians toprescribe [6-8]; and Knowing that 36 states have passed legislation recognizingmarijuana's therapeutic value [9,10]; and Also knowing that the only available access to legalmarijuana which was through the Food and Drug Administration'sInvestigational New Drug Program has been closed by the Secretaryof Health and Human Services since 1992 [11]; and Understanding that while synthetic Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)is available in pill form, it is only one of approximately 60cannabinoids which may have medicinal value individually or insome combination; and Understanding that marijuana has an extremely wide acutemargin of safety for use under medical supervision and cannotcause lethal reactions [6,32,34]; and Understanding that marijuana has been reported to beeffective in: a) reducing intraocular pressure in glaucoma[12,13]; b) reducing nausea and vomiting associated withchemotherapy [14-16]; c) stimulating the appetite for patientsliving with AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) andsuffering from the wasting syndrome [17-19]; d) controllingspasticity associated with spinal cord injury and multiplesclerosis [20-25]; e) decreasing the suffering from chronic pain[26-28]; and f) controlling seizures associated with seizuredisorders [29-31]; and Understanding that marijuana seems to work differently frommany conventional medications for the above problems, making it apossible option for persons resistant to the conventionalmedications [32,33]; and Being concerned that desperate patients and their familiesare choosing to break the law to obtain this medicine whenconventional medicines or treatments have not been effective forthem or are too toxic [34,35]; and Realizing that this places ill persons at risk for criminalcharges and at risk for obtaining contaminated medicine becauseof the lack of quality control; and Realizing that thousands of patients not helped byconventional medications and treatments may find relief fromtheir suffering with the use of marijuana if their primary careproviders were able to prescribe this medicine; and Concluding that cannabis/marijuana was wrongfully placed inSchedule I of the Controlled Substances Act depriving patients ofits therapeutic potential; and Recognizing that APHA adopted a resolution (7014) onMarijuana and the Law which urged federal and state drug laws toexclude marijuana from classification as a narcotic drug [36];and Concluding that greater harm is caused by the legalconsequences of its prohibition than possible risks of medicinaluse; therefore 1. Encourages research of the therapeutic properties ofvarious cannabinoids and combinations of cannabinoids; 2. Encourages research on alternative methods ofadministration to decrease the harmful effects related tosmoking; 3. Urges the Administration and Congress to moveexpeditiously to make cannabis available as a legal medicinewhere shown to be safe and effective and to immediately allowaccess to therapeutic cannabis through the Investigational NewDrug Program. References: 1. Abel EA. _Marijuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years_. NewYork: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1982. 2. Mikuriya TH, ed. _Marijuana:Medical Papers 1839-1972_. Oakland, CA: Medi-Comp Press,1973. 3. Bonnie RJ, Whitebread II CH. _The Marijuana Conviction: AHistory of Marijuana Prohibition in the United States_.Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia, 1974. 4. NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse (RP Shafer, Chairman)._Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding_. New York: The NewAmerican Library, Inc., 1972. 5. Controlled Substances Act of 1970 (Pub.L. 91-513, October27, 1970, 21USC801 et seq.). 6. Inthe Matter of Marihuana Rescheduling Petition, Docket 86-22,Opinion, Recommended Ruling, Findings of Fact, Conclusions ofLaw, and Decision of Administrative Law Judge, September 6, 1988.Washington, DC: Drug Enforcement Agency, 1988. 7. Randall RC. _Marijuana, Medicine and the Law_. Washington,DC: Galen Press, 1988. 8. Randall RC. _Marijuana Medicine and the Law, Vol. II_.Washington, DC: Galen Press, 1989. 9. Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics. No accepted medicalvalue?? _ACT News_. Spring, 1995;4. 10. Grinspoon L, Bakalar JB. Marihuana as medicine: A pleafor reconsideration. _JAMA_. 1995;273(23):1875-1876. 11. Government extinguishes marijuana access, advocates smellpolitics. _JAMA_. May 20, 1992;267(19):2673-2674. 12. Colasanti BK. Review: Ocular hypotensive effect ofmarihuana cannabinoids: Correlate of central action or separatephenomenon. _J Ocular Pharmacol_. 1986;2(3):295-304. 13. Hepler RS, Frank IM. Marihuana smoking and intraocularpressure. _JAMA_. 1971;217:1392. 14. Sallan SE, Zinberg NE, Frei III E. Antiemetic effect ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients receiving cancerchemotherapy. _New Engl J Med_. 1975:293(16):795-797. 15. Sallan SE, Cronin C, Zelen M, Zinberg NE. Antiemetics inpatients receiving chemotherapy for cancer. _New Engl J Med_.1980;302:135-138. 16. Vinciguerra V, Moore T, Brennan E. Inhalation marijuanaas an antiemetic for cancer chemotherapy. _NY State J Med_.1988;88:525-527. 17. Nelson K, Walsh D, Deeter P, et al. A phase II study ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol for appetite stimulation in cancer-associated anorexia. _J Palliative Care_. 1994;10(1):14-18. 18. Regelson W, Butler JR, Schultz J, et al. Delta-9-THC asan effective antidepressant and appetite stimulating agent inadvanced cancer patents. In _Int Conf Pharmacol Cannabis_, SSzara, MC Braude, eds. Savannah: Raven, 1975. Foltin RW, Fischman MW, Byrne MF. Effects of smoked marijuana on food intake and body weight of humans living in a residential laboratory. _Appetite_. 1988;11:1-14. Clifford DB. Tetrahydrocannabinol for tremor in multiple sclerosis. _Ann Neurol_. 1983;13:669-671. Malec J, Harvey RF, Cayner JJ. Cannabis effect on spasticity in spinal cord injury. _Arch Phys Med Rehab_. 1982;35:198. 22. Meinek H, Schonle PW, Conrad B. Effect of cannabinoids onspasticity and ataxia in multiple sclerosis. _J Neurol_.1989;230:120-122. 23. Petro D. Marihuana as a therapeutic agent for musclespasm or spasticity. _Psychosomatics_. 1980;21:81-85. 24. Petro D, Ellenberger C. Treatment of human spasticitywith delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. _J Clin Pharmacol_.1981;21:413S-416S. 25. Ungerleider JT, Andyrsiak T, Fairbanks L, et al.Delta-9-THC in the treatment of spasticity associated withmultiple sclerosis. 26. Johnson MR, Melvin LS, Althius TH, et al. Selective andpotent analgesics derived from cannabinoids. _J Clin Pharmacol_.1981;21:271S-282S. 27. Maurer M, Henn V, Dittrich A, et al.Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol shows antispastic and analgesiceffects in a single case double-blind trial. _Eur Arch PsychiatryClin Neurosci_. 1990;240:1-4. Noyes Jr. R, Brunk SF, Avery DH, et al. The analgesic properties of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and codeine. _Clin Pharmacol Ther_. 1975;18(1):84-89. 29. Cunha JM, Carlini EA, Pereira AE, et al. Chronic administration of cannabidiol to healthy volunteers and epileptic patients. _Pharmacology_. 1980;21:175-185. 30. Feeney D. Marijuana use among epileptics. _JAMA_.1976;235:1105. 31. Karler R, Turkanis SA. The cannabinoids as potentialantiepileptics. _J Clin Pharmacol_. 1981;21:437S-448S. 32. Institute of Medicine. _Marijuana and Health_.Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1982. 33. Mechoulam R, ed. _Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents_.Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1986. 34. Cannabis clubs open for medicinal business. _USA Today_.October 1, 1993:B1, B5. 35. Berger J. Mother's homemade marijuana: A plan to aid herson leads to arrest and push for change. _The New York Times_,October 11, 1993. American Public Health Association, Resolution No. 7014: Marijuana and the Law. APHA Public Policy Statements, 1948- present, cumulative. Washington, DC: APHA, current volume. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-14IA087-000627-B013-230http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ctptoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050813 text/html 4945HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:07:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:06:08 GMTContent-length: 4728 Cannabis Therapeutic Research Program - CaliforniaResearch Advisory Panel Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information CANNABIS THERAPEUTIC RESEARCH PROGRAM REPORT to the CALIFORNIA LEGISLATURE Prepared by the RESEARCH ADVISORY PANEL 350 McAllister Street, Room 6000 San Francisco, California 94102 TABLE OF CONTENTS Panel Members and Staff Executive Summary Cancer Chemotherapy, Nausea and Vomiting The-Problem Inadequacy of Drugs in Current Use Early Experience with Marijuana and THC Cannabis Therapeutic Program Legislative History The Research Advisory Panel Panel's Role in Development of Legislation Summary of Legislation Extension of Law and Provision for Glaucoma Studies Implementation of the New Law Protocol Development Drug Supply Cost Investigator Eligibility Physician Enrollment Research Subjects Research Subject Protection Study Objectives Protocol History Data Collection Data Quality Control Abuse Site Visits Dissemination of Findings and Results Detailed Protocol Results Number of Patients Treated Initial Trial Cumulative Dose Study Combination Protocol Results of Study with Smoked Marijuana Protocol Exceptions (Pilot Protocols) Results of the Controlled Study Protocols Glaucoma Protocol Post Marketing Survey of Investigators Discussion of Results of Cannabis Therapeutic Program Approval by FDA for Marketing of THC and Conclusion of the Cannabis Therapeutic Program Approval and Rescheduling Investigational THC no Longer Supplied by NCI Credits Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-15IA087-000627-B014-137http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/nelson1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051056 text/html 150495HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:10:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:59:49 GMTContent-length: 150276 Biological and Psychological Effects of Cannabis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information A CRITICAL REVIEW OF THE RESEARCH LITERATURECONCERNING SOME BIOLOGICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS OFCANNABIS Dr. Peter L. Nelson Nelson, P. L. (1993). A critical review of the researchliterature concerning some biological and psychological effectsof cannabis. In Advisory Committee on Illicit Drugs (Eds.),Cannabis and the law in Queensland: A discussion paper (pp.113-152). Brisbane: Criminal Justice Commission of Queensland. INTRODUCTION An electronic search of the published research literaturethrough computerised on-line services, such as DIALOG InformationServices, reveals that since the mid 1960's over 4000 papers,monographs and books on medical, psychological and social aspectsof cannabis use and abuse have been published.1 These studies cutacross a wide range of disciplines including: the potentialteratogenicity of D-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and related compounds(Cohen, 1986; Fried, 1989; Fried and O'Connell, 1987; Hill andTennyson, 1986; Stern, 1981; Qazi, Mariano, Milman, Beller andCrombleholme, 1985); histopathology and functional occlusion ofthe pulmonary system (Henderson, Tennant and Guerry 1972;Tashkin, Shapiro, Ramanna, Taplin, Lee, and Harper, 1976;Tashkin, Shapiro, Lee, and Harper, 1976; Tennant, Guerry, andHenderson, 1980); cardiovascular changes (Aronow and Cassidy,1974; Benowitz and Jones, 1975; Stimmel, 1979); possiblepermanent neurological effects (Campbell, Evans, Thomson, andWilliams, 1971; Co, Goodwin, Gado, Mikhael, and Hill, 1977;Feinberg, Jones, Walker, Cavness, and Floyd, 1976; Fried, 1989;Grant, Rochford, Fleming, and Stunkard, 1973; Grant, Rochford,Fleming, and Stunkard, 1973; Hannerz and Hindmarsh, 1983; Heath,1972; Heath, 1973; Heath, Fitzjarrell, Garey, and Myers, 1979;Kuehnle, Mendelson, Davis, and New, 1977; Tassinari, Amrosetto,Peraita-Adrados, and Gastaut, 1976); the likelihood of theexistence of a psychological complex of behaviours and attitudescollectively referred to as the "amotivationalsyndrome" (Creason and Goldman 1981; McGlothlin and West,1968; Smith, 1968; Weller, 1985); the possible effects onlearning and behaviour (DSM-III-R.; Fabian and Fishkin, 1981;Fried, 1977; Johnston, O'Malley, and Bachman, 1986; Jones, 1975,1980; Kolansky and Moore, 1971; McBay, 1986; Mullins, Vitola, andAbellera, 1974; Weller, 1985); and the possibility of arelationship between cannabis use and major psychiatric disorders(DSM-III-R, 1987; Andreasson, Allebeck, and Rydberg, 1989; Imadeand Ebie, 1991; Lavik and Onstad, 1986; Meyer, 1975; Negrete,Knapp, Douglas, and Smith, 1986; Thacore and Shukla, 1976;Thornicroft, 1990; Tunving, 1985). Amongst these papers are anumber of fairly thorough review articles and books which attemptan overview of most areas of cannabis research (Cohen, 1986;Hollister, 1988; Jones, 1980; Nahas, 1984; Nahas and Latour,1992; Petersen, 1980). Although the total volume of this literature is somewhatdaunting at first glance, a sampling of the material soon revealsthat much is repetitive and a relatively small number of papersare continually referred to by most authors. Therefore, thisreview will concentrate on a selective group of these articles(90+), which represent the core of this research, but in doingso, we proceed with a high degree of confidence in therepresentative nature of those papers chosen for review andcritique. Nonetheless, no review can be assumed to be free ofbias and this one is no exception. The quality of much of thisliterature reviewed, however, is confounded by the political andsocial debate surrounding illicit drug use in general andcannabis in particular. There seems to be few neutral parties inthe debate and some reports barely hide the prejudices whichdrive for particular conclusions, no matter what the empiricaldata appears to indicate. In commenting on the problems of research into the effects ofcannabis on humans Jones (1980) states: This large and rapidly growing literature demonstrates thatall relevant information on all effects of cannabis will probablynever be available. Because of the nature of science, usuallyfacts change as experience accumulates. As more people use anydrug for more time, as analytic instruments become moresensitive, and as researchers ask more focused questions, newfacts appear and the significance of older facts is continuallyrevised (pp. 54-55). And, we might add, the interpretation of these 'scientificfacts' appears to change with the changing political climate. Of course, this growth of knowledge and evolvinginterpretation of the empirical data can be seen in the alcoholand cigarette literature as well. Like these two licit drugs, theeffects of cannabis must be taken in relation to its frequency ofusage and hence dose rate. Thus, it is still an issue of debatewhether the moderate use of alcohol, as claimed by some, isbeneficial to cardiovascular health. However, there is littledisagreement that intense, prolonged use of alcohol isdeleterious to both physical and psychological well being. In thecase of cannabis, on the other hand, no one appears to be able todefine what constitutes heavy use and in field research ofillicit users the results become highly uncertain because of theinability of scientists to ascertain actual dose rates and hencelife-time intake of cannabinoids. This is due to the wide rangeof concentrations of THC and related compounds in smokedmarijuana and differences of smoking habits from one individualto another. A 'fifth' of single-malt whisky at a given percentstrength is a very precise amount of ethyl alcohol, but akilogram of marijuana can vary widely in its content of bioactiveand psychoactive compounds. Further, when reading the scientific literature on the effectsof cannabis, it is important to put the emerging evidence intoperspective. Very often statements are made about the effects ofits use which, when taken out of context, appear to be somewhatexaggerated in their supposed effect on human health. Forexample, infant birth weight is considered an important indicatorof later rates of cognitive and psychological maturation and thustaken to be a significant risk-factor in the use of any drug bypregnant women. Some studies relate cannabis usage to reducedbirth weight, but neglect to put this finding in the context ofother, more commonly used substances such as tobacco, which causeeven greater effects on birth weights of the infants of usingmothers (Hill and Tennyson, 1986; Fried and O'Connell, 1987). Behavioural studies also have attempted to address the issueof the relative effect of cannabis, as compared to other licitdrugs such as alcohol, in performance tasks - particularly forits effect on driving an automobile. One of the more recent ofthese studies by Chesher et al (1985) concludes that"duration of impairment produced by all three drugs(cannabis was taken in two ways) at the doses used was verysimilar" (p. 624). A report issued in February, 1990 by theUnited States National Transportation Safety Board indicated that12.8% of those involved in fatal truck accidents showed signs ofcannabis ingestion in post mortem examination (cited in Nahas andLatour, 1992, p. 496). However, these published rates are usuallyconfounded by multiple use of psychoactive substances in themajority of cases, particularly alcohol, which is believed toincrease the deleterious effects on behaviour and judgementinduced by cannabis alone. However, in an earlier and largerstudy drivers using cannabis only were involved in only 2.2% ofrecorded fatal accidents and Hollister (1988) concludes from thedata that "at present, THC plays a relatively minor role infatal traffic accidents as compared with alcohol" (p. 113).Apart from the direct neuropsychological effects of both drugs,the problems caused by alcohol and cannabis in relation to motorvehicle accidents, in particular, are more due to the methods andcircumstances of their use by a minority of individuals ratherthan the fact that these substances both cause, in the main,reversible perceptuo-motor deficits. As indicated in the opening remarks, this review of theeffects of cannabis on humans will not attempt to be exhaustiveand will be divided into two broad categories - physiological andpsychological. The physiological classification will includediscussions of effects on the cardio-pulmonary system,teratogenicity and the central nervous system. The psychologicalgrouping, on the other hand, will discuss the relationship ofcannabis use to social adjustment, driving behaviour, toxicpsychoses and schizophrenia. Of course, the psychological andneurological are inextricably intertwined, but for heuristicpurposes they will be kept separate, being cross-referenced onlywhere necessary. PHYSIOLOGICAL Since most cannabis users smoke either marijuana or hashish,it is reasonable to examine the effect of smoking cannabis on theoccurrence of lung disease. Nahas (1984) reminds us that smokingcannabis releases plant constituents such as tars, carbonmonoxide, acids, aldehydes, pyrobenzenes and particulate irritantsubstances, so any toxilogical or pharmacological studies mustconsider these by-products of smoking in addition to thedelta-9-THC content of the smoke, especially in the case ofchronic use. The reader should also take note that many reporterson the effects of cannabis ingestion do not always make clearconceptual discriminations between the effects of smokeby-products (which are very similar to tobacco except for thepresence or absence of nicotine or THC) and those specificallyrelated to the pharmacology of THC. Of course, users primarilysmoke cannabis, but it can also be ingested orally giving similarpsychoactive effects. Thus, any reasonable discussion of thephysiological effects of cannabis must take into account that itis illegally used primarily for its psychoactive properties andif THC were to be provided in an easily ingested rapid actingoral form, the problems due to smoking could be obviated. When taken, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol rapidly disappearsfrom the blood plasma and is taken up in fat where it remainswith a half life decay rate of 5-7 days. This means that after asingle dose of THC, less than 1% of the primary active ingredientremains in fatty tissue after approximately 35-50 days (Nahas,1984). THC's oil solubility and thus high affinity for fattytissue probably accounts for its attraction to neural tissue withits high lipid content in myelin and other components of theneurone. Herkenham et al (1990) used quantitative autoradiographyto map the distribution of THC in mammalian brains in which theydemonstrated that: ...in all species very dense binding was found in the globuspallidus, substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr), and themolecular layers of the cerebellum and hippocampal dentate gyrus.Dense binding was also found in the cerebral cortex, other partsof the hippocampal formation, and striatum. In rat, rhesusmonkey, and human, the SNr contained the highest level ofbinding. Neocortex in all species had moderate binding acrossfields, with peaks in superficial and deep layers. Very low andhomogeneous binding characterised the thalamus and most of thebrainstem, including all of the monoamine-containing cell groups,reticular formation, primary sensory, visceromotor and cranialmotor nuclei, and the area postrema. Theexceptionshypothalamus, basal amygdala, central gray, nucleusof the solitary tract, and laminae I-III and X of the spinalcordshowed slightly higher but still sparse binding (p. 1935). They conclude that the structure activity profile defined bythe binding of the THC analogue used in the study is consistentwith "the same receptor that mediates all of the behaviouraland pharmacological effects of cannabinoids, ...including thesubjective experience termed the human 'high'" (Herkenham etal, 1990, p. 1935). These binding sites are also consistent withTHC's effects on loosening of associations, fragmentation ofthought and short-term memory deficits. Further, dense bindingsfound in the basal ganglia and cerebellum suggest a role forcannabinoids in effecting motor control while involvement withthe ventromedial striatum suggests connections to dopaminecircuits. However, the expected reinforcing properties usuallyassociated with these dopamine pathways is difficult todemonstrate in the case of THC. There are over 60 other cannabinoids and cannabidiols presentin cannabis smoke, most of which have very little psychoactivityand do not bind to these same sites. The effect of thesesubstances is largely unknown, nor is the level of psychoactivityfor any THC remaining in fatty tissue on the days subsequent tothe original ingestion known. Although, in the case of light tomoderate cannabis users, THC can be detected in body fluids forapproximately 30 days after the last consumption, it is quitedifficult to detect perceptuo-motor effects this long after agiven average single dose (1-3 mg THC in cannabis to be smoked).This is unlike alcohol where a clear dose/response curve isdemonstrable in which effects of ethanol on behaviour andjudgement can be demonstrated at blood levels below 0.05%. Intheir comparative study Chesher et al (1985) have estimated thata dose of cannabis originally containing 1 to 2 mg THC produced adecrement in performance on a battery of psychological testswhich was approximately the same as that produced by alcohol at aconcentration of 0.05% (at peak) (p. 627). The results of this last study suggest that many of thebehavioural studies to be examined later in this paper may beseriously flawed. The high dose rates of the typical chroniccannabis user recruited for these behavioural studies, when takenin the context of the relatively long half-life of THC, suggestthat behavioural and psychological tests conducted on chronicusers who are supposedly no longer using cannabis are, in fact,being carried out on individuals still highly intoxicated. If, asChesher et al (1985) suggest, the ingestion of 1-2 mg of THC tobe smoked is the equivalent, in a behavioural sense, of achievinga 0.05% blood alcohol, then typical dose rates of 150 mg per day(to be smoked) are the intoxication equivalent of drinking morethan fifteen 10 oz schooners of standard beer per hour. Cannabisusers at this level of consumption will still have verysignificant accumulations of THC in their fatty tissue, and hencea serum equivalent of more than 0.05% blood alcohol, severalweeks after their last ingestion of cannabis. Thus, any studiesconducted to examine the permanent effects of THC on behaviourfor heavy cannabis users must be sure that their subject samplehas not used any cannabis whatsoever for several months prior toexamination. PULMONARY EFFECTS There have been a number of anecdotal reports and uncontrolledclinical observations which link cannabis smoking to the risk ofpulmonary pathology (Cohen, 1986). However, this evidence is muchless conclusive than a controlled study of lung function testscarried out by Tashkin and colleagues (1980) in which 74 habitualcannabis smokers were compared to non-users. The resultsindicated no substantive difference between users and non-usersbut Cohen (1986) criticises these results as being skewed by thefact that all the participants were initially screened and thoseshowing any respiratory pathology were removed from the study. Inaddition, Tashkin et al's (1980) findings somewhat contradicttheir earlier (1976) report in which they conclude that veryheavy marijuana smoking for 6 to 8 weeks appears to cause mildbut significant airway obstruction. Earlier studies of U.S. servicemen hashish smokers conductedby Henderson and Tennant (1972), however, make a more damagingcase against cannabis in relation to lung disorders. Theseresearchers found frequent and severe nose and throatinflammation often accompanied by X-ray findings which includedsinusitis and lower airway diseases such as bronchitis andasthma. As part of these studies patients with chronic cough weresubjected to bronchoscopy and biopsy of the epithelial lining ofthe posterior wall of the trachea. Microscopic examination of thebiopsy samples revealed a number of cellular abnormalities whichare associated with the later development of lung cancer andchronic obstructive pulmonary disease. These include the loss ofcilia, basal epithelial cell proliferation and proliferationatypical cells. The authors acknowledge that most of these men smoked tobaccoalong with hashish, but insist that the development of theabnormalities observed significantly pre-dates their usualappearance in those who are tobacco smokers only. The problemwith ascribing these pathological changes to cannabis alone isobvious. The later attempts of Tennant and associates todisconfound tobacco effects from those of cannabis tended to showthat either smoking tobacco alone or use of hashish on its own isless deleterious than combining the two (Tennant, Guerry, andHenderson, 1980). However, the sample size used in this laterstudy was much too small to allow any clear-cut conclusions to bedrawn. Cohen summarises these findings. Although not a single case of lung cancer has yet beenattributed to chronic marijuana smoking in this country (U.S.),the possibility cannot be ignored that chronic, heavy marijuanasmoking, like chronic tobacco smoking, may be a risk factor forthe development of lung cancer and that the risks of developinglung cancer as the result of combined marijuana and tobaccosmoking could be additive or even synergistic (parentheses mine)(Cohen, 1986, p. 156). Finally, it should be borne in mind that cannabis producessimilar carcinogenic 'tars' to that of tobacco, but in greaterquantities than for an equal weight of tobacco, and the deepinhalation techniques employed by marijuana and hashish smokerstends to deposit that tar more deeply in the lungs. It has beencalculated that 70% of the particulate matter is retained in thelungs and it thus can be assumed that in the case of cannabisthis percentage is even greater (Jones, 1980). Again, incontrasting pulmonary effects of cannabis smoking with that oftobacco it should be recalled that most tobacco smokers are nowusing products which have been modified to reduce the 'tar'content and which are often filtered to that same end. Therefore,the comparison of illicit cannabis with legal, processed tobacco,in terms of health effects, is somewhat spurious. CARDIOVASCULAR EFFECTS When cannabis is first smoked one of its most prominentimmediate effects is tachycardia which tends to be proportionalto the ingested dose (Stimmel, 1979). The rate increase variesfrom 50-100% of resting pulse with an accompanying decrease inorthostatic blood pressure. It was observed by Aronow and Cassidythat the consumption of one marijuana cigarette containing 19 mgof THC decreased exercise time until angina by 48% as compared toa marijuana placebo which only reduced time to angina by 9%. Theauthors of this study concluded that cannabis smoking increasedmyocardial oxygen demand while decreasing myocardial oxygendelivery (Aronow and Cassidy, 1974). Hollister (1988) concludesfrom these results that, although smoking is not recommended foranyone with angina, the shorter time until angina seen withcannabis combined with its induction of tachycardia makes itparticularly deleterious for those suffering fromarteriosclerosis of the coronary arteries or congestive heartfailure. Nahas (1984) summarises what he believes to be thecardiovascular threat of cannabis ingestion based on the abovefindings: The smoking of marihuana increases the work of the heart byincreasing heart rate, and in some cases by increasing bloodpressure. This increase in work load poses a threat to patientswith hypertension, cerebro-vascular disease, and coronaryatherosclerosis. Marihuana can also cause postural hypotension. The drop inblood pressure could be hazardous in those individuals withcompromised blood flow to heart or brain, especially if they arevolume-depleted or if other drugs have impaired reflex control oftheir blood vessels. In older patients treated by delta-9-THC orwho had smoked marihuana for glaucoma, orthostatic hypotensionhas been disabling and a risk factor of cardiovascularcomplications. Marihuana appears to intensify the effects of the sympatheticnervous system on the heart, an undesirable consequence inpatients with coronary artery disease and in those susceptible toarrythmias (p. 127). Jones (1980) admits that distinguishing chronic from acuteeffects of cannabis on the cardiovascular system is problematic.Chronic, long term oral administration of THC can result inmildly depressed heart rate and slight lowering of blood pressure(Benowitz and Jones, 1975). Although these changes appear to beof little biological significance, Jones feels that long term usemight be associated with lasting health consequences, drawing hisargument from the accumulated data now existent on tobacco useand heart disease. It was, he argues, years before the connectionwas made between smoking and coronary artery disease. Jonesclaims that THC has "far more profound effects on thecardiovascular system than does nicotine," but fails to tellus how. In fact, the findings of Benowitz and Jones he presentson long term oral administration of THC (above) shows an effectwhich could be construed as potentially useful in combating thenegative cardiovascular effects of long term stress. As is oftenthe case in THC research, interpretation is in the eye of thebeholder. Jones' prediction concerning the effect of long term cannabisuse as having potentially more serious effects than nicotineingestion is somewhat peremptory. Until the effects of the"tars," particulates, carbon monoxide and differingsmoking styles involved in marijuana smoking are disconfoundedfrom the effects of the cannabinols (THC in particular),prognostications about the future effects of cannabis on thecardiovascular system are somewhat precipitous. His statementcomparing nicotine with THC is particularly ill founded. Moststudies have not looked at comparisons between THC and nicotine,per se, but have made comparisons between smoked cannabis andtobacco cigarettes. The actions of both compounds are no doubtaltered by the method of delivery (smoking) as well as by thecombination of responses caused by other constituents of thesmoke such as carbon monoxide, for example. Nicotine itself isknown to be a strong activator of sympathetic pathways of theautonomic nervous system thereby having a direct, stimulatingeffect on the heart (Kalat, 1988). No such direct action has beendemonstrated for THC or its other psychoactive derivatives. Again, as in the case of possible pulmonary action of THC,conjecture seems to far outweigh empirical evidence. Whatevidence there is appears to be flawed by studies which areeither uncontrolled, anecdotal, or based on small, idiosyncraticcases. Even more importantly, the research cited above does notcontrol for the effect of psychological factors on cardiovascularactivity. As will be described later in this paper, cannabisintoxication is well known for producing mild to severe panicreactions in naive users (Cohen, 1986; Hollister, 1988; Jones,1980; Nahas, 1984; Weil, 1970). The level of stress produced bysuch states, and by altered consciousness experiences in general,often may be responsible for the clinical signs of stresssyndrome such as shortness of breath, tachycardia, etc. There islittle doubt that any individual with incipient cardiopathologymay show symptoms of cardiac distress when so psychologicallytaxed. TERATOGENICITY Central to the issue of teratogenicity and THC is thepossibility that there is a direct action of the cannabinoids onchromosomes. In studies by Stenchever, Kunysz, and Allen (1974)and Herha and Obe (1974) a significant increase in chromosomalabnormalities was observed in marijuana users as opposed tonon-users. These changes consisted largely of breaks ortranslocations of chromosomes and more of the latter were foundin chronic users than non-users. However, when breaks wereincluded in the count, the effect was drowned and the differenceswere lost. A later study, however, found that after 72 days ofchronic marijuana smoking, no increase in chromosomal breakagerate could be found when compared to the base level existingbefore the study (Hollister, 1988; Matsuyama, Jarvik, Fu, andYen, 1976). The pre-test, post-test design of this last study canbe considered superior to the previous two clinicalinvestigations because of the built-in controls of awithin-subject statistical design. Studies not using thisparticular design usually cannot approximate the dose ratereceived by their subjects nor are they able to rule out othercauses of chromosome anomalies, which may be related todifferences in life-style between users and non-users and/or theeffects of other drugs rather than being due to the action of THCalone. In addition, one must take any chromosome studies in theproper context. Many commonly used licit drugs are capable ofcausing chromosome abnormalities as well. For example, in arecent in vitro study it was demonstrated that Paracetamol iscapable of producing concentration-dependent chromosomalaberrations in primary rat hepatocytes (Muller, Kasper, andMadle, 1991). Although these clastogenic effects in vitro wereobserved only at very high concentrations, pharmacokinetic dataand other published mutagenicity data suggest that there might bea risk for human use. According to the authors, in vivo studiessuggest Paracetamol is also weakly clastogenic in humanlymphocytes when used at the maximum human therapeutic doserange. However, there appears to be no public alarm regardingthis and earlier studies which made similar observations aboutthe effects of aspirin. For both THC and Paracetamol thelong-term effects of induced chromosomal abnormalities remainsunknown and thus we must be cautious in extrapolating to anypossible teratogenic consequences without considerably morecontrolled research. One of the more contentious areas of cannabis researchconcerns the effect on foetal development of the mother's use ofTHC containing preparations during pregnancy. As Cohen (1986)suggests, these effects can be highly confounded by other factorssuch as nutrition, alcohol, tobacco, other drug use andsocioeconomic status. He further suggests that fairly largenumbers of matched-pair subject would be required for themaintenance of external validity in such studies. Hingston et al(1982) studied 1,690 mother/child pairs in which 234 mothers usedmarijuana in varying amounts during the course of theirpregnancies. The outcome of this study revealed that cannabis usewas associated with lower infant birth weight and length for thebabies of users. This results revealed a proportional effect forthe level of consumption of THC, with higher use rates deliveringgreater birth weight deficits. Zuckerman et al (1989) obtainedsimilar results in which they found a statistically significantaverage 79 gram decrement in foetal weight and a 0.5 cm reductionin body length for maternal THC users as opposed to non-users. Inthis study they further raise the issue of the importance ofbiological markers in differentiating users from non-users. Whenanalysing the results of their subjects on verbal reports alone,the significant differences disappeared in contrast to adifferentiation made by urinanalysis for THC metabolites. Cohen (1986) states in his interpretation of the results ofHingston et al (1982) that maternal marijuana use was thestrongest independent predictor of the occurrence of featurescompatible with foetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) and was better thanalcohol as a predictor of FAS. In a later study Hingston et al(1984) clarified their earlier study and concluded that someadverse effects attributed to maternal drinking and smoking maybe the result of an interaction with marijuana. In other words,there may be an additive effect of drug combinations on thefoetus. In a related study Gibson, Bayhurst, and Colley (1983) foundthat, of the 7,301 births sampled for abnormal infantcharacteristics, mothers using marijuana were significantly morelikely to deliver premature babies of low birth weight. However,the largest study reported in Cohen's (1986) review of theliterature is that of Linn, Schoenbaum, Monson, Stubblefield, andRyan (1983). In this study 10 independent variables were analysedfor 12,718 women who gave birth at the Boston Hospital. Marijuanawas the most highly predictive of congenital malformation abovealcohol and tobacco. Further, Qazi et al (1985) studied theinfants of five regular marijuana only users and found that eachinfant had low birth weight, small head circumference, tremors atbirth, abnormal epicanthic folds, posteriorly rotated ears, along philtrum, a high arched palate and abnormal palm creaseswhich are all considered signs of FAS. Cohen suggests the causeof these morphological anomalies can be found in the results ofresearch conducted by Morishima (1984) in which he found that 5%of ova are damaged by exposure to THC. Cohen (1986) admits that gross malformations in human infantshave not yet been conclusively linked to THC exposure. Fried(1985), on the other hand, observed that any possible neonatalnervous system effects occurring from the result of regularmarijuana use by mothers during pregnancy do not manifest inpoorer performance on cognitive and motor tests at one and onehalf and two years of age. In addition, a later study by Fried(1989) found that, by age three, a dose response relationshipbetween lower language scores, lowered cognitive scores andprenatal cigarette (tobacco) exposure is observable. At this age,some cognitive and language deficits are also observable withprenatal marijuana exposure. In summary, although Fried observedthat at one, two and three years of age, there are persistenteffects of prenatal exposure to cigarettes, the effects ofprenatal marijuana exposure, if present, are not as readilyascertained. If, as noted in the introductory section of this paper,neonatal weight, length and head circumference are criticalvariables predictive of later psycho-motor development, there isgood reason for concern based on the results of most of thestudies cited above. However, Fried's (1985, 1989) work appearsto contradict the conventional wisdom in the case of the THCusers he studied vis--vis reduction in foetal body size andits relation to later learning and behavioural deficits. Thesecontradictory findings would tend to indicate either that theresearch into birth effects is somewhat confounded, or there isnot a simple relationship between foetal body size andbehavioural development. Again, as in other areas of researchinto the effects of THC on humans, the disentangling of theseissues awaits more exacting and controlled studies in the future(Nahas and Latour, 1992). NEUROLOGICAL EFFECTS In many ways the existence or not of permanent, harmfulchanges to the nervous system caused by the use of cannabis iscentral to the debate on the drug's long-term effects. Obviously,any substance which has definite psychoactivity must, ipso facto,be neurologically active. That cannabis alters brain functionthere is no doubt. The questions addressed by most research ishow and to what degree. Jones (1980) summarises the nature ofcannabis intoxication and its relation to neurological clinicalsigns. Acute cannabis intoxication includes not only the pleasantstate of relaxation, euphoria, and sought-after sensoryalterations, but also impairs judgments of distance and time,memory for recent events, ability to learn new information, andphysical coordination. At slightly higher doses the acuteintoxication includes tremor, transient muscular rigidity, ormyoclonic muscle activity. The subjective feelings of muscular"weakness" or stiffness can be measured objectively.Low doses produce no changes in tendon reflexes, but high dosescause hyperexcitability of knee jerks with clonus. At even higherdoses a full blown acute brain syndrome is possible (p. 67). Jones (1980) goes on to add that some researchers would arguethat such altered and impaired brain function represents a primafacie case of temporary neurological damage during the period ofacute intoxication. The health issue which arises from this iswhether these neurological alterations last only a few hours orwhether they persist with deleterious cumulative effects. As willbe seen below, the data is by no means consistent and conclusionsare difficult to draw. In the early 1970's press reports appeared which claimed thatscientists had found that cannabis use caused 'shrinking of thebrain'. These claims were based on the work of Campbell (1971),who used pneumoencephalography to examine a small sample (10) ofcannabis users by examining the size of their neural ventricles.These measurements appeared to reveal that the ventricles wereenlarged, a finding consistent with cerebral atrophy. The problemwith this early research is that it was conducted on a populationof patients who were suffering from various neurologicaldisorders. This fact, together with the inaccuracy of the earlierair-volume measurement technique, is deemed by Jones (1980) torender the work invalid. Later, similar, small-scale studiesconducted by Co et al (1977) and Kuehnle et al (1977) usingcomputerised transaxial tomography (CAT scans) found no evidenceof anatomic changes. In the latter research the subjects werepreselected for being healthy, normal cannabis users. However,these last two studies beg the research question by, in effect,choosing subjects who have not yet developed any pathology for anexamination of possible permanent neurological effects ofcannabis use. Electroencephalographic (EEG) changes in humans using cannabisusually entail an increase in mean-square alpha energy levels anda slight slowing of alpha frequency. In general, only very minorchanges tend to appear in the surface EEG's of cannabis users andthose that do, such as increases in alpha wave activity, tend tobe synonymous with drowsiness and relaxation (Jones, 1980; Cohen,1986; Klonoff, Low, and Marcus, 1973). Although scalp EEG changesare minimal, Heath (1973) and Heath et al (1979) reportsignificant alterations in electrical activity recorded inmid-brain structures of primates, most notably in the septal andamygdala areas. Although the focal EEG changes reported in thisresearch have been seen only in the brains of monkeys which wereexposed to marijuana smoke or given THC intravenously, theresearch of these authors has been quoted widely in bothscientific review articles as well as in various anti-cannabistracts. Therefore, a closer examination of some of this work isin order. Heath et al (1979) found that continuous, daily exposure tothe equivalent of the smoke from about 3 marijuana cigarettes perday produced abnormal electrical alterations after 2 to 3 months.Additional exposure of up to 3 to 6 months produced electricalabnormalities which persisted for up to 8 months. Heath alsoconducted histological examinations on brain tissue from themonkeys and found anatomic changes were apparent in theelectronmicrographs, suggesting long-lasting changes related tothe THC exposure. These changes included widening of the synapticcleft, clumping of synaptic vesicles and other unspecifiedchanges in morphology of neurones which occurred in monkeys after6 months of forced cannabis intake and were still evident 6months after cessation of cannabis use. However, it is unclearfrom his report whether a methodical evaluation of the supposedhistopathology was made which included an independent panel ofjudges or whether these were his own personal judgements. The deep sites from which abnormal EEG recordings wererecorded are generally believed to be involved in emotionalexpression and hence affect disorders.2 Heath's earlier workremains somewhat problematic when his experimental setup isexamined in more detail. Although his monkeys included controlswho were exposed to both very low THC containing marijuana andtobacco smoke alone,3 this research remains highly confounded.The monkeys were strapped into chairs with transparent, sealedplastic boxes surrounding their heads. The smoke, together withoxygen, was pumped into the box for a pre-determined period whileEEG recordings were made through permanently implanted deepelectrodes. Given that in humans THC can induce panic anxietyattacks and given that monkeys do not like to be restrained, itis impossible to tell whether the abnormal electrical activityrecorded in limbic areas was directly induced in the brain by theaction of THC or whether this activity was what one would observewhen panic is induced in restrained monkeys intoxicated by THC. Heath describes the monkeys' behaviour. All displayed dilated pupils and sharp reduction in level ofawareness. The monkeys would stare blankly into space, sometimesdisplaying spontaneous nystagmus, and would become much lessattentive or completely unresponsive to environmental stimuli.When their hands or feet were grasped, the clasping response,which was consistently elicited on baseline examinations, wasabsent. Responses to pain (pinprick) and to sound (hand claps)were minimal to absent. Although the monkeys were notparticularly drowsy, spontaneous motor movements were notablyslowed, and passive tests of muscle tone suggested a degree ofcatatonia, although true waxy flexibility never developed (Heath,1973, p. 4). This certainly is not the way that the vast majority of humanbeings react to cannabis intoxication. The behaviour Heathdescribes appears to be more in line with an animal frozen inpanic or manifesting what used to be called 'animal hypnosis'.Hunt (1984), a cognitive psychologist, has called this the"negative capability" and it appears to be part of aneurophysiological mechanism for behavioural and cognitiveshutdown when an animal is overwhelmed by, for example, apredator. Another major problem with Heath's 1973 study was the controlof O2 partial pressure (PP) in the head chamber. From tables inhis paper one can see that the PP of O2 inside the monkey's"breathing chamber" was 75% greater than room PP in themarijuana run but only 9% above for the control tobacco sequence.The measured serum PP of O2 was 143% above pre-exposure levels asseen in his data for the marijuana sequence as opposed to a riseof only 22.4% in the case of the tobacco run. There is littledoubt that high partial pressures of serum O2 will affect brainfunction and hence the EEG recordings (p. 9). Thus, anycomparisons between THC exposure and tobacco exposure in thisstudy are at best spurious. Finally, Heath states that, as thechoice of subjects for cannabis studies moves up the phylogeneticscale, it is observed that THC produces a more localised effectin the brain involving fewer areas. In other words, humans showthe least generalised reactions to THC. In summary, apart fromthe confounding factors of behavioural variables and O2 partialpressures in this research, any attempt to generalise frommonkeys to humans is fraught with the possibility of committing alogical category error. As mentioned above, the research of Heath and his colleagueshas been widely reported and appears to have been acceptedsomewhat uncritically by a number of serious researchers as seenin two of the review articles being reported on here (Cohen,1986; Jones, 1980). This seems to be a recurring theme in much ofthe cannabis research today. In most research intopsychopharmacological effects on EEG reliable conclusions arerarely drawn from so small a number of studies. The interactionof pharmacological agents with brain and behaviour is complex andeven the simplest relationships require many experiments in orderto delineate the causal connections with any degree ofreliability. It appears as though any findings in cannabisresearch are immediately set upon by the those opposed to it usefor the purpose of adding power to already pre-drawn conclusions. Sleep EEG recordings sometimes can be more sensitiveindicators of drug effects than waking EEG (Jonew, 1980).Reduction in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep accompanied byincreases in total sleep time have been reported in humanstogether with considerable changes in surface EEG recordings aseffects of cannabis use (Feinberg , 1976). The cessation ofcannabis intake after prolonged use will then lead to a reboundeffect in which REM sleep stages and eye movements rise abovebaseline levels. This rebound is not unlike those seen after thecessation of other sedative hypnotic drugs. In addition to theseEEG changes, cortically evoked potentials consistent with alteredcentral nervous system (CNS) function have been recorded fromscalp electrodes of waking subjects (Herning, Jones, andPeltzman, 1979). However, as is often the case in cannabisresearch, "the pattern of change varies with dose andmeasurement technique, and between laboratories. The biologicalor functional significance of these alterations remainsobscure" (Jones, 1980, p. 69). Jones (1980) summarises the difficulties and uncertainty whichmust be accepted as part of cannabis research into itsneurological effects. Many survey and laboratory studies comparing user and nonuserpopulations have reported no differences in cognitive,intellectual, or perceptual function between these twogroups....Many of the studies reporting no neurologicaldifferences between users and nonusers have compared veryselected people using 1, 2, or 3 marijuana cigarettes per week tothose using none. It may well be that lasting impairment will beevident only at a greater dosage level or that the marijuana useinteracts with some other unrecognised factor to produce lastingeffects. The impairment will thus be missed in such limitedstudies. On the other hand, when deleterious, possiblymarijuana-related, effects on function have been noted in groupsof cannabis users, it is very difficult to determine whether thecannabis use caused the impairment, or was simply associated withit, or followed it. If one considers neurochemical data from test tubes, animaldata, clinical case reports, survey data, controlled laboratorydata, and semicontrolled field studies, the weight of theevidence so far is that lasting neuropsychological impairmentsare possibly but not inevitably associated with some undeterminedlevel of heavy, prolonged cannabis use. However, the many factorsthat would determine the appearance of clinically evidentcannabis-induced neuropsychological changes in any given user areso complex as to make any simple pronouncement of risk almostmeaningless (pp. 70-71). The research paradoxes revealed in the above section onphysiological effects of cannabis can only be adequately resolvedthrough the application of controlled experimental researchtechniques on large groups of humans. It is obvious that this isneither ethical nor practical. Of course, the tautological trapcreated by subject choice, as described in most of the aboveclinical research into cannabis, applies to all epidemiologicalstudies, not just cannabis research. As we have seen with bothtobacco and alcohol research in the past, reliable conclusionscan only be pieced together slowly through large-scale andmethodical data collection. So, it must be recognised thatdecisions probably cannot wait for the final datum to becollected because it is unlikely that all the data will ever be'in'. As with many decisions in other aspects of life, we mustexamine the apparent 'facts', while attempting to understandtheir context and accuracy, and then make the best possiblechoice based on the pragmatics of the circumstances rather thanon absolutist principles posing as facts. One might well arguethat if there is any doubt, whatsoever, that cannabis is safe touse, then it should be permanently banned. However, there may beuseful social purposes served by allowing controlled use ofcannabis which outweigh any possible deleterious effects it mayhave on the human organism. This is obviously the kind ofthinking behind the current freedom we have to use analgesics,such as aspirin and Paracetamol, in spite of their welldocumented negative side-effects. PSYCHOLOGICAL In any review of the psychological effects of cannabis, aclear distinction should be drawn between cannabis use, abuse anddependency. Because of the problems involved in determiningpotency, as delineated in the opening section of this paper, itis often difficult to distinguish casual users from those who areabusers or dependent on the drug. The standard reference fordifferential diagnosis of psychiatric disorders, the Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association(1987), defines cannabis dependence. Cannabis Dependence is usually characterised by daily, oralmost daily, use of the substance. In Cannabis Abuse, the personuses the substance episodically, but shows evidence ofmaladaptive behaviour, such as driving while impaired by CannabisIntoxication (p. 176). The DSM-IIIR asserts that the impairment of occupational andsocial functioning and the resultant physical pathologiesassociated with cannabis dependence tend to be less than thoseseen in other psychoactive intoxicants, such as heroin, cocaineand alcohol. As a result, people showing signs of cannabis abuseor dependency are less often seen by medical doctors andpsychiatrists. This fact further clouds any attempts atdelineating an accurate definition or symptomatology of cannabisabuse and/or dependency. The Manual does list a set of general symptoms characteristicof dependency, however. These include lethargy, anhedonia, andattentional and memory problems. This dependency syndrome usuallydevelops with repeated use over a considerable period of timewith rapid development following initial use being rare. Althoughthere has been considerable debate over the issue of thedevelopment of tolerance in cannabis users, the DSM-IIIR assertsthat "tolerance may develop to some of the substance'spsychoactive effects and thus promote increased levels ofconsumption" (p. 177). This increase is not very great,according to the Manual, and if levels of consumption become veryhigh, there may be a decrease in pleasurable effects with aconcomitant increase in the number of dysphoric effectsexperienced by users. Jones (1980) summarises. Tolerance, that is, a diminished response to a repeatedcannabis dose, is clearly associated with repeated use...Itappears now, both in animals and in humans, that tolerancedevelops quite rapidly to many of the effects of THC. The morefrequent the administration and the higher the dose the morerapidly it develops, but even subjects smoking as little as onemarijuana cigarette per day in a laboratory experimentdemonstrate tolerance on some behavioural and physiologicdimensions when they are carefully measured....Most of thetolerance seems to be lost rapidly, but this rate may vary withthe sensitivity of the measures used (p. 74). Other researchers, on the other hand, argue from both clinicaland personal experience that one must learn to get 'high' and,therefore, it takes less cannabis for experienced users to obtainthe desired effect than for neophytes (Tart, 1971; Weil, 1975).However, Weller, Halikas, and Moorse (1984) found, in a five-yearfollow-up study of regular marijuana users, that continuous usewas associated with decreasing pleasurable effects. Cohen (1986)summarises their results. Users who had earlier reported positive feelings ofrelaxation, peacefulness, enhanced sensitivity, floatingsensations, self-confidence, subjective impressions of heightenedmental power, and other sought-after effects now said that theseeffects had significantly diminished. The undesirable aspects ofthe experience, however, persisted essentially unchanged (p.158). PSYCHOPATHOLOGY Nahas (1984), a major contributor to the cannabis literature,takes a strongly proscriptive stand towards cannabis use andunderscores the potential psychological dangers inherent incannabis intoxication when he argues that exposure during the keydevelopmental periods of foetal growth and adolescence mayproduce long-term, permanent psychopathological changes inindividuals thus exposed. In order to further emphasise theallegedly unseen threat of cannabis use, Brill and Nahas (1984)address the issue of the paradox of the apparent minimalphysiological effects recorded in most cannabis users warning usthat The discrepancy between the marked psychological alterationsand the slight physical symptoms associated with Cannabisintoxication represents another aspect of its deceptive nature.Many people today believe that since no apparent gross physicaldamage results from the absorption of Cannabis derivatives, thereis little or no danger associated with their use. They aremistaken: Cannabis and all other hallucinogens have a commoncharacteristic, their psychotoxicity and their ability todisintegrate mental function, which is not accompanied by anymajor alterations of the vital physiological functions. Mentalillness, especially in the young, is also characterised by asimilar discrepancy between the functions of the mind, which aremarkedly impaired, and those of the body, which are wellpreserved (p. 263). This strongly held position, only loosely based on empiricaldata, often characterises the quality of discussion seen in theresearch literature concerning the psychological effects ofcannabis. In the work of Brill and Nahas (1984) the unclearrelationship between the physiological cause and psychologicaleffect of cannabis intoxication is used to insinuate an almost'devious' and/or 'sneaky' action for -9-tetrahydrocannabinol.On the other hand, the actual argument given in the last sectionof the above quote, aimed at establishing a potent relationshipbetween the minimal physiological causes arising from cannabisingestion and its apparent strong psychological effects, is,again, typical of the cannabis debate and, in this case, spuriouson at least two counts. The first is the obvious logical category error of arguingfrom the class of mental illness to the psychological effects ofcannabis intoxication without any evidence that these twophenomena are in any way the same category of event,physiologically or psychologically. The second, the argument asto the universality of deleterious psychological consequences ofcannabis use, is based on a small minority of cases who havedemonstrated some psychopathological effects directlyattributable to cannabis use and thus have come to the attentionof medical authorities. However, it should be remembered that thevast majority of users, whether occasionally experiencing somenegative states or not, manage the use of cannabis and are ableto integrate it into productive life-styles without developingany apparent psychopathology (Weil, 1975). The size of thismajority is in the many millions whereas the minority from whichmost of the pathological data is drawn is a non-representative(statistically) few hundred. In contrast to the view of cannabis as psychologicallydangerous in itself, Weil (1975) has argued that it should beunderstood to be what he calls an "active placebo."Weil describes an "active placebo" as "a substancewhose apparent effects on the mind are actually placebo effectsin response to minimal physiological action" rather thanbeing a direct cause of the psychological changes seen in users(p. 95). This effect is attested to, empirically, by the widevariety of responses individuals make to similar batches ofcannabis in similar situations. Weil's conclusions, based onhundreds of clinical observations, led him to argue that it washighly unlikely that cannabis alone could be responsible for thevery varied psychological responses and effects which heobserved. From the recent work of Herkenham et al (1990), cited earlierin this paper, there is no doubt that the cannabinols haveaffinities for specific brain structures. However, it is as yetunclear as to whether cannabis has any predictable specificbehavioural, cognitive, and/or affective effects resulting fromthe particular receptor site bindings mapped in their study. Todate it is not possible to describe a unique and repeatableconstellation of psychological responses to the action of thecannabinols as is possible for the opiate derivatives or theneuroleptic compounds used in the treatment of schizophrenia.This observation alone must cast some considerable doubt on mostpsychopharmacological ascriptions made for the actions of thecannabinols in humans. There have been numerous attributions made about thepsychological effects of cannabis. In the sections below a numberof areas which have had considerable attention in the researchliterature will be reviewed. However, before embarking on issues,such as "panic reaction" and "toxicpsychosis" amongst cannabis users, at least one popularmisconception concerning cannabis intoxication requiresclarification. As a result of press and electronic media coverage there is awidely held belief by the community-at-large that thoseintoxicated by cannabis are more prone to show aggressive andviolent behaviour. This idea also has found its way intoscientific discourse (Brill and Nahas, 1984; Imade and Ebie,1991). In their exploration of this issue, Brill and Nahasattempt to distil a phenomenology of cannabis intoxication based,to a large extent, on the idiosyncratic reportage ofJacques-Joseph Moreau who recorded observations about himself andother hashish users in the mid-Nineteenth Century. Moreaudescribes the quality of affect experienced during the moodswings he encountered while intoxicated on hashish. With hashish, the emotions display the same degree ofoverexcitement as the intellectual faculties. They have themobility and also the despotism of the ideas. The more one feelsincapable of directing his thoughts, the more one loses the powerto resist the emotions they create. The violence of theseemotions is boundless when the disorder of the intellect hasreached the point of incoherence (Brill and Nahas, 1984, p. 270). Not only is this description contexualised in NineteenthCentury cultural values and convictions, and thus not applicableas a direct comparison with late Twentieth Century experience,but the language itself is not easily interpretable from currentcontexts. The culturally embedded beliefs regarding the nature ofemotions and mind have changed radically since Moreau's time ashave the way individuals understand their relationship with theirsubjective lives. Therefore, using such a source in order tounderstand cannabis intoxication in the present is dubious atbest. Claims concerning violence thus appear to be somewhatconfounded and in summarising this issue Jones (1980) reportsthat Most commissions and review groups that have specificallystudied the relationship between cannabis and violence haveconcluded that the use of marijuana is not a major cause ofaggression. There is little new that would change that conclusion(p. 73). In fact, it is most often the case that chronic cannabis usershave a depressed demeanour, a lack of drive and rarely show signsof violent behaviour (Tennant and Groesbeck, 1972). In contrastto the myth of 'hashishim' running amok, is the often witnessedsyndrome referred to as "panic reaction", which haslikely been confused with aggression and violence in many cases. PANIC REACTION One of the most common dysphoric responses to cannabisintoxication is what has been called the "panicreaction." "Panic reaction" most often appears aspart of an anxiety reaction in relatively inexperienced users, orin those ingesting a higher than expected dose, and ischaracterised by the appearance of an acute fear reactionsometimes associated with panic connected to the experient'spossible, imminent death (Tennant and Groesbeck, 1972). This"panic reaction" typically follows or is followed by anacute paranoid state characterised by mistrust of others and abelief that others have malintent towards the intoxicant. Thesereactions are generally acute and disappear with the loss ofintoxication within hours (Cohen, 1986; Hollister, 1988). Of this acute panic syndrome, Jones (1980) delineates thepossible psychological progression. This reaction, which usually starts off with an exaggerationof normal cannabis effects, can range from mild anxiety andrestlessness to panic with paranoid delusions, to a full-blownacute toxic psychosis with loss of contact with reality,delusions, hallucinations, and agitated and inappropriatebehaviour. The reaction is more likely to occur in inexperiencedusers or in the user who unknowingly consumes more potentcannabis material than is anticipated. Preexisting psychologicaldifficulties may also contribute. The symptoms usually diminishover a few hours and are somewhat alleviated by reassurance, aquiet environment, and generally supportive atmosphere (p. 71). Kolansky and Moore (1971) studied a group of 38 subjects whohad smoked marihuana twice per week or more, consuming two ormore marijuana cigarettes per session. They found that theirsubjects consistently demonstrated poor "socialjudgement", poor "attention span", poorconcentration associated with confusion, anxiety, depression,apathy, passivity and indifference. These changes appeared to bepart of an alteration of consciousness characterised by: 1) abifurcation of the ego into observing and experiencing selves; 2)an apparent inability of the subjects to bring their thoughtstogether; 3) a paranoid suspiciousness of others; and 4) aseeming regression to a more infantile state (p. 487). Theysummarise using a mixture of psychoanalytic and physiologicalmetaphors, which appear to owe more to speculation than to goodscientific inference. It was our impression in these cases that the use of cannabisderivatives caused such severe decompensation of the ego that itbecame necessary for the ego to develop a delusional system in anattempt to restore a new form of reality. It would appear thatthis type of paranoid reaction is a direct result of the toxiceffects of cannabis upon the ego organisation of those patientsdescribed in this study (p. 489). However, in this paper Kolansky and Moore (1971) appear toindulge in generalisations concerning the effects of THC whichare based on a tiny, psychiatrically referred sample. Anyconclusions thus drawn concerning the action of cannabis on thegeneral population commit the logical error of inferring auniversal from an existential instantiation. In addition, valuejudgements are made about their patients throughout which reflecta strong cultural bias in favour of American middle-classprofessional standards. There was marked interference with personal cleanliness,grooming, dressing, and study habits or work or both. Theselatter characteristics were at times present in some patientsprior to smoking marihuana, but were always markedly accentuatedfollowing the onset of smoking (pp. 487-488). There seems to be little introspective awareness on the partof the authors regarding their strong prejudices and valuejudgements. If science is supposed to be a value-free activity,then this current report does not begin to represent science ineither spirit or praxis. These two psychiatrists appear to beblissfully unaware of the cultural changes taking place aroundthem at the time (1968 - 1971) and thus much of their criticismis confounded by their cultural blinkeredness. Further, theappearance of opposite and contradictory symptomologies (somebecame apathetic while other became hyperactive) in their studygroup suggests that THC is not a strictly a causal agent of theobserved psychopathology, as argued by Weil (1975), but, rather,a facilitator of predisposed conditions. Negrete et al (1986) offers a conceptual description of whatmight be the underlying psychological mechanisms of the panic,ego decompensation and paranoid ideation sometimes seen incannabis users. He states that it has been ...observed that tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) impairs the rate,sequence and goal directness of thinking; that under theinfluence of cannabis the individual experiences an intermittentloss of information; that the feed-back and feed-forwardperceptive mechanisms - which are essential in the process ofreality testing - are upset. In addition, there is a distortionin the sense of time which leads to a telescoping of past,present and future. Unrelated events become peculiarly connectedin the user's own 'psychological time'. All these phenomenafoster projection and stimulate paranoid ideation (pp. 515-516). Therefore, the evidence that new or inexperienced cannabisusers are prone to panic, paranoid, or anxiety attacks must beseen from the perspective of this effect being largely a functionof particular personality types (psychological 'set') and thequality of the 'setting' in which these personalities findthemselves when intoxicated. Any substance or situation which iscapable of facilitating (directly or as an "activeplacebo") a fairly radical change in cognitive sequencingand affective states and, hence, an individual's relationship toand understanding of social reality, has the potential ofgenerating panic, anxiety and paranoid states as a response toloss of control and attendant feelings of uncertainty. No doubtthis is a danger in the use of cannabis as well as being a dangerwhen one leaves home for the first time, marries, gives birth forthe first time, or starts a new job. When this type of psychological response does occur, there is,of course, a real possibility of it escalating into a fullyfledged psychotic reaction. The literature on cannabis is, infact, replete with cases and discussions of the relationship ofcannabis use and abuse to the formation of toxic psychoses, asubject to which we will now turn. CANNABIS TOXIC PSYCHOSIS In 1944 the New York La Guardia study concluded that given asuitably oriented personality, marijuana use could lead, in theright time and environment, to a true psychotic state.4 Evenearlier, however, a physician from British Guyana in 1893described the symptoms of what he believed to be a cannabispsychosis. The cannabis psychosis gives the impression of acute mania ormelancholia. Most often the patient is in a state of mania,suffering from delusions and visual and auditory hallucinations.He moves incessantly, waving his arms, throwing himself from oneside to another, running up and down in the room, crying andsinging. The psychosis might be associated with violentbehaviour. Sometimes the patient refuses to eat, sometimes hegets an intense hunger. The state may change rapidly and verysoon the patient will recover and seem quite normal again. - Butafter two or three recurrences, every time triggered by relapsesinto cannabis abuse, the patient runs the risk of becomingapathetic and blunt. The cases of melancholia triggered bycannabis abuse are more rare. I have, however, observed suchcases where the patients have become deeply depressed - to thelimit of committing suicide (Tunving, 1985, p. 209). Imade and Ebie (1991), working in Nigeria, assert thatcannabis psychosis "has gained recognition as a nosologicalentity" (p. 134). According to these authors cannabispsychosis is categorised by the ICD-9 and DSM-III as either aform of drug dependence or an induced organic mental disorder.The diagnostic criteria given include intoxication marked bydelusional disorder. The delusional behaviour appears to becaused solely by the ingestion of cannabis and persists for about2 - 3 hours. Both social and occupational functioning are claimedto show impairment and these reactions, argue Imade and Ebie,"vary according to the socioeconomic class, personality andattitude of the users" (p. 134). These authors claim that members of lower socioeconomicclasses derive feelings of power and self-engrandisement fromcannabis use whereas members of the higher status classesperceive cannabis as a relaxant and thus take it to achievegreater calm. In contrast to Imade's and Ebie's position, Brilland Nahas (1984) maintain that "at the present time thereseems to be insufficient evidence to state that a purelycannabis-induced psychosis exists as a separate clinicalentity" (p. 294). However, the latter two authors do arguestrongly that cannabis is psycho-toxic and may precipitate apsychotic reaction. Whether or not the dysphoric, psychotic-like response of somecannabis users is a "nosological entity", the work ofthe Nigerian researchers may be over-generalising from thespecial conditions of their cultural and economic circumstancessince there do not appear to be similar sociodemographicdifferences in response to cannabis reported by researchers ineconomically more developed countries. In fact, Brill and Nahas(1984) point out that most reports of 'cannabis psychosis' havetheir origins in the Third World which may reflect a specialvulnerability of those people to any toxic substance due tomalnutrition with its attendant low body fat and plasma proteinconcentration in affected individuals. In addition to the cultural, social and economic mismatches ofmany reports concerning cannabis induced psychosis, the problemwith most of the data reported in these studies is that they arehighly confounded and hence not scientifically sound. There israrely any clear, clinical data on the psychiatric condition ofthese individuals pre-dating their cannabis 'psychosis' and,hence, no way of assigning cause or any other relationshipbetween use and psychopathology. In addition, the age range inmost of these studies is that of young adults which is a commontime for the onset of psychotic disorders for non-drug takers aswell. Thornicroft (1990) summarises the possible relationships whichmay exist between psychosis and cannabis use. Previous reviews of the possible association between cannabisand psychosis have proposed six types of association. Cannabismay cause psychoses de novo. It may reveal a previously latentpsychosis. Cannabis may precipitate a relapse of a pre-existingpsychosis. Established psychotic mental disorder may lead to anincreased intake of cannabis. There may be a spuriousrelationship. Finally, there may be no relationship betweenpsychosis and cannabis. These views have, however, failed to make three vitaldistinctions. Firstly, they have not adequately separated organicfrom functional psychotic reactions to cannabis. Secondly, theyhave insufficiently discriminated between psychotic symptoms andthe syndromes of psychosis. Thirdly, they have not balanced theweight of evidence for and against the category of 'cannabispsychosis' (p. 25). Further, the symptomatology of the hypothesised 'cannabispsychosis' is very varied and often contradictory, indicating alack of a true and coherent constellation of symptoms one wouldexpect with an actual definable disorder. The only consistent setof responses appears to be those associated with any toxic brainsyndrome whether caused by cannabis or any other neurologicallyactive substance (DSM-IIIR; Weil, 1975). This lack of specificityis underscored by the following sample of symptom constellationsgiven by various modern cannabis researchers including: a)shyness, irritability, hypersensitivity and arrogance withchronic cannabis users being more often alienated from theenvironment and indulging in day dreams (Stringaris, a Greekpsychiatrist described in Tunving [1985]); b) loss of contactwith reality, delusions, and hallucinations as well as agitatedand inappropriate behaviour (Jones, 1980); c) depression andagitation (Cohen, 1986); d) the occurrence of extravagant ideassuch as being 'ageless' (Brill and Nahas, 1984);5 e) the deliriumsimilar to that of high fever (in its acute toxic phase) whichincludes confusion, prostration, disorientation, derealisation,and, at times, auditory and visual hallucinations (Brill andNahas); and f) paranoia and depersonalisation occurring in amanner indistinguishable from acute brain syndrome and a beliefon the part of the subject that s/he is going mad in spite ofremaining oriented with unimpaired consciousness (Kaplan, 1971).The above group of symptoms taken with the descriptions givenearlier could, in fact, constitute a wide range of conditionsranging from severe anxiety neurosis to true psychotic bipolaraffect disorder. Thacore and Shukla (1976) indicate that patients with'cannabis psychosis' show panicky and violent behaviour withgreater frequency, but they do "not consider this behaviourpsychotic, because reality contact is maintained" (p. 385).Further, from my own clinical and personal observations it oftenappears that many users who are having extreme dysphoricreactions are suffering from the fear of 'going crazy' ratherthan actually becoming truly psychotic. Thus, it is possible tointerpret many of the so-called psychotic responses to cannabisuse as extreme panic reactions which have escalated out ofcontrol. The force of this argument derives from the fact that a)the vast majority of these cases recover fully when the acutephase of intoxication is past and b) interpersonal support duringthis process is most often positively and constructively receivedby the victim in a non-psychotic manner, viz., consciousness isunimpaired thus allowing self-reflection and understanding inrational and non-delusional ways. Individuals suffering from clinically diagnosed organic orpsychodynamically identifiable psychoses do not respond in thismanner. The acute phase of psychosis, for the majority of cases,moves into a chronic phase with life-long consequences. Withthese psychotics the clinician finds it almost impossible topenetrate the patient's delusional, referential thought processand, similarly, positive support appears not to be capable ofpenetrating the psychotic's world when in this acute phase. Thisis not to say that such a psychotic episode never happens inassociation with cannabis. However, it has not been possible, todate, to disconfound the role of cannabis as a conceivablefacilitator of psychosis from its other possible roles asself-medication used to treat an impending psychosis or itscoincidental use as part of a syndrome of disturbed behaviour inan already troubled individual. Jones (1980) suggests that the toxic psychotic-like reactionsometimes associated with cannabis intoxication is often causedby unexpectedly high doses in experienced users, the reaction tointoxication by neophyte users, and/or the response ofindividuals with a pre-existing psychopathology. It has beenobserved that this "toxic" response is not consistentwith cannabis type or potency suggesting no direct, predictablepharmacological link. He summarises the overall state of researchinto 'cannabis psychosis'. As is often the case with clinical reports, studies describingcannabis psychosis rarely present data in a way that wouldwithstand rigorous scientific scrutiny. A number of reportsfinding no evidence of links between cannabis use and psychosesunfortunately have the same methodologic problems as studiesclaiming drug-related associations, making it very difficult todraw unequivocal conclusions (p. 72). Moreau, in his mid-Nineteenth Century writings, seems torecognise that there is a difference between delusional psychosisand "hashish fantasy" which suggests that researchers,today, may have to delineate, with some precision, thisdifference before any definable and consistent 'nosology' ofextreme cannabis dysphoria can be found. One possible suggestionis that there is no such clinical entity as a 'cannabispsychosis' but, rather, a series of fear and panic reactionswhich sometimes achieve the intensity of a psychotic-like state.This extreme but temporary response should be understood more asa result of the user's inability to cope with the cognitive andaffective reorganisation caused by THC rather than as a directand permanent "poisoning" of the CNS leading to apermanent psychosis. SCHIZOPHRENIA There have been a number of studies which make a connectionbetween cannabis and schizophrenia. As in the case of reports ontoxic psychosis and cannabis, the relationship between cannabisuse and onset of pathology is unclear. Again, cause and effectare difficult to establish because of the fact that most casesstudied are the result of psychiatric referrals from which onlypost hoc attributions can be made. In one of the very few longitudinal studies of cannabis andpsychopathology designed to disconfound the aetiology ofschizophrenia in relation to cannabis use Andreasson et al (1987)studied Swedish military conscripts. Commencing in 1969-70 thisinvestigation used a pre/post research design, which, in itsfirst stage, included obtaining a history of drug use, socialbackground, psychiatric history, a current psychologicalassessment and, where necessary, a psychiatric interview. Intheir current paper, reviewing follow-up assessment made fifteenyears later, Andreasson et al state that, in addition to cannabisconsumption, increased occurrence of schizophrenia in theconscripts was strongly correlated with diagnosis of psychiatricdisease other than schizophrenia at the time of conscription;indicators of a disturbed childhood; abuse of solvents; and pooradjustment at school. However, in this study no relationship wasobserved between the increase in schizophrenic occurrences andalcohol consumption, smoking, or socioeconomics. Although the authors suggest that the association of cannabisusage with schizophrenic onset may possibly be a result of an"emerging schizophrenia", they argue for theinterpretation that cannabis is a likely a precipitating factorin schizophrenic onset for "vulnerable" individuals.This conclusion was drawn as a result of the observation of anincreasing risk for development of schizophrenia being associatedwith increasing cannabis consumption in individuals with previouspsychiatric symptoms. For the authors, this conclusion isunderscored with the additional finding that conscripts with nopsychiatric symptoms initially also demonstrate an increased riskof schizophrenia with increasing cannabis consumption. Inconclusion, Andreasson et al (1987) state ...an individual might be vulnerable to schizophrenia but notget the disease unless it is triggered by some life-eventstressor. The findings in this study suggest that cannabis may besuch a stressor. The effect of cannabis on the central nervoussystem support this hypothesis (p. 1485). The effect of THC on the nervous system, they argue, islocalised in the hippocampus and is accompanied by a loweredturnover of acetylcholine. However, the more recent andcomprehensive study of Herkenham et al (1990) reported earlier inthis paper appears to contradict this hypothesis of Andreasson etal (1987). The distribution of THC in the human CNS is much morediffuse than these authors suggest and, to date, there is nodefinite evidence that acetylcholine systems in the hippocampusare associated with schizophrenogenesis. In fact, it is morestrongly argued that dopamine pathways in the ventral medialbrain are more directly involved in some of the 'schizophrenias'(Helmchen and Henn, 1987). Another problem with the Andreasson et al (1987) study is thatthe causal relationship of cannabis to the onset of schizophreniastill remains equivocal. Although the data appears to besuggestive of a possible link between cannabis and theprecipitation of a schizophrenia in vulnerable individuals, theauthors go beyond their data by strongly suggesting that cannabisis, nonetheless, another clue to the cause of schizophrenia.However, even a cursory examination of the literature onschizophrenia (which is beyond the scope of this paper) revealsthat the stresses of late adolescence and early adulthood appearto be one of the major precipitating factors in the developmentof schizophrenia in vulnerable individuals - with or without theuse of cannabis. Since this study examined young men of this agegroup, the relationship of increasing cannabis use withincreasing incidence of schizophrenia may be an artefact relatedto the overall range of deviant behaviours adopted by young mensuffering from the stresses of life change for which they areunprepared. And finally, of the 55,000 conscripts entering the initialphase of the Andreasson et al (1987) study, only 274schizophrenics emerged of which 21 were in the high cannabisconsuming group with a total of 49 having ever consumed THC atall. Thus, taken together with the fact that the causalconnection between cannabis use and the onset of schizophreniawas still left unclarified, these results should be consideredinsufficient for drawing any scientifically sound conclusionsconcerning a meaningful link between cannabis and schizophrenia. In another large-scale military study of cannabis use carriedout on American soldiers Tennant and Groesbeck (1972) found thatfor the 720 hashish users culled from the 36,000 subjects of theresearch sample direct medical and psychiatric observationrevealed that the casual smoking of less than 10 to 12 gm of hashishmonthly resulted in no ostensible adverse effects other thanminor respiratory ailments. Panic reactions, toxic psychosis, andschizophrenic reactions were infrequent occurrences except whenhashish was simultaneously consumed with alcohol or otherpsychoactive drugs (p. 133). The authors found 115 cases of acute psychosis analogous toschizophrenia amongst hashish smokers but only 3 were of hashishusers only. The remainder were multiple drug users which includedamphetamines, hallucinogens and alcohol taken together withhashish. In these cases treatment with chlorpromazine did notentirely resolve the symptoms in these cases and most appeared tomove into a stage which resembled chronic schizophrenia. However,Tennant and Groesbeck (1972) argue that because of the nature ofsuch a soldier sample, they had good access to premorbid recordsfor the entire group. "In each case there was considerableevidence that latent schizophrenia probably preexisted" (p.134). However, no indication is given in this paper as to how thepre-trial screening was carried out nor is there any evidence ofhow the criteria for determining pre-morbid latent psychosis wasestablished. Jones (1980) argues for a partial causal relationship betweenthe onset of schizophrenia and cannabis use. He believes thatpatients with schizophrenia, or with a genotype for schizophrenia"may be more prone to develop schizophrenic-like psychosesafter consuming only modest amounts of cannabis" (p. 72).However, his use of the term "schizophrenic-like" mayindicate, as in the case of toxic psychoses, that some of thesemore extreme but transient negative responses to cannabis havecharacteristics in common with schizophrenic disorders but arenot fully constitutive of the pathology itself. Imade and Ebie(1991), on the other hand, in an empirical statistical studycomparing schizophrenic and cannabis psychosis symptomologies,conclude that there is no significant difference between the twogroups leading them to speculate that cannabis may be a possibleadditional risk factor in the development of schizophrenia.Surprisingly, this conclusion of no statistically significantdifference in symptoms is contradicted by Table 2 (p. 135) intheir published results which shows a statistically significantdifference in 9 of the 13 symptom categories presented. One canonly speculate as to why the authors draw conclusions in directcontradiction to their empirical findings.6 Other researchers appearing to agree with Imade's and Ebie'sconclusions concerning the similarity of cannabis psychosis andschizophrenia are Thacore and Shukla (1976). Their study ofchronic cannabis abusers in India found a constellation ofsymptoms some of which are similar to schizophrenia while otherare not. Their work indicates that the special characteristics ofschizophrenic thought disorder (loosening of association, thoughtblockage, disturbance in conceptual thinking, alienation ofthought) occur statistically significantly more frequently inschizophrenic patients than in cannabis intoxicants sufferingpsychotic-like reactions. Hallucinations were experienced equallyin both conditions but "all (cannabis) patients hadpredominant persecutory delusions in a setting of clearsensorium" (p. 384) in contrast to schizophrenics who do notshow any capacity for rational self-reflection while in an acutephase. Although these findings suggest some fundamentaldifferences between the two conditions, caution must be appliedin accepting these results because of the small sample involvedand the culturally idiosyncratic method of scoring andinterpreting patients' symptoms. In conjunction with Jones (1980) Hollister (1988) asserts,based on research conducted by Knudsen and Vilmar (1984) as wellas by Tunving (1985), that cannabis use may aggravate an alreadyexisting schizophrenia, and this would be true whether thepathology was as yet unmanifest, but he is not convinced that THCcan cause schizophrenia or depressive disorders on its own.Moreover, referring to Rottanburg et al (1982), he declares thatcannabis use may lead to "a self-limitinghypomanic-schizophrenic-like psychosis" (Hollister, 1988, p.112). Again, this statement suggests that the relationshipbetween drug use and pathology may be linked through an as yetunidentified third factor involving the preference byschizophrenics for particular classes of drugs in their attemptsat self-medication and thus control of frightening delusionalstates. Consequently, there appears to be an association betweencannabis use by diagnosed schizophrenics which confounds theinterpretations of a causal link between cannabis andschizophrenia. Needless to say, the connection is problematic andunresolved and certainly needs considerably more and bettercontrolled research before any firm conclusions can be drawn. BEHAVIOUR AND SOCIAL ADJUSTMENT Weller (1985) summarises a number of findings across a varietyof studies aimed at establishing a profile of cannabis users. One study found that marijuana users were more impulsive andnonconforming than nonusers. Another study discovered more"psychiatric impairment" in users based on personalitytests. A self-administered drug survey conducted at two collegesfound that users were less likely to be at the top of theirclass, had looser religious ties, and were more dissatisfied withschool. They were also more likely to be bored, anxious, cynical,disgusted, moody, impulsive, rebellious, or restless. In stillanother study, marijuana users were more opposed than nonusers toexternal control and likely to use the drug to relieve tension(p.101).7 He criticises much of this characterisation by arguing thatlittle effort was made to determine the personality types anddifferences before subjects became involved in a cannabis'lifestyle'. Thus, it is arguable that any ascription ofpersonality type for cannabis users must be seen as notscientifically grounded and hence somewhat spurious. This logicalerror of explanations given post hoc propter hoc appears to be acommonly repeated one throughout the cannabis literature.However, Weil's (1975) argument that cannabis is an "activeplacebo" (p. 95) which facilitates already existent covertbehaviours and pathologies offers an equally credible explanationfor most observations made concerning pathological syndromes andcannabis use with the added benefit of accounting, in part, forthe great variation seen from individual to individual. One suchconstellation of behaviours which has been repeatedly claimed asunique to chronic cannabis users is the so-called"amotivational syndrome" to which we now turn. AMOTIVATIONAL SYNDROME McGlothlin and West (1968) first reported that regularcannabis use can lead to the development of passive,inward-turning, amotivational personality characteristics. Atabout the same time, Smith (1968) made a similar observation,based on several young marijuana users, that regular cannabisingestion leads to a loss of desire to compete and work which,like McGlothlin and West, he labelled the "amotivationalsyndrome". Weller (1985) describes the characteristicsassociated with this hypothesised syndrome. This contention was based on clinical observation ofmiddle-class, heavy marijuana users referred to them fortreatment. Conforming, achievement-oriented behaviour had changedto relaxed and careless drifting. Inability to concentrate forlong periods, endure frustration, follow routines, and carry outcomplex, long-term plans, as well as apathy and loss ofeffectiveness, were noted. Such individuals became totallyinvolved with the present at the expense of future goals. Theyhad less objective productivity and seemed to withdraw subtlyfrom the challenge of life (pp. 95, 98). He reminds us, however, that no specific studies or casereports were cited to support McGlothlin's and West's (1968)observations. Other descriptors which supposedly characterisethis syndrome include: shift or decline in ambition;unproductive, aimless life; poor class attendance; lack of goals;poor school performance; apathy; disorientation; and depression(Weller, 1985). Nevertheless, in most cases symptoms disappearedif marijuana was discontinued suggesting not so much as asyndrome but behaviour of chronically intoxicated individualsusing their intoxicated state as a way of focusing theirresentment of social and parental pressure. In addition, Weller (1985) cites a number of studies whichreport lowered levels of sperm and testosterone. The latterchange was observed in a closed ward situation with subjects atfirst showing no alteration in testosterone levels for about fourweeks, followed by a subsequent and gradual drop in testosteronelevel which continued until cannabis intake stopped. Thissituation reversed itself on cessation of cannabis intake withlevels beginning to rise after one week's abstinence. Wellerconcludes that "if testosterone affects aggression anddrive, low testosterone might affect motivation. However, thisrelationship must be considered hypothetical without additionalresearch (p. 102)." Cohen (1986) reminds us that the syndrome is so variable inpresentation and influenced by the magnitude and type ofpremorbid pathology, the very existence of such a syndromeremains quite controversial. On the other hand, lethargy and lossof ambition and goal orientation persist during intervals ofwithdrawal from cannabis. In many cases this anergic condition isapparently reversed after months of abstinence, but Cohenindicates that some clinicians report what they believe to be theoccurrence of permanent brain dysfunction in some subjects.Again, as in reports of other psychopathologies being connectedto cannabis usage, the constellation of symptoms tends not toconstitute a definite syndrome with great variation beingobserved in each case. The symptoms of what is being called "amotivationalsyndrome" could be understood as a facilitated endogenousdepressive disorder which is brought to the fore by chroniccannabis use in a minority of individuals. Halikas et al (1978)reported a high incidence of depressive disorder in regularcannabis users who had smoked at least fifty times in the pastsix months before the commencement of the study. Weller (1985)indicates that an examination of the subjects of that studyreveals that most were young (mean age = 22 years), middle-classand had been smoking cannabis for an average of 2 years."Systematic evaluation revealed that most of theirpsychiatric problems predated marijuana use. About 18% had ahistory of definite or probable depression before significantmarijuana use (p. 102)." It should be borne in mind, once again, that the subjects ofmany of these studies are referred for treatment and hence do notrepresent the population of cannabis users. In fact, from thenumbers given in many sources, those presenting withpsychopathologies of any kind represent a very small minorityindeed. For example, the 1991 NCADA survey of drug use inAustralia reveals that 30+% of all Australians have triedcannabis at least once. 13.1% have used it within the past yearand 5.4% within the last week. Thus, there are hundreds ofthousands of cannabis users who apparently function well enoughso that they do not come to the attention of medical or legalauthorities. If "amotivational syndrome" was a fact ofcannabis use, Australian society would unmistakably feel itsimpact. One can only conclude that this supposed 'syndrome' is,in actuality, the mis-labelling of a latent affect disorderwhich, in a small minority of unfortunate individuals, becomesmanifest when facilitated by chronic cannabis use. TASK PERFORMANCE It is not surprising to find repeated assertions in theliterature of reduced performance on learning and memory tasks ina population of cannabis users who are available for evaluationlargely through psychiatric referral. The pathological symptomsleading to referral most often include agitation (panicdisorders) and/or lethargy (amotivation). These symptoms areoften primary manifestations of on-going affect disorders and, inthe case of depression, are frequently accompanied by feelings ofalienation, depersonalisation, flattened affect, memory and othercognitive impairments. A large-scale study by Mullins et al(1974) conducted for the United States Air Force on recentconscripts who were, for the most part, young, healthy and notpsychiatrically morbid, reveals a different picture regardingperformance among cannabis users. The authors compared 2,842 US Air Force trainees who had usedonly cannabis with 1,843 who had used cannabis and/or other drugsand with a control sample of 9,368 on whom no drug-usinginformation was available. Comparisons were made on five separateaptitude measures, on educational level attained prior toenlistment, and on three measures of performance of Air Forceduties. These aptitude measures are the Armed ForcesQualification Test (AFQT) and four aptitude indexes of the AirmanQualifying Examination (AQE); Mechanical (M), Administrative (A),General (G), and Electronic (E). Comparisons of scores were madebetween those who used only cannabis; those who used cannabis inconjunction with some other drug; those who used other drugssingly, but not cannabis; those who used other drugs incombination, but not cannabis; and the control group. It wasfound that every mean score for the drug using groups wassignificantly different from the control group at p = 0.01 orbetter. The most interesting finding, however, is that for levelof performance "all means are significantly lower than thecontrol mean except the means for the cannabis-only group, whichare significantly higher than the control means" (Mullins etal, 1974, p. 4) Mullins et al (1974) argue that the differences between thecannabis-only group and the other drug groups in relation to thecontrols may be the result of the degree of drug use. In otherwords, multiple drug users are seen by the authors as likelyheavy users as opposed to cannabis-only user group. Thus, thelower means for the multiple drug groups are interpreted asresulting from the total overall consumption of drugs rather thanthe mixing of mind-altering substances. In addition, whencontrolling for total ingestion of cannabis, the authors concludethat the cannabis-only group is more talented on average(according to the operational definition of talent embedded inthe Air Force aptitude tests) than any of the other groupstested. Although the authors argue that the lower scores of themultiple group are likely due to the degree of overallconsumption of drugs, they conclude that one of the more notabledangers of cannabis is in coupling it with other drugs.8 The authors attempt to explain the results by first observingthat the use of other drugs, with or without cannabis, iscorrelated with lower overall educational attainment in thestudy's subject group. They continue by noting that there aresignificantly more cannabis-only users who have graduated fromhigh school (76.4%) than there are in the control group (70.7%),which is offered in partial explanation of the higher aptitudescores achieved by the cannabis-only group. In light of ourearlier discussion concerning motivation, both achievement scoresand educational level tend to be good indicators of highermotivation in the cannabis-only users than in the otherexperimental groups and the controls. On the other hand, of thosecontrols and cannabis-only users who entered university, Mullinset al found a significantly higher percentage of control subjects(37.5%) than of cannabis-only subjects (24.9%) completed theirstudies. Strangely, in summarising their study the authors concludethat this last difference indicates the possible existence of an"amotivational syndrome" in cannabis-only users and, intheir final remarks, strongly suggest that cannabis has definiteserious, negative effects on behaviour. However, in summarisingtheir findings they state ...in general, the use of cannabis-only appears to beassociated with a much less serious performance deficiency thanthe use of other drugs, singly or in combination" (Mullinset al, 1974, p. 11) This statement can only be seen as a distortion of theempirical findings of these researchers. Except for the issue ofuniversity completion rates for the various groups, cannabis-onlyusers in their study appear to be superior in performance onevery measure used by the United States Air Force. The authors'conclusion, on the other hand, stresses that the performance ofthe cannabis-only group is merely less worse than the multipledrug groups rather than better than all other groups. Again, thisis an good example of the problems which occur with value-drivenresearch in the investigation of cannabis. No doubt this methodof interpretation of the empirical findings arises because it isvery unlikely that positive conclusions concerning cannabis usein young airmen would lead to career advancement for members ofthe military who conduct social science research on their ownorganisation. Of course, there have been a number of other studies whichhave obtained very different results when measuring performance.It should be noted, however, that most of these have beenconducted on a more select population than the Mullins et alinvestigation, with considerably smaller sample sizes and oftenon individuals who have been psychiatrically referred. Cohen's(1986) general review of these issues in relation to cannabisleads him to conclude that A wide range of intellectual performance impairment due tomarijuana intoxication is known. Cognitive tasks, such as digitsymbol substitution, complex reaction time, recent memory andserial subtractions, are all performed with an increased errorrate as compared to the sober state. These abilities are allgenerally recognised to be necessary to perform skilled tasks.Marijuana interferes with the transfer of information fromimmediate to short-term storage. Less demanding tasks such assimple reaction time are performed as well during the non-drugcondition. A major unresolved question is whether long-term useproduces irreversible effects (p. 157). Two confounding issues are generally not critically addressedin the literature on cannabis and performance summarised by Cohen(1986) above. The first is proper control for the role ofmotivational levels in the outcome of performance tests conductedon cannabis intoxicated individuals. THC may have differentialeffects on motivation depending on the type of task to becompleted. Cohen acknowledges that the apparent attenuation ofthe ability to learn while intoxicated with cannabis may be dueto possible perceptual and motivational changes experienced byintoxicants. He speculates that the concomitant impairment ofimmediate recall associated with these changes is linked to alack of motivation to learn and to the related attenuation oflogical thinking abilities which makes the acquisition of newinformation more difficult. Simply stated from a more phenomenological perspective, whileintoxicated, "right brain" activities appear to bepreferred by those using cannabis. Logico-deductive cognitionstend to be usurped by metaphoric imaging arising as a result ofan intensified 'absorptive state'. "Absorption", apersonality characteristic often studied in relation to hypnosisand other altered state of consciousness experiences, appears todeploy attention in ways antithetical to the more usuallinguistically ordered information processing of daily lifeactivities (Tellegen and Atkinson, 1974; Tellegen, 1982). Sincethe majority of memory and performance tasks used in many of thestudies on cannabis and performance are dependent on languageprocessing ("left brain") for recall, it is notsurprising that most cannabis users do less well on these testswhen intoxicated. The second issue is, naturally, the notion of 'long' and'short' term memory employed by Cohen (1986) and others. If werecognise that different styles of cognition and learning areassociated with different states of consciousness (Tart, 1972),then the model of memory storage and transfer deployed by Cohenis likely to be inapplicable to the study of individuals in an"Absorptive" state of consciousness. In addition, thestatement about information "transfer" as used by Cohenis, at this stage of learning and memory research, more metaphorthan fact since the actual neuropsychological substrates andmechanisms of this hypothetical construct have yet to be locatedand their mechanisms delineated. Creason et al (1981), on the other hand, do attempt to controlfor motivation in relation to cannabis consumption levels intheir study of 55 high school adolescents. From this group foursub-groups were identified consisting of nonusers("Never"), casual users ("less than once aweek" or "once or twice a week"), heavy users("three or more times a week" or "daily"),and heavy users who are now ex-users (p. 449). Motivation wasoperationally defined as ...the difference between the subject's performance on a taskwhen working for a reward and when the subject is not externallymotivated. A subject who performed better working for a rewardthan when not was considered more motivated than a subject whoperformed at the same level regardless of whether there was areward at stake (p. 448). "The dependent variable was the difference in the numberof solved single-solution anagrams between the first and secondtrials," the assumption being the first trial measuredactual ability and the second measured performance level whenmotivated, with the difference showing the effect of motivation(p. 449). From this research design the authors found that heavyusers and heavy ex-users were significantly (statistically) lowerin motivation than non-users or casual users, the latter twogroups showing no significant difference. The authors thusconclude that the effect of heavy use on motivation is notdependent on the presence of the drug in the user's system. Toaccount for this they hypothesise the existence of an interveningvariable, such as a personality factor, which distinguishes thosewho are high users from low or non-users. In conclusion theyargue that there is good evidence in the research literature tosuggest that "heavy marijuana use is limited to those whoare already inclined to low motivation and depression" ( p.452) Unfortunately, Creason et al were not able to assess for anypossible pre-existing psychiatric morbidity or personalitydifferences which may have indicated any prior conditions inheavy users before the commencement of their cannabis habit.Thus, there is no empirical evidence arising from this studywhich is able to support their explanatory hypothesis. Although there have been suggestions regarding brain damage incannabis users, as cited earlier in this paper, Varma et al(1988) find no evidence of a real difference between users andcontrols on measures of intelligence and memory. These findingsare consistent with two United States Government studies(National Institute of Mental Health, 1972, cited in Rubin andComitas, 1975; National Institute on Drug Abuse,1980) in whichthe authors suggest that any differences found between cannabisusers and non-users in cognitive functioning pertain more toperceptuo-motor tasks. However, Varma et al (1988) observed thatin Indian cannabis users who are not part of a deviantsub-culture, the users still appear to be significantly moredisabled in "personal, social and vocationalfunctioning" (p. 151). However, the higher rating ofdisability in this group of cannabis users did not, in theopinion of the authors, amount to a noticeable difference. In assessing the work of Varma et al (1988) it is necessary tounderstand that the group studied is the equivalent, in the West,of heavy, chronic drinkers of alcohol. This is underscored by theauthors' recruitment of subjects amongst a known group of heavyusers whose life-style revolves around congregating togetherspecifically for the purpose of consuming cannabis. In addition,findings of higher 'neuroticism' and 'psychoticism' test scoresfor these individuals also indicates that they are not averagemembers of the society being studied (Eysenck, 1960). In effect, this research is confused by the usual problems ofpersonality disorder and psychopathology almost certainlyexisting in the study group prior to cannabis addiction asindicated by membership in and adherence to a cannabis-basedsub-group in the context of a country (India) in which thissubstance is widely accepted and probably broadly used in othersocial circles as well. If pathology was not present prior, thensuch extreme use could be regarded as a cause of thepsychological problems (as in the case of severe alcohol abuse).Nevertheless, this cannabis sub-culture is an inappropriate groupto estimate the long-term effects of social cannabis ingestion,just as it would be inappropriate to estimate the social,physiological and psychological effects of alcohol by studyingchronic, intractable drunks. In contrast to Varma et al (1988), a study by Schwartz et al(1989) claims to demonstrate definite adverse effects of cannabison memory. The latter researchers evaluated the auditory/verbaland visual/spatial memory for groups matched on age, IQ, andabsence of previous learning disabilities. The study used 10cannabis-dependent adolescents and compared them with theperformance two control groups consisting of 8 adolescent drugabusers, who had not been long-term users of cannabis, and 9adolescents who had never used any drug. Significant differencesbetween the cannabis-dependent group and the two control groupswere demonstrated on the Benton Visual Retention Test and theWechsler Memory Scale Prose Passages. The authors also foundthat, after 6 weeks of supervised abstention from intoxicants,those in the cannabis-dependent group demonstrated someimprovement on the Wechsler Memory Prose Passages score and onthe Benton Visual Retention Test. This improvement, however,failed to achieve statistical significance leading the authors toconclude that cannabis-dependent adolescents develop selectiveshort-term memory deficits which appear to continue for at least6 weeks after the complete cessation of cannabis intake. This last study employs very small numbers of subjects in itsexperimental and control groups, which makes the results somewhatweak in a statistical sense. Further, in this research theexperimental subjects consumed approximately 900mg/week of THC(18 grams of high-potency marijuana @ 5% THC) which is aboutequivalent to 130 mg/day for a 4 month period - considerablyhigher than most heavy users. This level of cannabis was consumedto within a couple of days of end of the trial. Heavy users, according to a recent survey conducted by theCriminal Justice Commission of Queensland, Australia use about 10grams of cannabis containing about 2-3% THC, or 300mg ofTHC/week.9 The ward study by Schwartz et al (1989) referred tohere provided subjects with about 900mg THC/week, or three timesthe amount of in vivo heavy users. If the physiological half-lifeis taken as one week (Cf. Nahas, 1984), then at the end of a 6week abstinence period following 12 weeks of cannabis ingestionat the rate of 900mg THC/week, the lipid burden of THC will beapproximately 28mg THC.10 Further, if, as revealed in the work ofChesher et al (1985), 1-2 mg of ingested cannabis causes asimilar level of behavioural deficit as a 0.05 blood alcohollevel, then the retest situation in the Schwartz et al study ison subjects who are still in a highly THC affected state. Unlike alcohol, THC is highly soluble in body lipids and it isthis property which causes it to remain systemically present muchlonger than water soluble alcohol. Thus, the resultant levels ofTHC accumulated by participants in the Schwartz et al (1989)study would be extremely high at the end of the first part of thestudy. With a half-life of 5-7 days it would be many weeks beforethe serum THC would be at an equivalent zero level for theseextremely high-dose subjects. It is quite conceivable, therefore,that the subjects were, at re-test time, still at or above theintoxication equivalent of 0.05 blood alcohol.11 This, of course,does not include an approximation for the effect of anyadditional THC remaining in brain lipids which, conceivably,could still be quite high. Therefore, low or zero measures ofserum THC do not guarantee that participants in the post-testsection of the Schwartz et al study are cannabis-free and, hence,the test subjects may still be affected by a low-level,background intoxication. Returning to the issue of perceptuo-motor and cognitiveperformance, Chesher et al (1985), using nine different tests,attempted to ascertain the effects of cannabis consumption onperformance in a controlled study employing individuals in a doselevel by time pre- post-drug experimental design. Employing thecentroids of the combined test scores for each condition, theauthors compared the performance effects of smoked cannabis,orally ingested cannabis, and alcohol with the resulting evidencesuggesting that "the duration of impairment produced by allthree drugs at the doses used was very similar" (p. 624).However, the earlier findings of Weil et al (1968), that somedose-related impairment is observable on simple intellectual andpsychomotor tests for naive subjects but not for regular users,indicates a need for finer elucidation of the observed effects,if the results of Chesher et al are to be taken at face value. Chesher et al's (1985) results also suggest that orallyadministered THC is 4000 times more potent than ethanol in itspharmacological action. Although exact comparisons could not bemade between smoked cannabis and imbibed alcohol, it wasestimated that 1-2 mg of THC in the marijuana-to-be-smokedproduces a decrement in performance equivalent to 0.05 bloodalcohol level (p. 627). This finding suggests that, since theaverage marijuana cigarette contains approximately 1-3 mg of THC,similar restrictions would have to be placed on cannabisconsumption and driving as now exist for alcohol. Hollister (1988) reports a summary of four separate studies inwhich the occurrence of positive serum tests for drugs in deaddrivers involving 2610 fatalities was estimated. Alcohol wasfound in 1680 cases and THC in 351 with 294 of the latterinvolving alcohol as well. Of those found with THC, 278 had serumconcentrations less than 5mg/ml, suggesting that "THC playsa relatively minor role in fatal traffic accidents as comparedwith alcohol" (Hollister, 1988, p. 113; McBay, 1986). Inother words, only 2.2% of cannabis-only users were involved inthese fatal accidents. Of course, the long half-life ofcannabinols in the body and the presence of them in blood longafter acute intoxication has ceased, as seen from the studiescited above, does not indicate whether or not those individualswho tested positive in the quoted road fatalities wereintoxicated. Cohen (1986) asserts, in his summary of the drug and drivingresearch literature, that 70% of all fatal auto crashes involvealcohol. However, he reports that 37% of the fatal crashesstudied tested positive for the presence of serum cannabinols,but these were found mainly in combination with alcohol and otherpsycho-active drugs with cannabis-only users representing 12% ofall those cases involving cannabis. Alcohol was mixed withcannabis in 81% of the cannabis cases and, again, it isimpossible to tell, unlike with alcohol, whether those testingpositive for cannabinols were in the acute phase of intoxicationrather than several days away from last cannabis usage. From hissummary of the statistics Cohen therefore argues that Although alcohol is the prime cause of automotive accidents,marijuana and cocaine are currently being found frequently enoughto constitute potentially significant problems. It is establishedthat marijuana and alcohol have additive effects upon drivingskills. Since marijuana metabolites were found in more than athird of the drivers, impairment due to marijuana is contributingto the problem (p. 158). The above research likewise is confounded by the presence ofalcohol in the majority of cannabis cases. In order to supportCohen's contention, data would be required to show that accidentsare increasing, in any given demographic area, in directproportion to the increase in use of drugs such as marijuana andcocaine while simultaneously controlling for alcohol use. Withoutsuch clear-cut quantitative relationships one must still concludethat alcohol is the primary cause of fatal crashes even whereother drugs are present. Again, the findings of THC metabolitesin 37% of the drivers involved in fatal crashes do not indicatethat these individuals were intoxicated with THC at the time.However, the data may be suggesting that there is an increaseddanger when driving on alcohol for cannabis users even post acuteintoxication. Whether the hypothesised additive effect of THC andalcohol is a fact and/or whether this effect happens post acutecannabis intoxication remains to be elucidated through carefullycontrolled research which has not yet been done. Weil (1975), although writing in the early 1970s, stillprovides a useful and insightful summary of research on cannabisand performance. Because marihuana is such an unimpressive pharmacologicalagent, it is not a very interesting drug to study in alaboratory. Pharmacologists cannot get a handle on it with theirmethods, and because they cannot see the reality of thenonmaterial state of consciousness that users experience, theyare forced to design experimental situations very far removedfrom the real world in order to get measurable effects. There arethree conditions under which marihuana can be shown to impairgeneral psychological performance in laboratory subjects. Theyare: (1) by giving it to people who have never had it before; (2)by giving people very high doses that they are not used to (orgiving it orally to people used to smoking it); and (3) by givingpeople very hard things to do, especially things that they havenever had a chance to practise while under the influence of thedrug. Under any of these three conditions, pharmacologists candemonstrate that marihuana impairs performance (p. 86). Most altered states of consciousness, such as those producedin hypnosis, meditation and ecstatic experiences, involvedeployment of attention strongly in the present. This'unreflected', unself-conscious attentional state, which isfocused primarily in the 'now', will, whether induced by drugs ornot, possibly interfere with the normal memory processesassociated with the 'reflected' conscious state required fordiscursive thought and logico-temporal activities usuallyassociated with memory and learning. Thus, any discussion ofmemory and THC use must consider the possibility that THCfacilitates a free-floating 'absorptive' state which favoursengagement in spatial-metaphoric cognitive styles of the'unreflected' state (Fabian and Fishkin, 1981). It is thuspossible that the apparent memory deficits seen in individualsintoxicated with THC, who are being required to perform andattend to verbal, temporal, logico-deductive activities, is theresult of 'time-sharing' between the two states. The effect is tointerrupt the usual cognitive and memory consolidation processes. This 'time-sharing' process can be conceptualised as atemporary and rapid movement out of the induced 'unreflected'state of consciousness into 'reflected' consciousness when enough'demand' is made to attend to a temporal, discursive informationstream. As soon as demand falls below some critical thresholdrequired for attention, the 'unreflected' state resumes thusdisrupting any on-going learning process. The laying down ofshort-term memory and the ability to attend accurately toobjective (clock) time may require a certain level of continuousbackground 'self-observation' - a primarily 'reflected' stateactivity. Therefore, assigning the cause of memory deficitsmeasured in THC intoxicated individuals to the pharmacologicalaction of cannabis may be an attribution error with cannabisbeing primarily a catalyst for these altered states which are theactual cause for a failure to process discursive information inthe usual way. CONCLUSIONS Although this review has ranged over a rather broad areaencompassing a number of different research disciplines, thereappears to be a common concern linking most of the researchreviewed - is cannabis a significant public health risk? It isthe opinion of this author that this question is still, afteralmost thirty years of research effort, unclarified. In the physiological domain there certainly appears to bereasonably strong evidence of the potential threat to the humanrespiratory system associated with chronic, heavy cannabissmoking. However, whether use amongst moderate, social cannabissmokers poses the same risk is a question as yet unanswered. Thisrisk is, of course, from the combustion by-products of thecannabis leaves, stems, and flowers and is not directlyassociated with the active ingredient for which cannabis issought and used, -9-tetrahydrocannabinol. One method forobviating such a health risk would be to make pharmacologicallypure forms of orally ingestible THC available to those who wantit in a similar manner to the way in which governments nowregulate the production and distribution of alcohol. In general, the results of much of the research concerning theeffects of THC on the CNS appears to be either negative orinconclusive. The work of Heath and colleagues is an exception,of course, but as was shown above, this research is highlyconfounded and cannot be considered to be reliable in spite ofthe fact that it is widely quoted in scientific and otherliterature on cannabis. Turning to the psychological dimension, the"amotivational syndrome" appears to be a not veryuseful hypothetical construct which is poorly grounded inempirical psychological data. The populations studied in thistype of research are often psychiatric referrals and it has beenrevealed in other, more methodologically thorough research, thatsupposed sufferers of cannabis-induced "amotivationalsyndrome" often had signs of clinical depression prior totheir use of cannabis. As argued earlier in this paper,"amotivational syndrome" appears to be a categoryseeking content, especially when the profile of individualsstudied is better understood through the more conventionalpsychiatric diagnostic category of depressive disorder.Nevertheless, there is little doubt that cannabis has some effecton behaviour and performance. Driving a motor vehicle whileintoxicated with cannabis will certainly increase the risk of anaccident. However, the apparent 'permanent' changes to memory andperformance as demonstrated in some 'ward' studies are notentirely convincing considering the exaggerated dose levels usedand the long half-life of THC in humans. Studies in performance and aptitude such as that by Mullins etal (1974) highlight the value-driven quality of much of theresearch reviewed here. When the effects of alcohol and otherdrugs are controlled, cannabis-only users apparently showsignificantly greater overall aptitude than any other groupamongst U.S. Air Force recruits. Nevertheless, this did not stopthe authors from sounding alarms concerning the potential harmfuleffects of cannabis on performance in young men. In fact, itappears as if most of the research reviewed by this authorcommenced from an a priori position that cannabis is dangerous tohuman health, physiological and psychological, it only remains todiscover just how dangerous. In pursuing these objectives authorssuch as Brill and Nahas (1984) breached all current goodscientific practice by using the writings of a Nineteenth Centuryphysician to make a supposed empirical case in the late TwentiethCentury without any apparent recognition on their part of thepotential for misinterpretation or misapplication. It appears as though two possible hypotheses are availableregarding cannabis and public health. The first is that cannabisis a potential public health problem, it merely remains to bediscovered to what degree. The second states that cannabisrepresents no significant or unreasonable threat to the generalpublic well-being. According to the physicist, James Jeans(1958), expanding on William of Occam's 'Razor' When two hypotheses are possible, we provisionally choose thatwhich our minds adjudge to be the simpler, on the suppositionthat this is the more likely to lead in the direction of thetruth. It includes as a special case the principle of Occam'srazor - 'entia non multiplicanda praeter necessitatem' (p.183). From the position of this widely held scientific principle itis arguable that only the second hypothesis is reasonableregarding the current debate on cannabis. From the use levelsobserved in Australia (31.9% have ever tried cannabis and 7.1%(1.3 million Australians) use it once a month or more [Departmentof Health, Housing and Community Services, 1991]), when taken inconjunction with the very small number of cases who actually cometo the attention of medical authorities as a direct result ofcannabis use, one can only conclude that the simpler hypothesiswhich covers the facts is that cannabis use does not pose asignificantly increased risk to public health over and above manyother activities which are considered necessary and/or sociallyacceptable. As suggested by Weil (1975) altered state experiences appearto be a natural human capacity which can be facilitated by theingestion of psychoactive substances such as THC. The negativereporting, vis--vis cannabis and performance, may beunderstood as a value judgement regarding what type of mentalstate and hence style of performance is deemed useful by society.In other contexts, the present-centred altered state ofconsciousness, which can be induced by cannabis, is highly prizedin the contemplative religious traditions of Christianity,Buddhism and Islam. The ability of this altered state to openbroader perspectives and, hence, new life meanings appears to bepart of a growth process which has the power to bring aboutpersonal renewal and relieve psychological suffering. Althoughthese religious traditions have developed methods for achievingthese altered states without the use of pharmacologicalfacilitators, the need for such experiences is probably innate tohuman personality. In the age of high-tech medicine the use ofchemical substances to achieve these ends should not besurprising. The psychiatrist Arthur Deikman (1982) suggests that thebifurcation of consciousness into "observing"(objective) and "experiencing" (receptive) selves isthe basis of mystical experience with the latter, 'unreflected'state, too often missing in our lives. He further reminds us thatwithout the cultivation of the "experiencing self" wemay fail to enter into mystical awareness and therefore be unableto heal the psychopathology innate to our human condition. Hethus argues for a return to mysticism as both outlook andtechnique in the process of human growth. The mystical tradition has been concerned with the veryproblems that modern psychotherapy has been unable to resolve. Itmakes sense, therefore, to investigate mysticism with a view todealing more effectively with those problems and gaining wisdomas human beings (p. 4). Finally, it has been suggested by numerous renown philosophersand psychologists that without the ability to enter wholly intothese "experiencing" altered states, we may fail tofully actualise our human creative and cultural potentials(James, 1936; Jung, 1960; Maslow, 1968; Wilber, 1977). Thus, wemay understand the use of cannabis in society not only as apublic health issue, but as a sign of a fundamental butunfulfilled human need, which cannabis users attempt to fill byuse of the drug, albeit inadequately. REFERENCES Andreasson, S., Allebeck, P., & Rydberg, U. (1989).Schizophrenia in users and nonusers of cannabis: A longitudinalstudy in Stockholm County. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 79(5),505-510. Aronow, S. & Cassidy J. (1974). Effect of marihuana andplacebo-marihuana smoking on angina pectoris. New England Journalof Medicine, 291, 65-67. Benowitz, N. L. & Jones, R. T. (1975). Cardiovasculareffects of prolonged D-9-tetrahydrocannibol ingestion. ClinicalPharmacol Ther, 18(3), 287-297. Brill, H. & Nahas, G. G. (1984). Cannabis intoxication andmental illness. In G. G. Nahas (Ed.), Marihuana in science andmedicine. New York: Raven Press. Campbell, A. M. G., Evans, M., Thomson, J. L. G., &Williams, M. J. (1971). Cerebral atrophy in young cannabissmokers. Lancet, ii(7736), 1219-1225. Chesher, G. B., Bird, K. D., Stramarcos, A., & Nikias, M.(1985). A comparative study of the dose response relationship ofalcohol and cannabis on human skills performance. In D. J. Harvey(Ed.), Marijuana nineteen eighty-four: Proceedings of the OxfordSymposium on Cannabis (pp. 621-627). Oxford: IRL Press. Co, B. T., Goodwin, D. W., Gado, M., Mikhael, M., & Hill,S. Y. (1977). Absence of cerebral atrophy in chronic cannabisusers. JAMA, 237(12), 1229-1230. Cohen, S. (1986). Effects of long term marijuana use.International Symposium on Marijuana, Cocaine and Traffic Safety(1986, Santa Monica, California). Alcohol, Drugs & Driving -Abstracts & Reviews, 2(3-4), 155-163. Creason, C. R. & Goldman, M. (1981). Varying levels ofmarijuana use by adolescents and the amotivational syndrome.Psychological Reports, 48(2), 447-454. Deikman, A. J. (1982). The observing self: Mysticism andpsychotherapy. Boston: Beacon Press. Department of Health, Housing and Community Services (1991).National Campaign Against Drug Abuse social issues survey, 1991[computer file]. Canberra: Social Science Data Archives, TheAustralian National University. DSM-III-R. (1987). Washington, D.C.: American PsychiatricAssociation. Eysenck, H. J. (1960). The structure of human personality.London: Methuen. Fabian, W. D. & Fishkin, S. M. (1981). A replicated studyof self-reported changes in psychological absorption withmarijuana intoxication. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 90(6),546-553. Feinberg, I., Jones, R., Walker, J., Cavness, C., & Floyd,T. (1976). Effects of marijuana extract and tetrahydrocannabinolon electroencephalographic sleep patterns. Clin Pharmacol Ther,19(6), 782-794. Fried, P. A. (1977). Behavioral and electroencephalographiccorrelates of the chronic use of marijuana. A review. Behav Biol,21(2), 163- 196. Fried, P. A. (1985). Postnatal consequences of maternalmarijuana use. In T. M . Pinkert (Ed.), Consequences of maternaldrug use. NIDA Research Monograph Series 58. DHHS Pub. No. (ADM)85-1400. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt Printing Office. Fried, P. A. (1989). Cigarettes and marijuana: are theremeasurable long-term neurobehavioral teratogenic effects?Neurotoxicology, 10(3), 577-583. Fried, P.A. & O'Connell, C. M. (1987). A comparison of theeffects of prenatal exposure to tobacco, alcohol, cannabis andcaffeine on birth size and subsequent growth. NeurotoxicolTeratol, 9(2), 79-85. Gibson, G. T., Bayhurst, P. A., & Colley, D. P. (1983).Maternal alcohol, tobacco and cannabis consumption on the outcomeof pregnancy. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Obstetricsand Gynecology, 23, 16-19. Grant, I., Rochford, J., Fleming, T., & Stunkard, A.(1973). A neuropsychological assessment of the effects ofmoderate marijuana use. J Nerv Ment Dis, 156(4), 278-280. Halikas, J. A., Shapiro, T. M., & Weller, R. A. (1978).Marijuana: A critical review of sociological, medical andpsychiatric questions. In A. Schecter (ed), Treatment Aspects ofDrug Dependence. West Palm Beach, Florida: CRC Press. Hannerz, J. & Hindmarsh T. (1983). Neurological andneuroradiological examinations of chronic cannabis smokers. AnnNeurol, 13, 207-210. Happold, F. (1963). Mysticism: A study and an anthology.Middlesex: Penguin Books. Heath, R. G. (1972). Marijuana: Effects on deep and surfaceelectroencephalograms of man. The Archives of General Psychiatry,26, 577-584. Heath, R. G. (1973). Marijuana: Effects on deep and surfaceelectroencephalograms of Rhesus monkeys. Neuropharmacology, 12,1-14. Heath, R. G., Fitzjarrell, A. T., Garey, R. E., & Myers,W. A. (1979). Chronic marijuana smoking: Its effect on functionand structure of the primate brain. In G. G. Nahas & W. D. M.Paton (Eds.), Advances in the Biosciences (Vol. 22 and 23) (pp.713-730). Oxford: Pergamon Press. Henderson, R. L., Tennant, F. S., & Guerry, R. (1972).Respiratory manifestations of hashish smoking. Archives ofOtolaryngology, 95, 248-251. Herha, J. & Obe, G. (1974). Chromosomal damage in chronicusers of cannabis. Pharmakopsychiatrie, 7, 328-337. Herkenham, M., Lynn, A. B., Little, M. D., Johnson, M. R.,Melvin, L. S., De Costa, B. R., & Rice, K. C. (1990).Cannabinoid receptor localization in brain. Proceedings of theNational Academy of Science USA, 87, 1932-1990. Herning, R. I., Jones, R. T., & Peltzman, D. J. (1979).Changes in human event related potentials with prolongeddelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) use. Electroenceph ClinNeurophysiol, 47(5), 556-570. Hill, R. M. & Tennyson, L. M. (1986). Maternal drugtherapy: effect on foetal and neonatal growth and neurobehavior.Neurotoxicology, 7(2), 121-139. Hingston, R., Alpert, J., Day, N., Darling, E., Kayne, H.,Morelock, S., Oppenheimer, E., & Zuckerman, B. (1982).Effects of maternal drinking and marijuana use on foetal growthand development. Pediatrics, 70, 539. Hingston, R., Zuckerman, B., Frank, D. A., Kaynes, H.,Sorenson, J. R., & Mitchell, J. (1984). Effects of foetaldevelopment of maternal marijuana use during pregnancy. In D. J.Harvey (Ed.), Marijuana '84 Proceedings of the Oxford Symposiumon Marijuana. Oxford: IRL Press. Hollister, L. E. (1988). Cannabis--1988. Acta PsychiatricaScandinavica, 78(345, Suppl), 108-118. Hunt, H. T. (1984). A cognitive psychology of mystical andaltered-state experience. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 58,467-513. Imade, A. T., & Ebie, J. C. (1991). A retrospective studyof symptom patterns of cannabis-induced psychosis. ActaPsychiatrica Scandinavica, 83(2), 134-136. James, W. (1936). The Varieties of religious experience. NewYork: The Modern Library. Jeans, J. (1958). Physics and philosophy. Ann Arbor: TheUniversity of Michigan Press. Johnston, L. D., O'Malley, P., & Bachman, J. G. (1986).Drug use in American high school students, college students andother young adults. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of DrugAbuse. Jones, R. T. (1975). Effects of marijuana on the mind. In J.R. Tinklenberg (Ed.), Marijuana and Health Hazards (pp. 115-120).New York: Academic Press. Jones, R. T. (1980). Human effects: An overview. In R.Petersen (Ed.), Marijuana Research Findings: 1980 (pp. 54-80).Washington, GPO: DHEW Pub. No. (ADM) 80-1001. Jung, C. G. (1960). The structure and dynamics of the psyche:Vol. 8 (R. F. C. Hull, Trans.). Bollingen Series XX, New York:Pantheon Books. Kalat, J. W. (1988). Biological Psychology (3rd ed.). Belmont,CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company. Klonoff, Hl, Low, M., & Marcus, A. (1973).Neurophysiological effects of marijuana. Can Med Assoc, 108(3),150-156. Knudsen, P. & Vilmar, T. (1984). Cannabis and neurolepticagents in schizophrenia. Acta Psychiatr Scand, 69, 162-174. Kolansky, H. & Moore, W. T. (1971). Effects of marijuanaon adolescents and young adults. JAMA, 216(3), 486-492. Kuehnle, J., Mendelson, J. H., Davis, K. R., & New, P. F.J. (1977). Computed tomographic examination of heavy marijuanasmokers. JAMA, 237(13), 1231-1232. Lavik, N. J., & Onstad, S. (1986). Drug use andpsychiatric symptoms in adolescence. Acta Psychiatr Scand, 73(4),437-440. Linn, S., Schoenbaum, S., Monson, R., Stubblefield, P., &Ryan, K. (1983). The association of marijuana use with outcome ofpregnancy. American Journal of Public Health, 73, 1161-1164. Maslow, A. H. (1968). Toward a psychology of being (2nd ed.).Princeton: Van Nostrand. Matsuyama, S. S., Jarvik, L. F., Fu, T. K., & Yen, F. S.(1976). Chromosomal studies before and after supervised marihuanasmoking. In M. C. Braude and S. Szara (Eds.), Pharmacology ofMarihuana (pp. 723-729). New York: Raven Press. McBay, A. J. (1986). Drug concentrations and traffic safety.Alcohol, Drugs, Driving, 2, 51-60. McGlothlin, W. H. & West, L. J. (1968). The marijuanaproblem: An overview. American Journal of Psychiatry, 125(3),370-378. Meyer, R. E. (1975). Psychiatric consequences of marijuanause: The state of the evidence. In J. R. Tinklenberg (Ed.),Marijuana and Health Hazards (pp. 133-152). New York: AcademicPress. Morishima, A. (1984). Effects of cannabis and naturalcannabinoids on chromosomes and ova. In M. C. Braude & J. P.Ludford (Eds.), Marijuana Effects on the Endocrine andReproductive System. Research Monograph Series 44, DHHS Pub. No.(ADM) 84-1278. Washington, D.C.: National Institute on DrugAbuse. Muller, L., Kasper, P., & Madle, S. (1991). Furtherinvestigations on the clastogenicity of paracetamol andacetylsalicylic acid in vitro. Mutat Res, 263(2), 83-92. Mullins, C. J., Vitola, B. M., & Abellera, J. W. (1974).Users of cannabis only. US AFHRL Technical Report 74- 41. Nahas, G. G. & Latour, C. (1992). The human toxicity ofmarijuana. The Medical Journal of Australia, 156(7), 495-497. Nahas, G. G. (Ed.) (1984). Marihuana in science and medicine.New York: Raven Press. National Institute on Drug Abuse (1980). Marijuana and health;Eighth Annual Report to the US Congress from the Secretary ofHealth and Human Services. United States Government Negrete, J. C., Knapp, W. P., Douglas, D. E., & Smith, W.B. (1986). Cannabis affects the severity of schizophrenicsymptoms: Results of a clinical survey. Psychological Medicine,16(3), 515-520. Petersen, R. (Ed.) (1980). Marijuana Research Findings: 1980.Washington, GPO: DHEW Pub. No. (ADM) 80-1001. Qazi, Q. H., Mariano, E., Milman, D. H., Beller, E., &Crombleholme, W. (1985). Abnormalities in offspring associatedwith prenatal marihuana exposure. Dev Pharmacol Ther, 8(2),141-148. Rottanburg, D., Robins, A. H., Ben-Arie, 0., Teggin, A., &Eik R. (1982). Cannabis associated behavior with hypomanicfeatures. Lancet, 2, 1364-1366. Rubin, V. & Comitas, L. (Eds.) (1975). Ganja in Jamaica.The Hague: Mouton & Co. Schwartz, R. H., Gruenewald, P. J., Klitzner, M., & Fedio,P. (1989). Short-term memory impairment in cannabis dependentadolescents. Am J Dis Child, 143, 1214-1219. Smith, D. E. (1968). Acute and chronic toxicity in marihuana.Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 2, 37-47. Stenchever, M. A., Kunysz, T. J., & Allen, M. A. (1974).Chromosome breakage in users of marihuana. American Journal ofObstetrics and Gynecology, 118, 106-113. Stern, L. (1981). In vivo assessment of the teratogenicpotential of drugs in humans. Obstet Gynecol, 58(5 Suppl), 3S-8S. Stimmel, B. (1979). Marijuana. In B. Stimmel (Ed.),Cardiovascular Effects of Mood-Altering Drugs (pp. 167-178). NewYork: Raven Press. Tart, C. T. (1971). On being stoned: A psychological study ofmarijuana intoxication. Palo Alto, Calif.: Science and BehaviorBooks. Tart, C. T. (1972). States of consciousness and state-specificsciences. Science, 176, 1203-1210. Tashkin, D. P., Calvarese, B. M., Simmons, M. S., &Shapiro, B. J. (1980). Respiratory status of seventy-fourhabitual marijuana smokers. Chest, 78, 699-706. Tashkin, D. P., Shapiro, B. J., Lee, Y. E., & Harper, C.E. (1976). Subacute effects of heavy marijuana smoking onpulmonary function in healthy men. New England Journal ofMedicine, 294(3), 125-129. Tashkin, D. P., Shapiro, B. J., Ramanna, L., Taplin, G. V.,Lee, Y. E., & Harper, C. E. (1976). Chronic effects of heavymarijuana smoking on pulmonary function in healthy males. In M.C. Braude & S. Szara (Eds.), Pharmacology of Marijuana (pp.291-295). New York: Raven Press. Tassinari, C. A., Amrosetto, G., Peraita-Adrados, M. R., &Gastaut, H. (1976). The neuropsychiatric syndrome ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabis intoxication in naivesubjects: A clinical and polygraphic study during wakefulness andsleep. In M. C. Braude & S. Szara (Eds.), Pharmacology ofMarijuana (pp. 357-375). New York: Raven Press. Tellegen, A. & Atkinson, G. (1974). Openness to absorbingand self-altering experiences ("Absorption"), a traitrelated to hypnotic susceptibility. Journal of AbnormalPsychology, 83, 268 - 277. Tellegen, A. (1982). Brief manual for the DifferentialPersonality Questionnaire. The University of Minnesota. Tennant, F. S. & Groesbeck, C. J. (1972). Psychiatriceffects of hashish. Arch Gen Psychiat, 27, 133-136. Tennant, F. S., Guerry, R. L., & Henderson, R. L. (1980).Histopathologic and clinical abnormalities of the respiratorysystem in chronic hashish smokers. Substance and Alcohol Abuse,3, 316. Tennant, F. S., Preble, M., Prendergast, T. J., & Ventry,P. (1971). Medical manifestations associated with hashish.Journal of the American Medical Association, 216, 1965-1969. Thacore, V. R. & Shukla, S. R. P. (1976). Cannabispsychosis and paranoid schizophrenia. Archives of GeneralPsychiatry, 33(3), 383-386. Thornicroft, G. (1990). Cannabis and psychosis: Is thereepidemiological evidence for an association?. British Journal ofPsychiatry, 157, 25-33. Tunving, K. (1985). Psychiatric effects of cannabis use. ActaPsychiatrica Scandinavica, 72(3), 209-217. Varma, V. K., Malhotra, A. K., Dang, R. et al (1988). Cannabisand cognitive functions: A prospective study. Drug AlcoholDepend, 21, 147-152. Weil, A. (1975). The natural mind. Victoria, Australia:Penguin Books. Weil, A. T. (1970). Adverse reactions to marihuana:Classification and suggested treatment. New England Journal ofMedicine, 282, 997-1000. Weil, A. T., Zinberg, N. E., & Nelsen, J. M. (1968).Clinical and psychological effects of marihuana in man. Science,162(3859), 1234-1242. Weller, R. A. (1985). Marijuana: Effects and motivation.Medical Aspects of Human Sexuality, 19(3), 92-104. Weller, R. A., Halikas, J. A., & Moorse, C. (1984).Alcohol and marijuana: Comparison of use and abuse in regularmarijuana users. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 45, 377-379. Wilber, K. (1977). The Spectrum of consciousness. London: TheTheosophical Publishing House. Zuckerman, B., Frank, D. A., Hingston, R., et al. (1989).Effects of maternal marijuana and cocaine use on fetal growth.New England Journal of Medicine, 320, 762-768. This work may not be reproduced, in whole or in part,by any means (printed or electronic) without the writtenpermission of the author. 1Searches were conducted in two data bases: Medline (IndexMedicus) and PsychInfo (Psychological Abstracts). The followinginclusive 'or' statement was searched: MARIJUANA OR THC ORCANNABIS OR TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL. Medline produced 2253 'hits'and PsychInfo 1935. One can assume that there is some overlap,hence the approximation of over 4000. 2The earlier, 1973, study of Heath, in addition to the septalarea, included recording sites in the cerebellum, postero ventrallateral thalamus, hippocampus, and orbital and temporal cortices.The thalamic and hippocampal sites are major components of thelimbic system and hence intrinsically involved with emotionalexpression and would most likely show unusual and significantlydifferent activity in a situation of induced stress. 3The experimental group received exposure to marijuana smokecontaining 2.29% D-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and the controls wereexposed to either marijuana smoke containing 0.1%D-9-tetrahydrocannabinol or tobacco smoke. 4Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, 1944, cited in Nahas, 1984,p. 285. 5This idea, of course, is also the claim of many famous,historical mystics and religious leaders. Cf. Happold (1963). 6A possible reason for this apparent contradiction may lie inthe sources of funding for cannabis research. Most money comesfrom government coffers and most governments are in opposition tocannabis use. Therefore, one may conclude that researchers willattempt to minimize findings which do not satisfy the views oftheir funders in order to insure future support. This may seemharsh, if one accepts the myth of scientific objectivity, butscientists are as competitive as any other group in theirattempts to stay in the "game" and to win. 7For his summary he draws extensively on Halikas, Shapiro, andWeller (1978). 8However, the authors qualify this statement later on byindicating that it is the heavy use of cannabis in conjunctionwith other drugs which is most likely the cause of the reducedscores. They fail to make the observation that heavy drug usersof any kind, particularly heavy multiple drug users, are verylikely to be suffering from some other psychiatric disorder whichmay affect motivation and/or performance. 9This was a preliminary report released in March, 1993 at apublic forum held in Brisbane. It will soon be published by thecommission and copies are obtainable through the Criminal JusticeCommission, Coronation Drive, Toowong, QLD. 10This was calculated using a discrete approximation of ahalf-life decay. 11It should be remembered that 1-2 mg of THC to be consumed isthe equivelant of an alcohol blood level of 0.05 (Chesher et al,1985). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-16IA087-000627-B014-168http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/canb1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051115 text/html 54771HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:11:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:31 GMTContent-length: 54553 Cannabis Amotivational Syndrome by Dr. Peter L. Nelson Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information CANNABIS AMOTIVATIONALSYNDROME AND PERSONALITY TRAITABSORPTION: A REVIEW ANDRECONCEPTUALIZATION Peter L. Nelson, Ph.D. Centre for Humanities and Human Sciences Southern Cross University Lismore, NSW 2480 Australia ABSTRACT This paper argues that the so-calledcannabis 'amotivation syndrome', widely reported in theliterature, may not be a single nosological entity, butrepresent, instead, a change in cognitive style emerging as aresult of cannabis's ability to facilitate a unique attentionalstate favoured by those who have a higher than average level of apersonality factor referred to as 'trait absorption'.Exaggeration of the absorptive style of cognition throughcannabis use, when taken in the context of either a pre-existingor a reactive depression, may be what has been mistakenlycategorized as 'amotivational syndrome'. INTRODUCTION In spite of the pressure of increasinglaw enforcement campaigns and more sophisticated educationalendeavours in Australia and other Western democracies, cannabisis not apparently losing its attractiveness to many young people[1]. One of the major concerns expressed by those who areattempting to reduce cannabis use in the young is the occurrenceamongst users of a collocation of behaviours and attitudescollectively referred to as the 'amotivational syndrome' [2, 3].This presumed psychological syndrome is believed to be a directresult of regular, heavy cannabis use and leaves those soaffected reduced in motivation and capacity for the usualactivities required for achievement and success in today's world.Although many anti-cannabis campaigners accept, a priori,the existence of the 'amotivational syndrome', there is stillsome considerable debate as to whether it is an actualnosological entity and whether all cannabis users are soeffected. This article will argue that'amotivational syndrome' is not, in fact, a single entity, but,rather, a collection of behaviours which emerge as the result ofthe combination of the effects of an already existent or areactive depression occurring concomitantly with cannabis'sability to facilitate a unique attentional state favoured bythose who have a higher than average level of a personalityfactor referred to as 'trait absorption' [4]. Thus, the apparentloss of motivation for many socially accepted behaviours andtasks as well as the changes in attitude and cognitive styleassociated with cannabis use may represent a re-orientation inattentional style, meaning and values rather than merely acollapse into pharmacologically induced pathology. So, it may bethat cannabis is not being predicably affected by educational orlaw enforcement programs because the urge to use the drug arisesfor many from a primary psychological need which far outweighsthe power of those sorts of external pressures. The primarypersonality 'need' being described here is the propensity ofcertain individuals to seek and choose to experience 'flow' [5]or 'absorptive' states for their own sake because of theirintrinsic self-rewarding qualities. In order to explore the possiblerelationship between 'trait absorption' and apparent'amotivational syndrome' this paper will first present a reviewof the 'amotivational syndrome' literature followed by adelineation of the personality factor, 'trait absorption'. In thefinal section a re-examination of 'amotivational syndrome' willbe undertaken in the light of the discussion of the absorptivepersonality type and the unique styles of attention deploymentpreferred by these individuals. Further, it will be suggestedthat not only are attempts by cannabis users to augment the'absorptive' cognitive style not pathological, but this type ofbehaviour may be seen as a healthy sign of a striving tore-balance cognitive 'style' from over-dependence on the active,achieving, doer mode of the post-industrial age to the'receptive' style of the visionary and mystic more reminiscent oftraditional spirituality and artistically creative life-styles[43]. AMOTIVATIONAL SYNDROME Cannabis research has, for the pastthree decades, failed to reach any unassailable conclusionsregarding long-term psychological effects of the drug onotherwise normal, healthy users [6, 7, 8, 9, 45, 46]. Researchhas been, at best, problematic, taking place in the midst of ahighly emotionally charged debate. Pharmacologically, whencannabis is ingested the primary psycho-active ingredient,delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), rapidly disappears from theblood plasma and is taken up in fat where it remains with a halflife decay rate of 5-7 days. This means that following a singledose of THC, less than 1% of the primary active ingredientremains in fatty tissue after approximately 35-50 days [10].THC's oil solubility, and thus its high affinity for fattytissue, probably accounts for its attraction to neural tissuewith its high lipid content. Although, in the case of light tomoderate cannabis users THC can be detected in body fluids forapproximately 30 days after the last consumption, it is quitedifficult to detect perceptual-motor effects this long after agiven average single dose (1-3 mg THC in cannabis to be smoked).This is unlike alcohol where a clear dose/response curve isdemonstrable in which effects of ethanol on behaviour andjudgement can be demonstrated at blood levels below 0.05% [11]. These properties of long half-life andhigh intoxicant activity of THC have been a major confoundingfactor in previous clinical and closed ward behavioural andperformance studies of the effects of cannabis in humans [9]. Thehigh dose rates of the typical chronic cannabis user recruitedfor many of these studies, when taken in the context of therelatively long half-life of THC, suggest that behavioural andpsychological tests conducted on chronic users, who aresupposedly no longer using cannabis, are, in fact, being carriedout on individuals still somewhat intoxicated [9, 12]. Hence, anyascriptions of permanent neurological, behavioural, cognitive oraffective changes due to cannabis are often confounded. Inaddition, as will be argued later in this paper, cannabis appearsto facilitate the learning of cognitive styles which emphasizecapacities quite different from and contrary to those requiredfor doing well on most psychological performance tests. From the recent work of Herkenham etal [13] in mapping the distribution of cannabis binding sitesin the brain there is no doubt that the cannabinols haveaffinities for certain brain structures. However, it is as yetunclear as to whether cannabis has any predictable specificbehavioural, cognitive, and/or affective consequences resultingfrom the particular receptor site bindings mapped in their study.To date it is not possible to describe a unique and repeatableconstellation of psychological responses to the action of thecannabinols as is possible for the opiate derivatives or theneuroleptic compounds used in the treatment of schizophrenia [9].This observation alone must cast some considerable doubt on mostpsychopharmacological ascriptions made for the actions of thecannabinols in the human central nervous system. There is little doubt, however, thatcannabis has some effect on the nervous system during acuteintoxication. This can be seen from the wide variety ofpsychological changes reported by users and observed byresearchers. Weller [14] summarizes a number of findings across avariety of studies which purport to delineate psychologicalprofiles due to the effect of cannabis. One study found that marijuana userswere more impulsive and nonconforming than nonusers. Anotherstudy discovered more "psychiatric impairment" in usersbased on personality tests. A self-administered drug surveyconducted at two colleges found that users were less likely to beat the top of their class, had looser religious ties, and weremore dissatisfied with school. They were also more likely to bebored, anxious, cynical, disgusted, moody, impulsive, rebellious,or restless. In still another study, marijuana users were moreopposed than nonusers to external control and likely to use thedrug to relieve tension (p.101). However, he criticises thesecharacterisations by arguing that little effort has been made todetermine the personality types and differences before subjectsbecame involved in a cannabis 'lifestyle'. Thus, it is arguablethat any ascription of personality type or permanent behaviouraleffects of cannabis on users must be seen as somewhat spurious.This logical error of explaining the behaviour of cannabis users,post hoc, in the absence of within-subject controls,appears to be a commonly repeated one throughout the cannabisliterature. On the other hand, Weil's [15] argument that cannabisis an "active placebo" (p. 95), which facilitatesalready existent covert behaviours and pathologies, offers anequally credible explanation for most observations madeconcerning pathological syndromes associated with cannabis use.In addition, Weil's view has the added benefit of accounting for,in part, the great variation seen from individual to individualwhen intoxicated with THC. One such constellation of behaviours,which has been repeatedly claimed as a unique nosological entitypeculiar to chronic cannabis users, has been labelled'amotivational syndrome' [2, 3, 10, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20].McGlothlin and West first reported that regular cannabis use canlead to the development of passive, inward-turning, amotivationalpersonality characteristics. At about the same time, Smith made asimilar observation, based on several young marijuana users, thatregular cannabis ingestion leads to a loss of desire to competeand work which, like McGlothlin and West, he labelled'amotivational syndrome'. Weller [14] describes the origins andgeneral characteristics associated with this hypothesizedsyndrome. This contention was based on clinicalobservation of middle-class, heavy marijuana users referred tothem for treatment. Conforming, achievement-oriented behaviourhad changed to relaxed and careless drifting. Inability toconcentrate for long periods, endure frustration, followroutines, and carry out complex, long-term plans, as well asapathy and loss of effectiveness, were noted. Such individualsbecame totally involved with the present at the expense of futuregoals. They had less objective productivity and seemed towithdraw subtly from the challenge of life (pp. 95, 98). He reminds us, however, that no specificstudies or case reports were cited to support McGlothlin andWest's observations [2]. Other descriptions noted which apparently characterize thissyndrome include: shift or decline in ambition; unproductiveness;aimlessness; poor class attendance; lack of goals; poor schoolperformance; apathy and sluggishness in mental and physicalresponses; disorientation; flattening of affect; loss of interestin personal appearance; physical exhaustion; loss of time sense;difficulty with recent memory; mental confusion; and depression[14, 21, 22, 45, 46]. Nevertheless, in most cases symptomsdisappeared if marijuana was discontinued suggesting not so mucha syndrome but behaviour of chronically intoxicated individualsusing their intoxicated state as a way of focusing theirresentment of social and parental pressure. Moreover, Maughstates, from his summary of research conducted prior to 1974,that the amotivation symptoms listed above have been known topersist in some cases for up to 24 months after cessation of druguse. Weller cites Halikas et al's summary of the medicalliterature which suggests a reduction in levels of sperm andtestosterone in men as a result of chronic cannabis use [14, 21].The latter change was observed in a closed ward situation withsubjects at first showing no alteration in testosterone levelsfor about four weeks, followed by a subsequent and gradual dropin testosterone level which continued until cannabis intakestopped. This situation reversed itself on cessation of cannabisintake with levels beginning to rise after one week's abstinence.Weller concludes that "if testosterone affects aggressionand drive, low testosterone might affect motivation. However,this relationship must be considered hypothetical withoutadditional research (p. 102)." Carlin and Post observed, in the 226 subjects they studied, aninverse relationship between levels of marijuana consumption andrate of employment, successful completion of school, presentenrolment in school and the number of years of educationcompleted [16]. A later study by Creason and Goldman affirmedthis assessment when it was found that high school students whoare heavy users and ex-users of cannabis are significantly loweron a behavioural measure of motivation than are casual andnonusers [17]. However, these authors suggest that "heavymarijuana use is limited to those who are already inclined to lowmotivation and depression" (p. 452) and in yet another, butrelated study, assessment was undertaken of 237 students in aCentral European sports training facility for lifetime prevalenceof amotivational syndrome [18]. This study, in contrast to thatof Carlin and Post, reveals that 'amotivational syndrome' is notsignificantly associated with a history of marijuana use. Inaddition to the survey assessments provided by the above studies,Foltin et al, using an experimental design consisting of astructured performance task in the presence and absence ofbehavioural contingency requirements, found that in a comparisonof cannabis users to no-drug and placebo conditions smokedmarijuana was associated with a greater decrease in the use oftime earned to perform high probability activities duringcontingency periods [19]. These findings are interpreted by theauthors as evidence of an 'amotivational' effect which may resultfrom repeated use of smoked marijuana. In a large-scale study Mullins et al examined the drugconsumption habits of recent conscripts into the United StatesAir Force who were, for the most part, young, healthy and notpsychiatrically morbid [20]. The authors compared 2,842 US AirForce trainees who had used only cannabis with 1,843 who had usedcannabis and/or other drugs and with a control sample of 9,368 onwhom no drug-using information was available. Comparisons weremade on five separate aptitude measures, on educational levelattained prior to enlistment, and on three measures ofperformance of Air Force duties. It was found that every meanscore for the drug using groups was significantly different fromits control counterpart at p = 0.01 or better. The mostintriguing finding, in light of the authors' conclusion thatcannabis causes an 'amotivational syndrome', is that for level ofperformance "all means are significantly lower than thecontrol mean except the means for the cannabis-only group, whichare significantly higher than the control means" (p. 4).Moreover, the authors argue that the differences between thecannabis-only group and the other drug groups, regarding level ofperformance, may be the result of the degree of drug use. Theyassert that multiple drug takers are more likely to be heavyusers as opposed to the cannabis-only group which they claim aremore likely to be light to moderate users. Thus, the lower meansfor the multiple drug groups are interpreted as resulting fromthe total overall consumption of drugs rather than the mixing ofmind-altering substances which, like the mixture of cannabis andalcohol, may interact synergistically [6]. Congruent with the superior performance findings of Mullins etal are the results of Brill and Christie who observed, in alongitudinal study (1970-72) of marijuana use amongst 1,380American college students, that a great majority eitherexperienced "no effect" on adjustment or"improved" adjustment with only a small minorityclaiming their situation to be worsened [23]. In confirmation ofthis self-report evidence the students' grade-point averagesshowed no significant difference between cannabis user andnon-user groups. In a similar study on a sample of 560 collegestudents who were primarily cannabis-only users (85-90%), Goodefound that grade-point averages for the casual and infrequentusers to be higher than for non-users but slightly worse(non-significant) for heavy users as compared to abstainers [24].This appears to suggest that 'amotivational syndrome' is notinevitable amongst a normal college population of marijuanasmokers and the syndrome, if it exists, may be associated withheavy use only. In his review of the cannabis literature Cohen reminds us thatthe 'amotivational syndrome' is so variable in presentation andis influenced by the magnitude and type of any premorbidpathology, that the very existence of such a syndrome must remainquite controversial [6]. On the other hand, it is the observationof both this author and Cohen that apparent lethargy and loss ofambition and goal orientation persist for some time duringintervals of withdrawal from cannabis. In many cases this anergiccondition is apparently reversed after months of abstinence, butCohen reports that some clinicians recount what they believe tobe the occurrence of permanent brain dysfunction in some subjectsstudied. However, it is interesting to note that Thurlow observedthat cannabis users who complained of apathy and loss ofmotivation improved when treated with antidepressant medication[25]. Another interpretation of the symptoms of 'amotivationalsyndrome' offered by some researchers is that it may be afacilitated depressive disorder which is brought to the fore bychronic, heavy cannabis use in a minority of pre-disposedindividuals. Although Creason and Goldman argue for the existenceof an 'amotivational syndrome', they conclude that marijuanaconsumption among adolescents exists across a wide range of youthgroups, but heavy marijuana consumption appears to be limited tothose who seem already inclined to low motivation and depression[17]. Kupfer et al draw a similar conclusion in an earlierstudy in which they compare 46 and 44 male undergraduates whowere, respectively, heavy and light marijuana smokers [26].However, their findings do not suggest any particularpsychopathology associated with either group and these authorspropose that heavy use of cannabis may be related to alreadyexisting depression which is, itself, the source of impairedmotivation rather than frequent marijuana use. Halikas et al also report a high incidence ofdepressive disorder in regular cannabis users who had smoked atleast fifty times in the past six months before the commencementof the study [21]. Weller indicates that an examination of thesubjects of that study reveals that most were young (mean age =22 years), middle-class and had been smoking cannabis for anaverage of 2 years [14]. "Systematic evaluation revealedthat most of their psychiatric problems predated marijuana use.About 18% had a history of definite or probable depression beforesignificant marijuana use (p. 102)." It should be borne in mind that the subjects of many of thosestudies which identify 'amotivational syndrome' as a product ofcannabis use have been referred for treatment and hence do notrepresent the population of cannabis users in general. In fact,from the numbers given in many sources, those presenting withpsychopathologies of any kind represent a very small minorityindeed. For example, the 1991 National Campaign Against DrugAbuse survey of drug use in Australia reveals that 31.9% ofAustralians 14 years and older have tried cannabis at least once,7.1% have used it within the past month, and 5.4% within the lastweek [44]. Thus, there are just under a million regular cannabisusers in Australia who apparently function well enough so thatmost do not come to the attention of medical or legalauthorities. Therefore, if 'amotivational syndrome' was a fact ofcannabis use, Australian society would unmistakably feel itsimpact more directly and distinctly than is actually the case.One can only conclude that this supposed 'syndrome' may be, inpart, the mis-labelling of a latent affect disorder which, in asmall minority of unfortunate individuals, becomes manifest whenfacilitated by chronic cannabis use. From the findings of Creason and Goldman, it appears that theeffect of heavy cannabis use on motivation is not dependent onthe presence of the drug in the user's system [17]. Althoughtheir work more precisely operationalizes the concept of'motivation', which is central to the 'amotivational syndrome'debate, it is, perhaps, too narrow a definition when attemptingto delineate the complex constellation of social-psychologicalchanges seen in chronic cannabis users. For them motivationmerely becomes ...the difference between the subject'sperformance on a task [solution of anagrams] when working for areward and when the subject is not externally motivated [workingfor a reward]. A subject who performed better working for areward than when not was considered more motivated than a subjectwho performed at the same level regardless of whether there was areward at stake (p. 448). (Brackets mine) From their results, in which theyobserved diminished motivation in heavy users and ex-users, theyhypothesize the existence of a possible intervening personalityvariable as the possible distinguishing characteristic whichseparates those who are high users and high ex-users from casualor non-users and "that this factor is independent of presentmarijuana use while it does make the subject more likely to usemarijuana" (17, p. 452). In conclusion they argue that thereis good evidence in the research literature to suggest thatintense cannabis use may be limited to those who have aninclination towards low motivation and depression. Unfortunately,these authors were not able to assess for any possiblepre-existing psychiatric morbidity or personality differenceswhich may have indicated either prior psychiatric conditions ordifferences in personality driven motivational levels in heavyusers before the commencement of their cannabis habits. Summarizing thus far: althoughresearchers have apparently identified a group of cannabisconsumers who undergo some changes in life-style and motivation,the existence of 'amotivation syndrome' as a nosological entityseems somewhat doubtful for at least five reasons. First, moststudies cited thus far are unable to disconfound prior existingpsychiatric morbidities from any effect directly caused bycannabis. Second, and closely related, is the difficulty inseparating cannabis as catalytic facilitator of a covert butdeveloping psychopathology from cannabis as causal agent in theonset of depression, loss of motivation, etc. Third, many of thestudies examined above were conducted without properlycontextualizing the social circumstances of those being studied(e.g., Kolansky and Moore [45]). Research on motivation,adherence to educational courses and behaviour changes associatedwith cannabis use conducted in the 1960's and 1970's areconfounded with the effect of changing social values, rebelliousattitudes to the 'system' and alternative life-style worldviewswhich were prevalent at the times of those studies. Fourth, theresearch results on and pattern of this supposed syndrome containtoo much contradictory evidence to pass the most basic test ofempirical consistency required for sound scientificconceptualization as a single dynamic entity. Fifth, and mostimportantly from the perspective of this paper, no pre-test,post-test long-term longitudinal studies have been conductedwhich attempt to identify personality traits associated withchronic cannabis usage. Returning to the interpretation of'amotivational syndrome' as given in Creason and Goldman, it canbe argued that the explanatory intervening personality variableposited by these authors (to account for increased cannabis useand subsequent loss of motivation in the cognitive,perceptual-motor tasks typically employed in most performancestudies) is what Tellegen and Atkinson have called 'traitabsorption' [4, 17]. It can be hypothesized that those who becomeheavy cannabis users (and show signs of 'amotivational syndrome')are doing so because the intoxicant properties of THC augment andfacilitate this given personality trait in a manner which isself-rewarding. Of course, the inherent danger of anyself-rewarding system is the formation of an uncontrollablepositive feedback loop which leads to ever increasing levels ofconsumption of the facilitating substance - in this casecannabis. It is being hypothesized herein that theso-called 'amotivational syndrome' does not represent a specificpsychiatric nosology but is, rather, the combination of twogeneral factors arising from heavy cannabis use brought about bya personality-need driven positive feedback loop. With regularcannabis use is observed: 1) a change in cognitive style to a more'absorptive' state in which externally driven reward systems nolonger predominate with subsequent reduction in a user's level ofachievement motivation; and 2) the development of depression whichsometimes ensues either as a consequence of a prior existingpathology or as a result of the user being unable to sustain thedesired 'absorption' state for reasons arising as a result ofsocial circumstances, changing self-concept engendered by thecannabis-induced state and/or the development of increasedtolerance to the effects of THC. However, before discussing the possiblemechanisms entailed by the above hypotheses, the personalityfactor of 'trait absorption' requires further elucidation. TRAITABSORPTION It has been argued in recent years that'flow' states of consciousness and/or 'absorption' experiencesmay represent a basic human personality trait which has, as itsprimary drive, the need to experience the world in aself-absorbed state of consciousness which is intrinsicallyself-rewarding [4, 5]. This need varies from one individualto another and, in some, the achievement of this state may becomean end in itself. Tellegen and Atkinson describe the origins andqualities of what they call trait absorption. Phenomena of this kind, while apparentlyoverlooked by contemporary academic treatments of attention,perception, and memory, have been described and discussed widelyin literature on meditation, expanded awareness, peakexperiences, mysticism, aesthetic experience, regression in theservice of the ego, altered states of consciousness, and in theliterature on drug effects. For example, Maslow spoke of the"fascination" and "complete absorption" thatcharacterize peak experiences [27]. Schachtel, to whom Maslowrefers, described the "allocentric" perceptual mode asinvolving "totality of interest" [28, p.221], andopenness to the object in all its aspects with all one's senses,including one's kinesthetic experience. We suggest, in a similarvein, that the attention described in Absorption items is a"total" attention, involving a full commitment ofavailable perceptual, motoric, imaginative and ideationalresources to a unified representation of the attentional object(p.274). The absorptive state favoured by thosewith high levels of trait absorption is the likely basis for all'flow' experiences. In this state of consciousness theindividual's attentional resources are focused in such a manneras to enter wholly into whatever is in awareness, whether thefocus be interoceptive or exteroceptive [29]. This totality ofawareness on the side of the 'object' has been called by Sartreand other phenomenologists 'unreflected' consciousness [30]. Mostof our waking state is spent in 'reflected' consciousness inwhich attentional resources are divided between the 'object' and'self-as-object' so that we are simultaneously experiencing the'object' and ourselves doing the experiencing. It is in thislatter state that experience becomes memory and hence knowledgeand it is also in this state that we operate in what is generallyunderstood to be our normal linguistic, discursive mentalprocesses which includes our usual awareness of the passage oftime [31]. Irwin further discriminates between the'capacity' and 'opportunity' for 'absorption' as determiningwhether individuals engage experiential states which are derivedfrom deploying attentional resources in this particular way [32].Further, the 'capacity' for engaging in 'absorptive' states hasbeen standardized as a personality construct and is thereforemeasurable as a scale (Absorption) on a self-administeringpersonality instrument - the Tellegen Differential PersonalityQuestionnaire, and this personality 'capacity' has been found tobe able to successfully differentiate levels of hypnoticsusceptibility as well as frequency and type of reportedspontaneous mystical, visionary, and paranormal experiences [4,32, 33, 34, 35, 47]. Finally, trait absorption may underliewhat Weil has argued is a fundamental need in Homo Sapiens acrosscultures and time: the drive to engage altered states ofconsciousness for both ritualistic and creative developmentalpurposes [15]. In traditional societies, such as once existedamongst the Yakut of Siberia and the Australian Aborigines, anindividual with a strong natural proclivity for altered stateexperiences would be, as a matter of course, chosen for alife-role as shaman or 'clever man' [36, 37]. However, this roleno longer exists in the developed countries of the late TwentiethCentury. Thus, individuals who possess high 'trait absorption'and/or are inclined toward spontaneous 'absorptive' and tranceexperiences may find themselves making a "deviant roleexit" into alternative lifestyles, such as the cannabissub-culture, more frequently than those with less 'absorptive''capacity' in order to create greater 'absorptive' 'opportunity'[32, 38]. ARECONCEPTUALIZATION OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TRAIT ABSORPTIONAND AMOTIVATIONAL SYNDROME In contrast to the view that cannabis ispsychologically dangerous in itself, Weil has argued that itshould be understood to be what he calls an "activeplacebo" [15]. Weil describes an "active placebo"as "a substance whose apparent effects on the mind areactually placebo effects in response to minimal physiologicalaction" (p. 95) rather than being a direct cause of thepsychological changes seen in users. This effect is attested to,empirically, by the wide variety of responses individuals make tosimilar batches of cannabis in similar situations. Weil's notion,based on hundreds of clinical observations, led him to argue thatit was highly unlikely that cannabis alone could be responsiblefor the very varied psychological responses and effects which heobserved. He provides a useful insight into the reasons for thevaried outcomes seen across cannabis motivation studies. Because marijuana is such anunimpressive pharmacological agent, it is not a very interestingdrug to study in a laboratory. Pharmacologists cannot get ahandle on it with their methods, and because they cannot see thereality of the nonmaterial state of consciousness that usersexperience, they are forced to design experimental situationsvery far removed from the real world in order to get measurableeffects. There are three conditions under which marijuana can beshown to impair general psychological performance in laboratorysubjects. They are: (1) by giving it to people who have never hadit before; (2) by giving people very high doses that they are notused to (or giving it orally to people used to smoking it); and(3) by giving people very hard things to do, especially thingsthat they have never had a chance to practise while under theinfluence of the drug. Under any of these three conditions,pharmacologists can demonstrate that marijuana impairsperformance (p. 86). It has been argued that most alteredstates of consciousness, such as those produced in hypnosis,meditation and ecstatic experiences, involve deployment ofattention in unique ways with a particular emphasis on thepresent [29, 40, 41]. This 'unreflected', unselfconsciousattentional state, which is focused primarily in the 'now', will,whether induced by drugs or not, interfere with the normal memoryprocesses associated with the 'reflected' conscious state whichis required for discursive thought and logico-temporal activitiesusually associated with memory and task performance. Thus, this paper would argue that anydiscussion of motivation and THC use (and its relationship tomemory acquisition and performance) must consider the possibilitythat THC facilitates a free-floating 'absorptive' state whichfavours engagement in spatial-metaphoric cognitive styles of the'unreflected' 'here and now' style of consciousness. This ispartly confirmed by the findings of Fabian and Fishkin whoobserve in their study of cannabis and 'trait absorption' that ...marijuana users, when asked tospecifically reference the marijuana-high state, report a greaternumber of absorbing experiences than when not specifically askedto reference the marijuana state and when specifically asked toexclude all drug-related experiences [42, p. 548]. It is thus possible that the apparentmemory deficits associated with 'amotivational syndrome' seen inindividuals intoxicated with THC and, who are being required toperform and attend to verbal, temporal, logico-deductiveactivities, are the result of 'time-sharing' between the twostates of 'reflected' and 'unreflected' consciousness. The effectof this 'switching' is to disrupt the usual cognitive and memoryconsolidation processes by constantly interrupting the continuityof attention necessary for the completion of the memory process.This 'time-sharing' can be conceptualised as a temporary andrapid movement out of the cannabis-induced 'unreflected' state ofconsciousness (absorptive state) into 'reflected' consciousnesswhen sufficient 'demand' is present calling the experient'sattention to the temporal, discursive information stream. As soonas demand falls below some critical threshold required forattention, the 'unreflected' state resumes thus disrupting anyon-going consolidation and learning process. The laying down ofshort-term memory and the ability to attend accurately toobjective (clock) time require a certain level of continuousbackground 'self-observation' and rehearsal - which is a centralpart of 'reflected' state activity. Therefore, assigning thecause of memory deficits measured in THC intoxicated individualsto the direct pharmacological action of cannabis may be anattribution error with cannabis being primarily a catalyst(active placebo) for these altered states which are the actualcause of the failure to process discursive information in theusual way into long-term memory. The self-rewarding quality of thisabsorptive state will naturally lead to the cannabis userpreferentially returning to absorptive behaviours and cognitivestyles over and again. Of course, this will lead, no doubt, to aloss of concentration on any performance task in process, therebycreating a background of anxiety associated with the failure atwhatever chore the cannabis user is currently engaged. Naturally,this will facilitate further and more frequent returns to theabsorptive state since it will be experienced as rewarding andthe demand of the performance activity as aversive. No doubt, intime, the preference for the former state will lead to adiminished capacity to perform in many areas of daily activitywhich would likely cause considerable frustration in theexperient. This state of affairs will very likely lead, in time,to the generation of a sense of learned helplessness whichundoubtedly will exacerbate any depressive reaction or existingon-going depression. Weil has argued that our naturalproclivity for altered states of consciousness traditionally hasbeen facilitated in many cultures by the ingestion ofpsychoactive substances such as marijuana and hashish [15].Although this drug 'high' was once accepted as one in a range ofpossible states which humans might rightfully achieve, this iscertainly no longer the case in the West. Thus, the negativereporting, vis--vis cannabis and performance, may now bereconceptualized as a value judgement regarding the type ofmental state and hence style of cognitive performance deemeduseful and proper by today's social standards. Put more directly,researchers are testing cannabis users on tasks which representcurrent biases, thus allowing their research to reflect theprejudices of their times. In other historical and culturalcontexts chemically and contemplatively induced altered states ofconsciousness have been highly valued and it is arguable thatmost religious traditions have drawn their deeper insights andinspiration from these experiences. The capacity of altered stateexperiences to open broader existential perspectives and, hence,new life meanings appears to be part of a growth processintrinsic to both spiritual and creative life. Further, it can beargued that these types of altered state experiences arenecessary in the facilitation of personal renewal and the reliefof psychological suffering. Although most of the major worldreligious traditions have developed methods for achieving thesealtered states without the use of pharmacological agents, in theage of 'high-tech' medicine, and in the context of little socialor religious support for those 'talented' in the production ofaltered state experiences, the adoption of chemical substancesand the attendant association with deviant social groups forthese ends should not be surprising. The psychiatrist Arthur Deikman suggeststhat the bifurcation of consciousness into 'observing' (objective- 'reflected') and 'experiencing' (receptive - 'unreflected')selves is common for most people living in the West today [43].It is the denial of the latter mode, the source of our capacityfor mystical experience, which is the basis of our currentpsycho-spiritual crisis and, arguably, the underlyingpsychological cause of our destructive alienation from nature. Heasserts that without the cultivation of the 'experiencing self'we may fail to enter into mystical awareness and therefore beunable to remedy the psychopathology innate to our presentcondition. Thus, from the position advocated by Deikman and fromthe previous discussion, the use of cannabis in our modernindustrialized societies can be reconceptualized away from thenotion of a public health issue, to the understanding that itsuse is deeply connected to the seeking of personal renewal or thefulfilment of unmet spiritual needs, which users attempt tofulfil, albeit inadequately, through ingesting the drug. REFERENCES 1. Advisory Committee on Illicit Drugs(Eds.), Cannabis and the Law in Queensland: A Discussion Paper,Queensland: The Criminal Justice Commission, Brisbane, 1993. 2. W. H. McGlothlin and L. J. West, TheMarijuana Problem: An Overview, American Journal ofPsychiatry, 125(3), pp. 370-378, 1968. 3. D. E. Smith, Acute and ChronicToxicity in Marihuana, Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 2,pp. 37-47, 1968. 4. A. Tellegen and G. Atkinson, Opennessto Absorbing and Self-Altering Experiences("Absorption"), a Trait Related to HypnoticSusceptibility, Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 83,pp. 268 - 277, 1974. 5. M. Csikszentmihalyi and I. S.Csikszentmihalyi, Optimal Experience: Psychological Studies ofFlow in Consciousness, Cambridge University Press, New York,1988. 6. S. Cohen, Effects of Long TermMarijuana Use. International Symposium on Marijuana, Cocaine andTraffic Safety (1986, Santa Monica, California), Alcohol,Drugs & Driving - Abstracts & Reviews, 2(3-4), pp.155-163, 1986. 7. L. E. Hollister, Cannabis--1988, ActaPsychiatrica Scandinavica, 78(345, Suppl), pp. 108-118, 1988. 8. R. T. Jones, Human Effects: AnOverview. In R. Petersen (Ed.), Marijuana Research Findings:1980, pp. 54-80, GPO: DHEW Pub. No. (ADM) 80-1001,Washington, 1980. 9. P. L. Nelson, A Critical Review ofThe Research Literature Concerning Some Biological andPsychological Effects of Cannabis, In Advisory Committee onIllicit Drugs (Eds.), Cannabis and the Law in Queensland: ADiscussion Paper, pp. 113-152, Criminal Justice Commission,Brisbane, Australia, 1993. 10. G. G. Nahas (Ed.), Marihuana inScience and Medicine, Raven Press, New York, 1984. 11. G. B. Chesher, K. D. Bird, A.Stramarcos, and M. Nikias, A Comparative Study of the DoseResponse Relationship of Alcohol and Cannabis on Human SkillsPerformance, in D. J. Harvey (Ed.), Marijuana NineteenEighty-Four: Proceedings of the Oxford Symposium on Cannabis,pp. 621-627, IRL Press, Oxford 1985. 12. R. H. Schwartz, P. J. Gruenewald, M.Klitzner, and P. Fedio, Short-Term Memory Impairment in CannabisDependent Adolescents, Am J Dis Child, 143, pp. 1214-1219,1989. 13. M. Herkenham, A. B. Lynn, M. D.Little, M. R. Johnson, L. S. Melvin, B. R. De Costa, and K. C.Rice, ). Cannabinoid Receptor Localization in Brain, Proceedingsof the National Academy of Science USA, 87, pp.1932-1990,1990. 14. R. A. Weller, Marijuana: Effects andMotivation, Medical Aspects of Human Sexuality, 19(3), pp.92-104, 1985. 15. A. Weil, The Natural Mind,Penguin Books, Victoria, Australia, 1975. 16. A. S. Carlin and R. D. Post, DrugUse and Achievement, International Journal of the Addictions,9(3), pp. 401-410, 1974. 17. C. R. Creason and M. Goldman,Varying Levels of Marijuana Use by Adolescents and theAmotivational Syndrome, Psychological Reports, 48(2), pp.447-454, 1981. 18. D. F. Duncan, Lifetime Prevalence of"Amotivational Syndrome'' Among Users and Non-Users ofHashish, Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 1(2), pp.114-119, 1987. 19. R. W. Foltin, M. W. Fischman, M. J.Nellis, D. J. Bernstein, et al, Marijuana Effects and BehavioralContingencies, Proceedings of the 47th Annual ScientificMeeting of the Committee on Problems of Drug Dependence: Problemsof Drug Dependence, 1985, pp. 355-361, National Institute onDrug Abuse: Research Monograph Series, 1986. 20. C. J. Mullins, B. M. Vitola, and J.W. Abellera, Users of Cannabis Only, US AFHRL Technical Report74- 41, 1974. 21. J. A. Halikas, T. M. Shapiro, and R.A. Weller, Marijuana: A Critical Review of Sociological, Medicaland Psychiatric Questions. In A. Schecter (Ed.), TreatmentAspects of Drug Dependence, CRC Press, West Palm Beach,Florida, 1978. 22. T. H. Maugh, Marihuana (II): Does ItDamage the Brain? Science, 185(4153), pp. 775-776, 1974. 23. N. Q. Brill and R. L. Christie,Marihuana Use and Psychosocial Adaptation: Follow-Up Study of aCollegiate Population, Archives of General Psychiatry, 31(5),pp. 713-719, 1974. 24. E. Goode, Drug Use and Grades inCollege. Nature, 234(5326), pp. 225-227, 1971. 25. H. J. Thurlow, On Drive State andCannabis, Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal, 16(2),pp. 181-182, 1971. 26. D. J. Kupfer, T. Detre, J. Koral,and P. Fajans, A Comment on The "AmotivationalSyndrome" in Marijuana Smokers, American Journal ofPsychiatry, 130(12), pp. 1319-1322, 1973. 27. A. H. Maslow, Toward a Psychologyof Being (2nd ed.), Van Nostrand, Princeton, 1968. 28. E. G. Schachtel, Metamorphosis:On the Development of Affect, Perception, Attention, and Memory,Basic Books, New York: 1959. 29. C. T. Tart, States ofConsciousness, E. P. Dutton, New York, 1975. 30. J. P. Sartre, The Transcendenceof the Ego: An Existentialist Theory of Consciousness (F.Williams & R. Kirkpatrick, Trans.), Octagon Books, New York,1972. 31. P. White, Beliefs About ConsciousExperience, in G. Underwood (Ed.) Aspects of Consciousness:Vol. 3: Awareness and Self-Awareness, pp. 1-25, AcademicPress, New York, 1982. 32. H. J. Irwin, ParapsychologicalPhenomena and the Absorption Domain, The Journal of theAmerican Society for Psychical Research, 79, pp. 1-11, 1985. 33. P. L. Nelson, Personality Factors inthe Frequency of Reported Spontaneous Prternatural Experiences,The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 21, pp.193-209, 1989. 34. P. L. Nelson, The Technology of thePraeternatural: An Empirically Based Model of TranspersonalExperiences, The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 22,pp. 35-50, 1990. 35. A. Tellegen, Brief Manual for theDifferential Personality Questionnaire, The University ofMinnesota, 1982. 36. M. Eliade, Shamanism: ArchaicTechniques of Ecstasy (W.R.Trask, Trans.), Bollingen SeriesLXXVI, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1964. 37. A. P. Elkin, Aboriginal Men OfHigh Degree (2nd ed.), University of Queensland Press,St.Lucia, 1977. 38. J. Hagan, The Structuration ofGender and Deviance: A Power-Control Theory of Vulnerability toCrime and the Search for Deviant Role Exits, The CanadianReview of Sociology and Anthropology, 27(2), pp. 137-156,1990. 39. DSM-III-R, AmericanPsychiatric Association, Washington, D.C., 1987. 40. D. P. Brown, A Model for the Levelsof Concentrative Meditation, The International Journal ofClinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 25, pp. 236-273, 1977. 41. G. Reed, The Psychology ofAnomalous Experience, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1974. 42. W. D. Fabian and S. M. Fishkin, AReplicated Study of Self-Reported Changes in PsychologicalAbsorption with Marijuana Intoxication, Journal of AbnormalPsychology, 90(6), pp. 546-553, 1981. 43. A. J. Deikman, The ObservingSelf: Mysticism and Psychotherapy, Beacon Press, Boston,1982. 44. Department of Health, Housing andCommunity Services, National Campaign Against Drug AbuseSocial Issues Survey, 1991 [computer file], Social ScienceData Archives, The Australian National University, Canberra,1991. 45. H. Kolansky and W. T. Moore, Effectsof Marijuana on Adolescents and Young Adults, JAMA, 216(3),pp. 486-492, 1971. 46. G. G. Nahas and C. Latour, The HumanToxicity of Marijuana, The Medical Journal of Australia,156(7), pp. 495-497, 1992. 47. P. L. Nelson, Personality Attributesas Discriminating Factors in Distinguishing Religio-Mystical fromParanormal Experients, Imagination, Cognition and Personality,11(4), pp. 389-405, 1991-92. 48. P. L. Nelson and J. D. Howell, APsycho-Social Phenomenological Methodology for ConductingOperational, Ontologically Neutral Research into Religious andAltered State Experiences, Journal for the Psychology ofReligion, 3, pp. 1-48, 1993. T. O. Nelson (Ed.), Metacognition: Core Readings, Allyn and Bacon, Boston, 1992. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-17IA087-000627-B014-210http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/canb2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051129 text/html 90902HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:11:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:18 GMTContent-length: 90684 Personality Trait Absorption: An Exploratory Study ofOpportunity and Capacity in Relation to Cannabis Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information PERSONALITYTRAIT ABSORPTION: ANEXPLORATORY STUDY OF OPPORTUNITY AND CAPACITY IN RELATIONTO CANNABIS USE Peter L. Nelson, Ph.D. Centre for Humanities andHuman Sciences Southern Cross University Lismore, NSW 2480 Australia ABSTRACT Although the Tellegen Absorption Scalehas been widely employed in recent years as a measure ofpersonality Trait Absorption, it is argued that this simple scoredoes not sufficiently discriminate true capacity for Absorptionnor does it reveal the level of opportunity made for absorptiveexperiencing. This study operationalizes Capacity and Opportunityas two additional subscales appended to the Tellegen scale and,by employing the technique of Principal Components Analysis, fiveuseful sub-dimensions are generated. Following on from thisAuthor's earlier suggestion that personality Trait Absorption maybe linked to cannabis use and depression, an exploratory studywas conducted into the relationship of cannabis use, gender,self-perceived motivation loss and depression to observed levelsof overall Absorption as well as to levels of Capacity andOpportunity for absorptive experiencing. INTRODUCTION In recent years absorption has becomeincreasingly popular as a psychological construct [1]. Thisconception of attentional deployment, now interpreted andcodified as a personality trait [2, 3, 4], has found its way intoresearch areas as diverse as aesthetics [5, 6], hypnosis [7, 8,9, 10], psychopathology [11], religious behavior [12, 13],altered states of consciousness [14, 15, 16, 17, 18],parapsychological phenomena [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24],intelligence [25], illicit drug use [26, 27], dissociative states[28, 29] and medicine [30, 31, 32]. Individuals higher in TraitAbsorption appear to manifest a fundamental need to experiencethe phenomenal world in a manner which totally engagesattentional resources in an intrinsically self-rewarding way.Tellegen and Atkinson describe the absorptive experience as an"'allocentric' perceptual mode...involving 'totality ofinterest', and openness to the object in all its aspects with allone's senses" [1, p.221]. Further, this attentional style istotal, "involving a full commitment of available perceptual,motoric, imaginative and ideational resources to a unifiedrepresentation of the attentional object" (p.274). Irwin has argued that Absorption must beseen not only as an innate capacity for a particular mode ofattentional deployment, but should be understood as comprisingthree sub-dimensions: 'need' for absorptive experience;'opportunity' made for these experiences, as well as one'soverall capacity to have such experiences [21]. He accepts thatthe Tellegen Absorption Scale (TAS) of the DifferentialPersonality Questionnaire [2] is such a measure of 'capacity' andhe links 'opportunity' to 'need', which is operationalized as aslightly reworded form of the original TAS. Irwin's resultantNeed for Absorption Scale (NAS) requires Ss to rate, as either'true' or 'false', the assertion that they 'enjoy' each of theitems of the TAS rather than simply indicating whether theyexperience them or not. However, the connection between enjoyinga particular experience and 'need' for that experience remainsunclear in this formulation. In addition, Irwin's approach failsto address precisely the issue of 'opportunity' which, logically,only can be interpreted as the frequency of engagement inabsorptive states which is not assessed in either the TAS or theNAS. Although it is widely accepted that theTAS provides a read-out of overall 'capacity' for TraitAbsorption, the items, being true or false statements, fail todiscriminate either the frequency of occurrence or the ease ofaccess with which individuals experience the phenomenon of eachitem. In other words, when answering 'true' to a given Absorptionitem, there is no indication made whether this experiencehappened once in a life-time or everyday and, further, it is notpossible to ascertain whether an S finds it easy or difficult toaccess the phenomena represented by a given TAS item. Thus, twoAbsorption high-scorers may be, in fact, quite different both intheir rate of absorptive participation and in their innateabilities. Such a shortcoming suggests a need toexpand the items of the TAS in order to obtain, not only areading of simple Absorption level, but measures of bothfrequency (Opportunity) and ease of engagement (Capacity) aswell. This paper reports the results of using just such anexpanded scale in an exploratory empirical study of therelationship of Trait Absorption to cannabis use and the relatedfactors of gender, self-assessed loss of motivation andself-assessed frequency of depression. There appears to be very little in theliterature regarding these issues, but in relation to cannabis,it recently has been argued that the preference of users for thedrug may be a direct consequence of the ability of the activeingredient, _-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, to facilitateself-rewarding absorptive and 'flow' cognitive/affective states[26, 33]. It has been further suggested that the use of cannabismay be an attempt to redress an imbalance in cognitive andaffective 'style' in which active, discursive, logico-deductivecognitive activities are replaced by more passive, absorptive andflow styles of attention and conscious participation. From thisperspective cannabis use may reflect a means for individuals withhigher levels of Trait Absorption, and who have a preference forsuch states, to gain greater access to this attentional mode. It thus would seem likely that amongstregular users of cannabis a higher overall level of personalitytrait absorption might be observed. It has been asserted that theurge to use the drug may arise in some users from "a primarypsychological need which far outweighs the power of those sortsof external pressures" [26, p. 44] which mitigate againstillicit drug use. This need also may manifest itself in apreference for cannabis use in that the drug may enhance theCapacity as well as increase the Opportunity to experience statesof flow and absorption. What follows is a description andanalysis of an exploratory questionnaire designed to assess theseissues. METHOD A multi-purpose questionnaire containingitems for several different research projects was administered toundergraduate students at the Lismore and Coffs Harbour campusesof Southern Cross University (SCU) as well as to a few members ofthe surrounding community in the Northern Rivers district of NewSouth Wales, Australia. The overwhelming majority of respondentswere undergraduates (98.9%) who were taking IntroductoryPsychology during the period 1993-94. This psychology classserves not only the psychology major at SCU, but was, at thetime, a core subject for Paralegal Studies, Human MovementScience, Business, general Social Science and Arts majors aswell. Thus, the sample obtained is not dominated by psychologymajors only and more closely represents the student population ofSCU than do the usual collocations of undergraduates drawn fromintroductory psychology courses. The first part of the questionnaireincluded some standard demographic items and in regard to theresearch being reported herein information was obtained regardingself-assessments of depression, loss of motivation for dailychores and frequency of cannabis use. The questions used forassessing cannabis intake were the same as those employed by the1991 National Campaign Against Drug Abuse (NCADA) bi-annualnational survey of Australian substance use [34]. A system forguaranteeing anonymity was employed such that no one, includingthe primary investigator, could ascertain the identity ofrespondents thus ensuring reasonably honest replies to thecannabis questions. The last section consisted of the 34item Tellegen Absorption Scale [2]. Each item of this scalerequires a 'true' or 'false' response and if a subject answered'true' to any of these, s/he was instructed to answer two morequestions appended to each of the TAS items. These two additionalquestions were designed to ascertain: 1) Approximately howfrequently Ss engaged in the given TAS activity (creation ofOpportunity for absorptive activities); and 2) how easy is it forthe respondent to do so (Capacity for engaging in these kinds ofexperiences). Subjects were required to circle a single numberfrom 0-10 indicating ranges from "never" to "allthe time" for Opportunity and "difficult" to"easy" for Capacity. Unlike the study by Fabian andFishkin [27], Ss were not instructed to reference the cannabisintoxicated state when evaluating the TAS items, but to maketheir self-evaluations based on how they are in their usualday-to-day state. Participation in the research wasvoluntary, but a 10% increase in a subject's final grade wasoffered as an incentive for taking part. As a result there wasbetter than 99% participation rate for all classes surveyed. RESULTS A total of 272 questionnaires werereturned in usable form. Of these 74.6% are women and 25.4% menwith a mean age for the entire group of 24.8 years (Median = 20,SD = 8.9, Range: 17-56). The mean age for women is 25 years(Median = 20, SD = 9.2, Range: 17-56) and for men 23.9 years(Median = 20, SD = 7.8, Range: 18-49), the difference beingnon-significant but reflecting the predominance of women amongstthe mature-age students. Although there is a good representationof older students in the Southern Cross University population,68.5% of the current sample is 25 years or younger in thissample. The large ratio of women to men isaccounted for by the fact that the largest single group ofstudents in this study is enrolled in the Bachelor of SocialScience degree (40.8%) and these students are predominantlyfemale (81.1%). In addition, Psychology is a favored elective forthose students completing the Associate Degree in ParalegalStudies (12.9% of sample) and this course of study is generallyfavored by women as well (91.4% in this sample). In general,where psychology is taken as an elective, it is more likely to betaken by women and in this study the students listing 'Other'(other than Social Science, Business, Law, Paralegal) as theircourse of study are 74% female. PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS ANALYSIS:OPPORTUNITY AND CAPACITY FOR ABSORPTION For each case the total Absorption scorewas calculated as the sum of all the 'true' responses made to theprimary Tellegen Absorption items [2]. This is typically theAbsorption score (TAS) reported in the literature and has a rangeof 0-34. In addition, the totals for all Opportunity and Capacitysub-items for each case were calculated yielding Total AbsorptionOpportunity (TAO) (range/0-340) and Total Absorption Capacity(TAC) (range/0-340) scores. Next, the individual items forassessing Opportunity and Capacity for Absorption were used inthe generation of two separate Principal Components Analyses(PCA). This technique was employed to ascertain the existence ofany empirically-based higher order components which would beconceptually useful in addition to the three overall Absorptiontotals [35]. Varimax rotation was applied and Scree plots of theresultant eigen-values were made for both sets of variables [36].Although the first 8 and 10 values for Opportunity and Capacity,respectively, were greater than one, there was a clear 'break' ineach plot at the second eigen-value, so two-component modelsseemed to be indicated in both cases. Although a two-componentsolution yielded a conceptually sound grouping for Opportunity, athree-component model appeared more conceptually appropriate inthe case of Capacity and was thus adopted. The results of the PCA for AbsorptionOpportunity lists the Tellegen items with their respectiveloadings for the two rotated components which have been named'Immersed Entrancement' (Component 1 - C1AO) and'Intuitive/Imaginative Knowing' (Component 2 - C2AO) and togetheraccount for almost one third of the explained variance (see Table1). Variables with a loading coefficient of 0.320 (about 10% ofvariance) or greater were included in the naming process. Onlyvariable 13 ("If I wish I can imagine that my body is soheavy that I could not move it if I wanted to") did notreach this criterion on either component, but, since it wasclose, was also included in the table. Table 1. Componentloadings for Principal Components Analysis of AbsorptionOpportunity items. ROTATED PCA LOADINGS Components 1 2 16-Nature/Art consc. alteration 0.6572 34-Sunset 0.6103 24-Organ music lift 0.6040 23-Delight small things 0.5921 27-Music reminds of picts or pats 0.5589 33-Odors have colors 0.5348 17-Colors have distinct meanings 0.5333 15-Crackle & flames 0.5311 12-Lost in music 0.5265 30-Voice fascinating 0.5256 25-Noise to music (attending) 0.5195 2-Moved by eloquent language 0.5027 6-See cloud shapes in sky 0.4990 10-Textures as colors or music 0.4828 5-Mind envelop the world 0.4513 26-Memories from smells 0.4099 8-Understand mystical experience 0.4064 0.3678 18-Wander off in own thoughts 0.3714 21-Become character in play 0.3213 19-Recollect past with clarity 0.6329 1-Experience as child 0.5963 4-Visual after-image 0.5849 31-Presence not there 0.5749 20-Make sense but not to others 0.5648 14-Presence before seen 0.5389 28-Know what is going to be said 0.5367 9-Step outside self to different state 0.4944 11-Experience as doubly real 0.4830 3-Lost in story 0.4555 29-Physical memories 0.4502 22-Thoughts as visual images 0.4141 7-Absorbed in daydream 0.3672 0.4007 32-Images easily appear 0.3540 0.3855 13-Imagine body so heavy 0.2935 Variance explained by rotated components1 2 5.9508 5.0415 Percent of total variance explained 1 2 17.5023 14.8280 Key Component 1. - Immersedentrancement. (C1AO) Component 2. - Intuitive/imaginative knowing.(C2AO) Many of the loadings in the firstcomponent relate to items which ask the subject if s/he engagesin acts of interoceptive or exteroceptive immersion in andentrancement by thoughts, feelings, nature, sunsets, art, music,people, etc. Some of the items which load in Component 1 havesynesthetic qualities as well, but it can be argued thatimmersion and/or entrancement is fundamental to this type ofexperience. Component 2 is composed of items which ask Ss whetherthey have imaginal and/or intuitive experiences. The former typescan include episodes of entering into states in which oneexperiences the present as one did in childhood or states inwhich one can "step outside" oneself in order toexperience the world differently. The latter includes sensingpresences who are not veridically present, knowing what is goingto be said next before hearing it, and intuiting events andmeanings not yet evident to others. Three items in this analysis appear toload fairly evenly across both components: 8, 'UnderstandingMystical Experiences', 7, 'Absorbed in Daydream', and 32, 'Imageseasily appear'. In items 7 and 32 it is not difficult to see thatthere are both immersion and imaginal components to theseactivities. But this is not as clear for item 8 which asksrespondents to indicate whether or not they know what others meanwhen they refer to mystical experiences. The second PCA calculated for theAbsorption Capacity items yielded a three component solution (seeTable 2). In this case more than a third of the total variancewas explained and variables loading with a coefficient of 0.370or higher were used in naming the components. The first componentis called 'Exteroceptive Imaginal Entrancement' (C1AC) andincludes immersion in external stimuli such as sunsets, nature,music, etc. which can contribute to imaginal experiences such assynesthesia, seeing shapes in free-form stimuli such as clouds,or 'becoming' a character in a play. The second component hasbeen labeled 'Intuitive/Extrasensory Perceptions' (C2AC) and isassociated with the belief that one has precognitive perceptions,senses presences not there is a physical way, can step into aradically different reality frame and can perceive meanings whereothers cannot. Component 3 has been called 'InteroceptiveImaginal Entrancement' (C3AC) because of its focus onintrospective and reflective immersion on phenomena such as one'sdaydreams, inner images, memories and thoughts. In this last PCA only two items loadwith approximately equal strength across more than one component.Variable number 2, 'Moved by eloquent language' loadssignificantly on both components 1 and 3. This item appears tohave two aspects in that one becomes exteroceptively immersedand/or entranced while attending to the external stimuli ofsomeone's words while, at the same time, these stimuli may evokeassociations, memories and fantasies which then become an inwardpart of the total immersion experience. In the case of variable8, 'I think I really know what some people mean when they talkabout mystical experiences', it appears to be connected both toexternal stimuli (other people talking about mysticism) and tointuitively perceiving, in that the experience itself is anintuitive encounter. Table 2. Componentloadings for Principal Components Analysis of Absorption Capacityitems. ROTATED PCA LOADINGS Components 1 2 3 34-Sunset 0.6667 16-Nature/Art consc. alteration 0.6129 17-Colors have distinct meanings 0.5541 24-Organ music lift 0.5513 27-Music reminds of picts or pats 0.5501 33-Odors have colors 0.5368 2-Moved by eloquent language 0.5156 0.4110 10-Textures as colors or music 0.4993 23-Delight small things 0.4877 30-Voice fascinating 0.4729 12-Lost in music 0.4719 15-Crackle & flames 0.4708 5-Mind envelop the world 0.4643 6-See cloud shapes in sky 0.4491 21-Become character in play 0.4226 11-Experience as doubly real 0.3718 28-Know what is going to be said 0.6541 14-Presence before seen 0.6366 31-Presence not there 0.6073 29-Physical memories 0.5094 9-Step outside self to different state 0.4884 8-Understand mystical experience 0.4196 0.4734 20-Make sense but not to others 0.4368 25-Noise to music (attending) 0.3871 7-Absorbed in daydream 0.6395 32-Images easily appear 0.5812 26-Memories from smells 0.5453 19-Recollect past with clarity 0.5394 4-Visual after-image 0.5304 3-Lost in story 0.5217 18-Wander off in own thoughts 0.4783 22-Thoughts as visual images 0.4340 13-Imagine body so heavy 0.3977 1-Experience as child 0.3935 Variance explained by rotated components1 2 3 5.0738 3.4882 3.7932 Percent of total variance explained 1 2 3 14.9229 10.2595 11.1565 Key Component 1. - Exteroceptive imaginalentrancement. (C1AC) Component 2. - Intuitive/extrasensoryperceptions. (C2AC) Component 3. - Interoceptive imaginalentrancement. (C3AC) GENDER, CANNABIS USE AND ABSORPTION When asked whether Ss had ever triedcannabis at least once, 75% of the sample responded in theaffirmative with the rate being only marginally higher for menthan for women (see Table 3). The sample showed no statisticallysignificant dependency between gender and ever having triedcannabis. The mean age for those had tried cannabis is 24.8 yearsand for those who had never tried it, 24.7 years. To the NCADAquestion, "When did you last use marijuana or hashish?"51% responded that they were regular users and, again, there wasno dependency relationship between gender and the responses tothis question. Table 3. Cross-tabulationfor responses to "Have you ever tried marijuana orhashish?" and Gender. Rows are levels of Ever Tried Cannabis? Columns are levels of Gender Female Male totals Never Tried 52 16 68 76.5 23.5 100 25.6 23.2 25 19.1 5.88 25 Tried Cannabis 151 53 204 74.0 26.0 100 74.4 76.8 75 55.5 19.5 75 totals 203 69 272 74.6 25.4 100 100 100 100 74.6 25.4 100 table contents: Count Percent of Row Total Percent of Column Total Percent of Table Total It is interesting to note that almost 6%of those responding to the questionnaire during class time wereactually intoxicated on cannabis at the time and over 8% had lastused it the day before and were therefore likely to be showingsome effects from the drug because of its relatively longhalf-life (5-7 days) [33]. The 'try' and 'use' rates reported inthis study are more than twice the national averages which may beaccounted for by the fact that this is not a random sample of thelocal population, but a student sample, and, in addition, theNorthern Rivers District of New South Wales has a reputation forbeing the center of Australia's 'alternative' subculture.Responses also indicate that men (64.1%) are more likely to becurrent users of cannabis than women (46.3%). From a combined score derived from theNCADA queries: "When did you last use marijuana orhashish?" and "During your last period of usage ofmarijuana or hashish, how often did you use it?" and withthe addition of the question, "On the days you usedmarijuana or hashish, how often did you use it?" Ss werecategorized as being in one of three groups: Never-Used,Past-Users, or Current-Users (see Table 4) [34]. Past-Users wereconsidered to be those who last had used marijuana or hashishmore than one month ago and at that time their consumption ratewas one use per month or less on average. Current-Users are thosewho had used within the past month or more recently and hadconsumed at a rate of one per month or more. Again, there was nostatistically significant dependency between gender and use levelwhen use rate was partitioned in this manner. Table 4. Cross tabulationfor Frequency of Cannabis Use and Gender. Rows are levels of Frequency of Cannabis Use Columns are levels of Gender Female Male totals Never Used 52 16 68 76.5 23.5 100 25.6 23.2 25 19.1 5.88 25 Past User 73 18 91 80.2 19.8 100 36.0 26.1 33.5 26.8 6.62 33.5 Current User 78 35 113 69.0 31.0 100 38.4 50.7 41.5 28.7 12.9 41.5 totals 203 69 272 74.6 25.4 100 100 100 100 74.6 25.4 100 table contents: Count Percent of Row Total Percent of Column Total Percent of Table Total A more discriminating break-down of usewas attempted by dividing the Ss into 'regular', 'irregular','past' and non-users, because it was felt that there may be apersonality difference between the high and low ends of the userspectrum. However, this breakdown produced very littlestatistical discrimination between these two user groups on anyof the tests reported in this paper. Therefore, based on samplesize and the self-report nature of this research, a decision wastaken to combine the user subgroups in order to give greatersimplicity and strength to the statistical analysis. Following on, all component scores,together with the three total Absorption scores, were used asdependent variables in the calculation of univariate ANOVAsacross the independent variable of Gender. The results of theseanalyses for significant effects are given in Table 5. From thesecalculations it appears that both TAS and TAC show onlyborderline significantly higher mean scores for women whereas inthe case of TAO and C2AO the differences are stronger. For thissample it would seem that the primary difference across gender isthe greater emphasis by women for making more opportunities forabsorptive states and particularly those of anintuitive/imaginative type (C2AO). Table 5. UnivariateANOVAs, means and standard deviations for Absorption variablesacross Gender. Absorption Variables F-Ratio DF=1,270 Prob. Female N = 203 Mean S.D. Male N = 69 Mean S.D. Total Absorption Score 3.75 0.054 22.6 6.5 20.8 7.0 Total Absorption Opportunity 6.71 0.010 122.9 53.4 103.6 53.0 Total Absorption Capacity 4.06 0.045 145.3 60.5 128.3 60.6 Component 2 (Absorption Opportunity) 6.66 0.010 0.090 0.985 -0.266 1.003 Next, univariate ANOVAs were calculatedacross the cannabis use factor for all of the Absorption totalscores and component scores. The results indicate a strongstatistically significant difference across all three totalAbsorption scores (see Table 6). From the post hoc testsperformed it is evident the meaningful differences in mean scoresfor all three are to be found between the Current-User group andeither of the other two with current users always showing higheroverall TAS, TAO and TAC scores. Scores for both components of theOpportunity PCA show statistical significance across the levelsof cannabis use with post hoc tests revealing that, as in thecase of the total scores above, the real difference in meansoccurs between Current-Users and either of the other two groups.C2AO, 'Intuitive/Imaginative Knowing', yields a considerablysmaller probability of a Type I error than C1AO and can thus betaken as the more important dimension when identifyingdifferences between the user groups. From this analysis it seemsthat opportunities made (frequency) for absorptive activitiesemphasize more the achievement of intuitive and imaginativeexperiences although immersion, intero- and exteroceptively, isalso important when comparing current to past and non-users. Table 6. UnivariateANOVAs, means and standard deviations for Absorption variablesacross Frequency of Cannabis Use. Absorption Variables F-Ratio DF=2,269 Prob. Never Used N = 68 Mean S.D. Past User N = 91 Mean S.D. Current User N = 113 Mean S.D. Post Hoc Tests (Fisher's LSD) Total Absorption Score 7.56 0.0006 20.8 6.9 20.9 6.8 24.0 5.9 CU>NU (0.0015) CU>PU (0.0010) Total Absorption Opportunity 9.09 0.0002 105.0 49.8 107.9 52.6 134.0 53.6 CU>NU (0.0004) CU>PU (0.0005) Total Absorption Capacity 8.49 0.0003 128.1 59.6 128.9 61.9 158.6 56.9 CU>NU (0.0009) CU>PU (0.0004) Component 1 (Absorption Opportunity) 3.87 0.0221 -0.160 0.904 -0.125 1.004 0.197 1.026 CU>NU (0.0193) CU>PU (0.0213) Component 2 (Absorption Opportunity) 5.58 0.0042 -0.200 0.924 -0.142 0.979 0.235 1.021 CU>NU (0.0043) CU>PU (0.0069) Component 1 (Absorption Capacity) 3.57 0.0296 -0.200 0.849 -0.077 1.051 0.182 1.019 CU>NU (0.0125) Component 3 (Absorption Capacity) 4.38 0.0134 -0.026 1.021 -0.219 1.074 0.192 0.890 CU>PU (0.0035) In the analysis of the Capacitycomponents, only C1AC ('Exteroceptive imaginal entrancement') andC3AC ('Interoceptive imaginal entrancement') show statisticalsignificance. Here we have a reversal in emphasis from the caseof Absorption Opportunity. In the case of C1AC the primarydifference is to be found between Current-Users and Non-Userswhereas with C3AC it is between Current-Users and Past-Users.These results seem to indicate that differences between currentcannabis users and the other groups on the Capacity dimension arebest distinguished through immersion and entrancement activities. Following the univariate studies ofAbsorption across the individual factors of gender and cannabis,a two-way ANOVA was calculated for all Absorption variablesacross both these independent variables looking for interactioneffects. However, only C1AC gives a statistically significantinteraction (F(2,266) = 3.2740, p = 0.0394). The interaction plotof cell means (see Figure 1) clearly shows that women, who eithernever used cannabis or are past users, have higher 'exteroceptiveimaginal entrancement' capacity than men (of those usercategories) with the female past users showing a statisticallysignificantly higher mean C1AC score than male past users (p =0.005) or male non-users (p = 0.02). Male and female currentusers are very similar in mean C1AC as well as are female non-,past and current users. However, male current users showsignificantly higher exteroceptive absorption capacity thaneither never using or past using men (p = 0.007 and p = 0.002,respectively). This analysis would tend to confirm that, ingeneral, women have significantly more capacity for exteroceptiveabsorption except in the case of current users of cannabis wheremen show a slightly higher mean score. Figure 1. Interaction plot of means for C1AC(Exteroceptive imaginal entrancement) across Gender. SELF-PERCEIVED MOTIVATION LOSS,CANNABIS USE AND ABSORPTION As indicated previously all participantswere asked to rate items regarding self-perceived levels ofmotivation loss ("Do you find that you lack motivation forthe normal chores and activities required of your dailylife?"). When a cross-tabulation is calculated formotivation loss and rate of cannabis use, a statisticallysignificant dependency relationship is observed (Chi-square =12.21, 4 df, p = 0.0158). However, two cells of the resultanttable have fewer than 5 items, thus the relationship cannot beconsidered entirely reliable even though the chance of a Type Ierror is less than 2% (see Table 7). Nevertheless, it is evidentfrom observing this table that Current Users are almost 50% morelikely to place themselves in the highest motivation loss rankthan either Never or Past Users. In addition, Current Users areabout three times more likely to categorize themselves at thehighest level of motivation loss than at the other two motivationranks combined. Those Ss who see themselves as nevershowing a loss of motivation are 4-5 times more likely to beNever or Past Users of cannabis than Current Users while thosewho believe that they rarely lose motivation are fairly equallydistributed across the three levels of cannabis use. On the otherhand, those Ss who rank themselves as more regularly experiencingmotivation loss are more than twice as likely to be currentcannabis users as opposed to non-users and about 1.7 times morelikely to be Current Users than Past Users. Clearly, in spite ofthe weakness of some of the cells, there appears to be a directdependency between cannabis use and self-perceived motivationloss with increasing use associated with decreasing motivation inthis sample. Table 7. Cross tabulationof Frequency of Cannabis Use and levels of Self-PerceivedMotivation Loss. Rows are levels of Frequency ofCannabis Use Columns are levels of Rank ofSelf-Perceived Motivation Loss Never Rarely More Often totals Never Used 4 26 38 68 5.88 38.2 55.9 100 40 29.5 21.8 25 1.47 9.56 14.0 25 Past User 5 35 51 91 5.49 38.5 56.0 100 50 39.8 29.3 33.5 1.84 12.9 18.8 33.5 Current User 1 27 85 113 0.885 23.9 75.2 100 10 30.7 48.9 41.5 0.368 9.93 31.2 41.5 totals 10 88 174 272 3.68 32.4 64.0 100 100 100 100 100 3.68 32.4 64.0 100 Chi-square = 12.21 (4 df), p =0.0158 table contents: Count Percent of Row Total Percent of Column Total Percent of Table Total Univariate ANOVAs for all Absorptionvariables were calculated across the factor of Self-PerceivedLoss of Motivation and the significant results are given in Table8. For all three total Absorption scores (TAS, TAO and TAC)significant differences were found with those who report moremotivation loss showing the higher levels of Absorption. Post hoctests reveal the differences primarily are due to the greaterAbsorption means for those who lose motivation more often asopposed to Rarely. Of the three total scores TAO shows thehighest F-ratio suggesting that those who make more opportunityfor absorptive states are most differentiated from the others. Table 8. UnivariateANOVAs, means and standard deviations for Absorption variablesacross levels of Self-Perceived Loss of Motivation Absorption Variables F-Ratio DF=2,269 Prob. Never N = 10 Mean S.D. Rarely N = 88 Mean S.D. More Often N = 174 Mean S.D. Post Hoc Tests (Fisher's LSD) Total Absorption Score 3.79 0.0238 20.70 7.66 20.69 7.11 22.98 6.21 R < M (0.0083) Total Absorption Opportunity 6.08 0.0026 103.20 49.11 103.09 52.63 126.39 53.19 R < M (0.0009) Total Absorption Capacity 3.71 0.0258 120.70 53.68 128.72 62.80 148.41 59.34 R < M (0.0131) Component 2 (Absorption Opportunity) 7.04 0.0010 -0.225 1.058 -0.304 0.949 0.167 0.989 R < M (0.0003) Component 3 (Absorption Capacity) 3.54 0.0303 -0.165 0.822 -0.218 1.048 0.120 0.969 R < M (0.0096) Analysis of the component scores yieldssignificance only for C2AO and C3AC. The pattern of difference issimilar to that for the total scores and appears to indicate thatthe greater Opportunity made is in the realm of the imaginal andthe higher level of Capacity is for interoceptive experience.However, all these results for motivation loss must be consideredsomewhat weak when taken in the light of the great disparity incell sizes (10, 88, 174) and thus would require a larger sampleto confirm. An additional attempt was made to detectwhether or not the loss of motivation and cannabis use factorsinteract in terms of determining the levels of observedAbsorption scores. To this end two-way univariate ANOVAs werecalculated for all the Absorption variables and PCA componentscores as dependent variables across the independent variables ofCannabis Use and Self-Perceived Motivation Loss, but nostatistically significant interaction effects were found. SELF-PERCEIVED DEPRESSION, CANNABISUSE AND ABSORPTION The next analysis concerns therelationships between cannabis usage, self-perceived depressionand Absorption. Table 9 provides a cross-tabulation betweenlevels of Cannabis Use and rank of Self-Perceived Depression. Thefailure of the Chi-square statistic to attain a significant alphaindicates that these two ordinals are relatively independent.There is a slightly increased tendency, however, for CurrentUsers of cannabis to report being depressed More Often than forthe self-reports of either Past Users or those who have neverused. Table 9. Cross-tabulationof Frequency of Cannabis Use and levels of Self-PerceivedDepression. Rows are levels of Frequency ofCannabis Use Columns are levels of Rank ofSelf-Perceived Depression Never Rarely More Often totals Never Used 15 26 27 68 22.1 38.2 39.7 100 31.9 25.7 21.8 25 5.51 9.56 9.93 25 Past User 16 38 37 91 17.6 41.8 40.7 100 34.0 37.6 29.8 33.5 5.88 14.0 13.6 33.5 Current User 16 37 60 113 14.2 32.7 53.1 100 34.0 36.6 48.4 41.5 5.88 13.6 22.1 41.5 totals 47 101 124 272 17.3 37.1 45.6 100 100 100 100 100 17.3 37.1 45.6 100 table contents: Count Percent of Row Total Percent of Column Total Percent of Table Total As in previous analyses, all Absorptionscores were used as dependent variables in univariate ANOVAsacross the factor of Depression (see Table 10). For the group oftotal Absorption scores the significances for differences in cellmeans are quite strong with post hoc tests revealing a consistentpattern of the highest Depression rank showing a significantlygreater mean Absorption score when compared to those who areeither Never or Rarely depressed. The results of statisticaltests of the derived PCA components are also significant forC2AO, C2AC and C3AC with a similar pattern in the post hoccomparisons as found in the total scores. Here again, thesignificant difference in the creation of absorptive Opportunityis primarily located in the dimension of the intuitive/imaginaland, in the case of Capacity, in both the intuitive andinteroceptive activity domains. Table 10. UnivariateANOVAs, means and standard deviations for Absorption variablesacross levels of Self-Perceived Depression Absorption Variables F-Ratio DF=2,269 Prob. Never N = 47 Mean S.D. Rarely N = 101 Mean S.D. More Often N = 124 Mean S.D. Post Hoc Tests (Fisher LSD) Total Absorption Score 10.39  0.0001 19.2 6.2 21.4 6.9 23.9 6.1 N < R (0.0463) N < M (0.00002) R < M (0.0042) Total Absorption Opportunity 6.96 0.0011 100.3 52.3 111.0 51.7 130.4 53.7 N < M (0.0010) R < M (0.0065) Total Absorption Capacity 8.99 0.0002 119.0 52.9 131.7 61.3 156.9 59.6 N < M (0.0002) R < M (0.0017) Component 2 (Absorption Opportunity 6.55 0.0017 -0.401 0.871 -0.054 1.035 0.196 0.973 N < R (0.0458) N < M (0.0005) Component 2 (Absorption Capacity) 3.63 0.0277 -0.345 0.959 0.026 1.001 0.109 0.994 N < R (0.0348) N < M (0.0079) Component 3 (Absorption Capacity) 6.40 0.0020 -0.287 0.922 -0.144 0.956 0.226 1.021 N < M (0.0025) R < M (0.0053) Using a two-way design an attempt wasthen made to ascertain whether there were any interaction effectsbetween the independent variables, Cannabis Use andSelf-Perceived Depression, in determining Absorption cell means.Significant effects were found for three of the eight possiblevariables: TAO (F(4,263) = 2.71, p = 0.0308); C1AO (F(4,263) =2.42, p = 0.0493); and C3AC (F(4,263) = 2.68, p = 0.0320). As canbe seen in Figure 2, those who report never suffering fromdepression and never using cannabis have, on average,significantly lower mean TAO scores than either Past Users (p =0.005) or Current Users (p = 0.002) who never report depression. For those who have never used cannabisthere is a steady and significant climb in average TAO scoreacross the depression ranks (p = 0.02, p = 0.02) finallyexceeding the average score for Past Users who are at the highestlevel of depression (p > 0.05). Current cannabis users showonly a very small and insignificant rise in mean TAO score acrossdepression ranks whereas Past Users show a non-significant dropfrom the Never rank followed by a rise across the next rank.Overall, those who have never used cannabis stand out in thisanalysis in that increasing levels of self-perceived depressionshow increasing mean opportunity made for absorptive activitiesin contrast to current and past users who show consistentlyhigher mean levels of TAO across Depression ranks. Current Usersare over-all highest in TAO mean scores and vary very little nomatter what the rank of Self-Perceived Depression observed (p> 0.05). Therefore, it would appear that overall higher meansof TAO are connected to current cannabis use rather thandepression, except for non-users, who show increasing TAO whichis linearly related to frequency of self-reported depression.Past Users fall somewhere between the other two user groups andat the Rarely and More Often ranks of depression they aresignificantly different than Current users (p = 0.03 and p =0.005, respectively). Figure 2. Interaction plot of means for TotalAbsorption Opportunity across levels of cannabis use andself-perceived depression. In Figure 3 the interaction plot forC1AO ('Immersed entrancement.') reveals a similar pattern oflinear rise across the depression ranks for those who have neverused cannabis (p > 0.05, p = 0.047). For Current Users C1AOfirst makes a non-significant fall between the Never and Rarelydepression ranks with a final rise to a value slightly above theinitial C1AO level at the rank More Often. Past Users show a morelinear, but non-significant, decline in mean C1AO acrossdepression ranks with C1AO at the highest depression rank beingless than for either non-users or Current Users (p > 0.05, p =0.010, respectively). Figure 3. Interactionplot of means for C1AO (Immersed entrancement) across levels ofcannabis use and self-perceived depression. Finally, Figure 4 is the interactionplot for the third significant variable, C3AC (Interoceptiveimaginal entrancement). As in the other cases above, the meanvalues of C3AC for the sub-group of cannabis non-users risesteeply in a somewhat linear fashion across the ranks ofSelf-Perceived Depression (Never-Rarely, p > 0.05; Rarely-MoreOften, p = 0.001). The mean of C3AC for Current Users starts at ahigher value than the other user groups at depression rank Never(p > 0.05 for comparisons to both other groups) and risessharply, but levels out over the next rank. Comparisons ofCurrent User means at Rarely with Never Used means at the samedepression level also show significance (p = 0.033) and acomparison of means for Current User-Rarely and Past User-Rarelyalso reveals a strong difference (p = 0.0004). The change in direction of the plot forCurrent Users is opposite to that of the above variables and,unlike the others, the mean value of C3AC at the highestdepression rank is lower than that for non-users (p > 0.05).However, the differences in the means across depression ranks forCurrent Users are non-significant and represent, as in the othertwo variables, the group showing the highest overall absorptiveactivity. In contrast to the previous analyses, the Past Usergroup appears more variable with no significant differencebetween the first two depression ranks but a significant risefrom the second to the third rank (p = 0.007). Overall, it would appear that currentcannabis users show the highest overall mean Absorption levels nomatter how frequently they are subject to bouts of depression. Onthe other hand, for non-users of cannabis, mean levels ofabsorptive behaviors appear to increase in a linear manner withincreasing reported depression. The Absorption variables whichshow this linear progression all appear to relate to 'immersion'behavior with the variable, C3AC, representing specificallyinteroceptively focused immersion. In general, it is in this casethat non-users show higher absorptive activity than either of theother two user groups. Figure 4. Interactionplot of means for C3AC (Interoceptive imaginal entrancement)across levels of cannabis use and self-perceived depression. DISCUSSION The operationalizing of Irwin's [21]notions of 'capacity' and 'opportunity' as separately rated itemsfor frequency of occurrence and ease of participationcorresponding to each TAS item has yielded two useful Opportunitydimensions in the former case and three useful Capacitydimensions in the latter. This work thus confirms his initialconjecture regarding the importance of looking beyond the raw TASscore as the sole discriminative agent in studies employing TraitAbsorption as a predictive variable. In this study the calculatedcomponent scores are capable of not only refining prediction byproviding useful measures of frequency and true capacity, butthey appear to yield finer discriminations through the use of thesub-attributes capable of making more specific determinationsabout the role of Absorption in behavior and cognition. For example, in this sample whendiscriminating between the sexes, the TAS only provides a minimalsignificant separation which gives no clue as to how men andwomen differ in attentional behavior or style. The differencesfound on the TAO and C2AO subscales provide a strongerseparation, however, indicating that women appear to make moreopportunities for these sorts of experiences and that the type ofexperiences apparently sought are of an intuitive and imaginalnature. Further, when combining the gender analysis with the rateof cannabis use, this survey indicates that women have morecapacity for exteroceptive absorptive engagement with theexception being current users of cannabis where men and women arestatistically indistinguishable. To a degree, through the use ofAbsorption as a predictor, this analysis confirms a stereotype ofwomen as being more interpersonally engaged, by the fact thatthey demonstrate more frequent intuitive behavior which tends tobe focused outwardly. Of course, in the case of cannabis usealone the TAS, TAO and TAC scores are all strong discriminatorsof cannabis users from lower scoring past and non-users. In thissituation both components of the Opportunity PCA show the samepattern of significant difference as for the total scores butwith the intuitive/imaginal dimension being a somewhat strongerdiscriminator. This difference may indicate that, although makingopportunities for interoceptive and exteroceptive deployment ofabsorbed attention is a significant aspect of being a cannabisuser, the seeking of intuitive ways of knowing may be an evenmore important motivator for cannabis users to make opportunitiesfor absorption. On the other hand, when examining participants'capacity for Absorption, only C1AC and C3AC are usefuldiscriminators of cannabis use, thus the difference in capacityfor absorption appears to be mainly in the ability to deployattention inwardly or outwardly in a highly immersed manner. The positive connection betweenincreased TAS, TAO and TAC to higher levels of self-perceivedmotivation loss may be understood as either being caused by theeffect of cannabis on motivation or as a by-product of thepreference for the more passive behavior which obviously would bea consequence of being in an absorptive state. When the resultsof examining the component scores are added to the analysis,there appears to be a related, albeit less strong, relationshipbetween motivation and absorption similar to the cannabis usepattern with the exception that exteroceptive immersion does notreach a significant difference. Recalling that there is adefinite dependency relationship between cannabis use andmotivation loss, it is difficult to disconfound the effect seenhere from that for cannabis. It is thus difficult to interpretthe meaning of these results without a more rigorous experimentaldesign in which cannabis use and motivation loss can bedisentangled. However, it is also noteworthy that post hoc testsreveal that the primary effect for motivation loss is to be foundbetween the More Often and Rarely levels which may be indicativeof different underlying causes and/or personality types involved. The strong, positive relationship ofincreasing absorption activity, as reflected in the three totalscores, to increasing levels of self-perceived depression cannot,as in the case of motivation, be understood as merely a secondaryresult of a dependency between cannabis use and depression.Although there may be some overlapping variance between these twofactors, as witnessed by similarities in Opportunity and Capacityfound regarding absorption in cannabis use, component score meansin this instance show significantly greater capacity forintuitive knowing for those reporting more instances ofdepression. Thus, it would seem that a primary observabledifference amongst groups of differing levels of depression istheir differing capacity to enter into intuitive and imaginalexperiences. The interaction between depression andcannabis use for Absorption highlights further the realdifferences in absorptive frequency and capacity across these twofactors. Overall, current users of cannabis have more capacityand make more opportunities to engage the world in an absorptiveway with the level of depression apparently being irrelevant.Past cannabis users show a slightly more varied but relatedpattern, but non-users of cannabis reveal a strong positiverelationship between self-reported depression and the rate ofmaking opportunities and having capacity for absorptiveexperience. The latter situation makes more sense when weconsider that, in addition to this pattern existing for totalopportunity, the intero-, exteroceptive opportunity and theinteroceptive capacity components show a similar progressionwhich can be interpreted as increasing depression leading toincreasing time spent introspectively inward dwelling. Or,conversely, those who have a higher innate capacity forinteroceptive immersion may make more opportunities for deployingattention inwardly which may become part of the mechanism in theetiology of increasing bouts of depression. Although the data suggest that there isno dependency relationship between depression and cannabis use,increasing use of cannabis is strongly associated with decreasingmotivation. Again, it is not possible to surmise from thisexploratory model what, if any, is the causal connection.However, it can be hypothesized that increasing motivation lossdue to increasing use of cannabis may lead to a decrease inexternal physical participation with an attendant increasing roleas 'observer'. For those high in overall absorption this may beself-rewarding, thus leading to a life style where totaldeployment of attentional resources, externally or internally,becomes one of the primary activities of 'participation' in thelife process. Furthermore, part of the enjoyment of this role of'absorbed observer' may come from the increasing frequency ofimaginal and intuitive experiences which appear to accompanyexternal and/or internal attentional immersion. In the case ofpast users of cannabis, however, the general levels of absorptionare somewhat less and, as a result, the associated life-style andactivities may not have provided enough reward to overcome thenegative reinforcement of whatever was perceived to be lostthrough the use of cannabis. On the other hand, greater capacity forinteroceptive deployment of attention may be connected toincreasing depression for cannabis users and non-users alike, if,as suggested, inward dwelling is part of the etiology ofdepression.. Although no significant difference was found on thiscapacity component for cannabis users, the plot of Figure 4reveals a jump in this capacity for users from those who neverhave depression to those who do. However, it would requirecarefully controlled experimental studies to disentangle thecausal web underlying Absorption, cannabis and depression. REFERENCES 1. A. Tellegen and G. Atkinson, Opennessto Absorbing and Self-Altering Experiences("Absorption"), a Trait Related to HypnoticSusceptibility, Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 83,pp. 268 - 277, 1974. 2. A. Tellegen, Brief Manual for theDifferential Personality Questionnaire, The University ofMinnesota, 1982. 3. K. E. O'Grady, The Absorption Scale:A Factor-Analytic Assessment, International Journal ofClinical & Experimental Hypnosis, 28(3), pp. 281-288,1980. 4. M. E. Murray, Construct Validity ofthe Trait Absorption, Dissertation Abstracts International,35(8-B), p. 4191, 1975. 5. A. L. Combs, J. Black, A. O'Donnell,R. Pope, et al, Absorption and Appreciation of Visual Art, Perceptual& Motor Skills, 67(2), pp. 453-454, 1988. 6. L. A. Rhodes, D. C. David, and A. L.Combs, Absorption and Enjoyment of Music, Perceptual &Motor Skills, 66(3), pp. 737-738, 1988. 7. M. L. Glisky and J. F. Kihlstrom,Hypnotizability and Facets of Openness, International Journalof Clinical & Experimental Hypnosis, 41(2), pp. 112-123,1993. 8. H. L. Radtke and H. J. Stam, TheRelationship Between Absorption, Openness to Experience,Anhedonia, and Susceptibility, International Journal ofClinical & Experimental Hypnosis, 39(1), pp. 39-56, 1991. 9. E. R. Hilgard, P. W. Sheehan, K. P.Monteiro, and H. Macdonald, Factorial Structure of the CreativeImagination Scale as a Measure of Hypnotic Responsiveness: AnInternational Comparative Study, International Journal ofClinical & Experimental Hypnosis, 29(1), pp. 66-76, 1981. 10. S. J. Lynn and J. W. Rhue, Hypnosis,Imagination, and Fantasy, Journal of Mental Imagery, 11(2),pp. 101-111, 1987. 11. L. J. Kirmayer, J. M. Robbins, andJ. Paris, Somatoform Disorders: Personality and The Social Matrixof Somatic Distress. Special Issue: Personality andPsychopathology, Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103(1),pp. 125-136, 1994. 12. D. G. Richards, The Phenomenologyand Psychological Correlates of Verbal Prayer, Journal ofPsychology & Theology, 19(4), pp. 354-363, 1991. 13. N. P. Spanos and E. C. Hewitt,Glossolalia: A Test of the ""Trance'' andPsychopathology Hypotheses, Journal of Abnormal Psychology,88(4), pp. 427-434, 1979. 14. J. Glicksohn, Rating the Incidenceof an Altered State of Consciousness as a Function of the Rater'sOwn Absorption Score, Imagination, Cognition &Personality, 13(3), pp. 225-228, 1993-94. 15. P. L. Nelson, The Technology of thePraeternatural: An Empirically Based Model of TranspersonalExperiences, The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 22,pp. 35-50, 1990. 16. C. M. Rader and A. Tellegen, AnInvestigation of Synesthesia, Journal of Personality &Social Psychology, 52(5), pp. 981-987, 1987. 17. R. J. Pekala, C. F. Wenger, and R.L. Levine, Individual Differences in Phenomenological Experience:States of Consciousness as a Function of Absorption, Journalof Personality & Social Psychology, 48(1), pp. 125-132,1985. 18. N. P. Spanos, H. J. Stam, H. L.Radtke, and M. E. Nightingale, Absorption in Imaginings, Sex-RoleOrientation, and the Recall of Dreams by Males and Females, Journalof Personality Assessment, 44(3), pp. 277-282, 1980. 19. P. L. Nelson, Personality Attributesas Discriminating Factors in Distinguishing Religio-Mystical fromParanormal Experients, Imagination, Cognition and Personality,11(4), pp. 389-405, 1991-92. 20. P. L. Nelson, Personality Factors inthe Frequency of Reported Spontaneous Prternatural Experiences,The Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 21, pp.193-209, 1989. 21. H. J. Irwin, ParapsychologicalPhenomena and the Absorption Domain, The Journal of theAmerican Society for Psychical Research, 79, pp. 1-11, 1985. 22. R. G. Stanford and R. F. Angelini,Effects of Noise and the Trait of Absorption on Ganzfeld ESPPerformance, Journal of Parapsychology, 48(2), pp. 85-99,1984. 23. S. A. Myers, H. R. Austrin, J. T.Grisso, and R. C. Nickeson, Personality Characteristics asRelated to the Out-Of-Body Experience, Journal ofParapsychology, 47(2), pp. 131-144, 1983. 24. H. J. Irwin, Some psychologicaldimensions of the out-of-body experience, ParapsychologyReview, 12, pp. 1-6, 1981. 25. J. D. Mayer, D. R. Caruso, E.Zigler, and J. I. Dreyden, Intelligence and Intelligence-RelatedPersonality Traits, Intelligence, 13(2), pp. 119-133,1989. 26. P. L. Nelson, Cannabis AmotivationalSyndrome and Personality Trait Absorption: A Review andReconceptualization, Imagination, Cognition and Personality,14(1), pp. 43-58, 1994-95. 27. W. D. Fabian and S. M. Fishkin, AReplicated Study of Self-Reported Changes in PsychologicalAbsorption with Marijuana Intoxication, Journal of AbnormalPsychology, 90(6), pp. 546-553, 1981. 28. J. F. Kihlstrom, M. L. Glisky, andM. J. Angiulo, Dissociative Tendencies and DissociativeDisorders. Special Issue: Personality and Psychopathology, Journalof Abnormal Psychology, 103(1), pp. 117-124, 1994. 29. G. R. Norton, C. A. Ross, and M. F.Novotny, Factors that predict scores on the DissociativeExperiences Scale, Journal of Clinical Psychology, 46(3),pp. 273-277, 1990. 30. J. D. Shea, R. Burton, and A.Girgis, Negative Affect, Absorption, and Immunity, Physiology& Behavior, 53(3), pp. 449-457, 1993. 31. O. Vassend, Dimensions of NegativeAffectivity, Self-Reported Somatic Symptoms, and Health-RelatedBehaviors, Social Science & Medicine, 28(1), pp.29-36, 1989. 32. O. Vassend, Personality, ImaginativeInvolvement, and Self-Reported Somatic Complaints: Relevance tothe Concept of Alexithymia, Psychotherapy &Psychosomatics, 47(2), pp. 74-81, 1987. 33. P. L. Nelson, A Critical Review ofThe Research Literature Concerning Some Biological andPsychological Effects of Cannabis, In Advisory Committee onIllicit Drugs (Eds.), Cannabis and the Law in Queensland: ADiscussion Paper, pp. 113-152, Criminal Justice Commission,Brisbane, Australia, 1993. 34. Department of Health, Housing andCommunity Services, National Campaign Against Drug AbuseSocial Issues Survey [computer file], Social Science DataArchives, The Australian National University, Canberra, 1991. 35. B. G. Tabachnick and L. S. Fidell, UsingMultivariate Statistics (2nd Edition), Harper & Row, SanFrancisco, 1989. 36. R. B. Cattell, The Scree Test forthe Number of Factors, Multivariate Behavioral Research, 1,pp. 245-276, 1966. 37. Advisory Committee on Illicit Drugs,Cannabis and the Law in Queensland: A Discussion Paper,Criminal Justice Commission of Queensland, Brisbane, 1993. L. Wilkinson, SYSTAT: The System for Statistics, SYSTAT, Inc., Evanston, IL., 1989. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-18IA087-000627-B014-253http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/hollis1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051148 text/html 136032HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:11:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:16 GMTContent-length: 135813 Pharmacological Reviews of Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Health Aspects of Cannabis by Leo E. Hollister Veterans Administration Medical Center and StanfordUniversity School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California from PHARMACOLOGICAL REVIEWS Copyright c 1986 by TheAmerican Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics I.Introduction...................................................................................................................2 II. Acute and chronic effects of cannabis inhumans........................................ 2 A. Acutestudies...........................................................................................................2 B. Chronic studies.....................................................................................................3 III. Possible adverse effects of cannabis onhealth............................................ 3 A.Immunity....................................................................................................................3 B. Chromosomal damage.........................................................................................4 C. Pregnancy and fetal development..................................................................4 D. Cell metabolism.....................................................................................................5 E. Psychopathology.....................................................................................................5 1. Acute panic reaction......................................................................................5 2. Toxic delirium...................................................................................................6 3. Acute paranoid states....................................................................................6 4. Psychosis...............................................................................................................6 5. Flashbacks.............................................................................................................7 6. Violence..................................................................................................................7 7. Amotivational syndrome..................................................................................7 8. Residual psychomotor impairment............................................................. 8 9. Brain damage........................................................................................................8 F. Tolerance and dependence....................................................................................8 1. Cross tolerance....................................................................................................9 2. Physical dependence...........................................................................................9 G. Endocrine and metabolic.......................................................................................9 H. Lung problems..........................................................................................................10 I. Cardiovascularproblems......................................................................................10 J. Eyeproblems..............................................................................................................11 K. Contamination..........................................................................................................11 L. Possible accumulation.........................................................................................11 M. Effects on driving an automobile....................................................................12 IV. Therapeutic..........................................................................................................13 A. Antiemetic for patients in cancer therapy................................................13 B. Glaucoma....................................................................................................................14 C. Analgesia...................................................................................................................14 D. Muscle relaxant.......................................................................................................15 E. Anticonvulsant.......................................................................................................15 F. Bronchial asthma....................................................................................................15 G. Insomnia.....................................................................................................................16 H. Miscellaneous uses................................................................................................16 1. Hypertension........................................................................................................16 2. Abstinence syndromes due to central nervous systemdepressants ............................16 3. Antineoplastic activity..................................................................................16 4. Antimicrobial activity....................................................................................16 5. Migraine................................................................................................................16 6. Appetite stimulant......................................................................................16 7. Alcoholism..........................................................................................................17 V. Summary........................................................................................................17 I. Introduction The modern era of research into the effects of cannabis in manbegan less than 20 years ago. Many issues about its healthhazards, as they are with all drugs, remain controversial andambiguous. Many adverse reactions to drugs were not recognizeduntil after much exposure had occurred. Often these areidiosyncratic or allergic reactions. On the other hand, adversereactions due to the extensions of the pharmacological action ofa drug may be recognized both early and late. A similar patternholds for cannabis. The ambiguity currently surrounding thehealth hazards of cannabis may be attributed to a number offactors besides those which ordinarily prevail. First, it hasbeen difficult to either prove or disprove health hazards in manfrom animal studies. When such studies of cannabis revealpossible harmful effects, the doses used are often large and thetreatment is generally short. Second, cannabis is still usedmainly by young persons in the best of health. Fortunately, thepattern of use is more often one of intermittent rather thanregular use, the doses of drug usually being relatively small.This factor might lead to an underestimation of the potentialimpact of cannabis on health. Third, cannabis is often used incombination with tobacco and alcohol, among licit drugs, as wellas a variety of other illicit drugs. Thus, potential healthhazards from cannabis may be difficult to distinguish from thoseof concomitantly used drugs. Finally, the whole issue of cannabisuse is so laden with emotion that serious investigations ofhealth hazards of the drug have been colored by the prejudices ofthe experimenter, either for or against the drug as a potentialhazard to health. Assessment of the therapeutic potentials of marijuana is alsoclouded by prejudices, either for or against the drug. Virtuallyevery claim of therapeutic benefit made for marijuana is for acondition for which there are already many effective treatments.Thus, to justify the use of the new agent, it must be subjectedto the same elements of proof as a brand-new drug. Thus far, noneof the potential indications has been officially recognized. This report will focus on three main areas: (a) acute andchronic effects of cannabis in humans; (b) issues regarding itspossible adverse effects on health, including its effects ondriving ability; and (c) the therapeutic potential of cannabisconstituents or synthetic homologs of such constituents. II. Acute and Chronic Effects of Cannabis in Humans A. Acute Studies The availability of synthetictrans-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the major component ofcannabis, and the chemical techniques for quantifying its contentin cannabis preparations and in blood have made possible for thefirst time pharmacological studies which provide some precisionin dose. When the material is smoked, as it is most commonly usedin North America, a variable fraction of THC is lost by smokeescaping into the air or exhaled from the respiratory dead space.Relatively little is lost by pyrolysis, since it is likely thatthe cannabinoid is volatilized in advance of the burning segmentof the cigarette. The efficiency of the delivery of a dose bysmoking has been estimated to be about 18%, but frequent smokersobtain 23%, while infrequent users obtain only 10% (110). THC andmarijuana extracts are also active by mouth; the systemicbioavailability of oral administration is only about 6%,one-third that from smoking (130). When smoked, THC is rapidly absorbed, and effects appearwithin minutes, If marijuana is of low potency, effects may besubtle and brief. Seldom do they last longer than 2 to 3 h aftera single cigarette, although users prolong the effects byrepeated smoking. Oral doses delay the onset of symptoms for 30min to over 2 h, as well as prolonging the span of action of thedrug. These time schedules are consistent with knowledge of thepharmacokinetics of the drug. Smoking is similar to i.v.administration in producing maximum plasma concentrations early,while p.o. administration produces slower rises of maximum plasmaconcentrations, which are also lower than those for smoking (105,130). Although the route of administration affects the timecourse and the intensity of cannabis effects in man, the patternof these effects was well established by early investigators (84,88). All observers have commented on the constant increase in pulserate, often one of the first effects of the drug. Blood pressuretends to fall slightly or remains unchanged; at higher doses,orthostatic hypotension occurs. Conjunctival reddening is also consistently observed. Boththis symptom and the increased pulse rate correlate quite well intime with the appearance and duration of psychic effects of thedrug, as well as the plasma concentrations of the drug (6).Muscle strength is decreased. Appetite is consistently augmented,along with an increased food intake (80). Observed physiologicaleffects have not included changes in pupil size, respiratoryrate, or deep tendon reflexes. Perceptual and psychic changes are biphasic. An initial periodof euphoria or "high" is followed by drowsiness. Timesense is altered, hearing is less discriminant, and vision isapparently sharper with many visual distortions. Depersonalization, difficulty in concentrating and thinking,dream-like states are prominent. Many of these symptoms aresimilar to those produced by psychotomimetics. The effects that users derive from cannabis are extremelyvariable. Some of this variability depends on individualvariation in degree of tolerance to the drug, based on prior use.Although it is customary to ascribe some variability todifference in setting, i.e., the type of conditions andsurroundings which prevail during the drug use, or to set, i.e.,the expectations of the user, proving the effects of either hasbeen difficult. One study indicated that, with pharmacologically active dosesof the drug, extreme variations in setting produced littlealteration of drug effects, which were clearly different fromthose produced by placebo (82). B. Chronic Studies The effects of chronic use of cannabis are more to the pointwhen considering the issues of its status as a possible socialdrug. Three large-scale field trials of cannabis users have beenimplemented, but the results of these trials have done little toallay apprehensions about the possible ill effects of chronicuse. Objections have been made about the small samples used, thesampling techniques, and the adequacy of the studies performed. Jamaica is a country in which cannabis is widely used, underthe name ganja. The content of THC in native cannabis is generally high,estimated at severalfold that of cannabis generally supplied tousers in North America. The average Jamaican user smokes seven to eight cannabiscigarettes a day, such use not being considered deviant in thatcountry. Sixty adult workers, all men, were selected for study.Thirty were ganja smokers, and thirty were not, although thelatter may have used cannabis tea. Extensive studies in thehospital revealed no significant physical abnormalities betweenthe two groups. The smokers were found to be at greater risk offunctional hypoxia, which might have been due to the fact thattobacco was also used by this group. Smokers claimed to usecannabis to work better, but evidence in a selected subgroupsupported slightly decreased performance. The small sample andthe fact that impairment may be difficult to detect in unskilledworkers make it difficult to be sanguine about these generallynegative results (147). A similar study was done in Costa Rica, another country inwhich cannabis use is prevalent. Two groups of 80 subjects, usersand nonusers, were compared by a variety of clinical andlaboratory examinations. Essentially no difference between thetwo groups was detected (34). Forty-seven chronic users ofhashish in Greece were compared with 40 nonusers, focussingprimarily on tests of brain damage. No evidence of abnormality infunction as judged by a variety of tests could be detected in thehashish group as compared with the others. The hashish users hada higher prevalence of personality disorders, probably unrelatedto their use of hashish but possibly contributing to it (49). If field studies fail to provide evidence of harm fromprolonged use of cannabis, it is unlikely that experimentalstudies will do better, and such has been the case. The resultsof a 30-day high-dose cannabis study in which doses up to 210 mgof THC per day were administered p.o. to volunteers were mostremarkable in how well the subjects tolerated such large doses(93). Tolerance was probably present in most subjects prior to thestudy, but it was rapidly augmented during it. Under theseconditions, a mild withdrawal reaction was found when the drugwas abruptly discontinued. Additional unanticipated findings wereweight gain, bradycardia, and an absence of psychotomimeticeffects. As the amount of drug absorbed from p.o. administrationmay be small, these results are only partially applicable tosmoking. A longer experimental study in which cannabis was smokedrather than taken p.o. exposed subjects from 35 to 198 mg of THCdaily for 78 days. The unique contribution of this study was thediscovery of the effects of cannabis in lowering intraocularpressure. Other effects noted were lowering of serum testosteronelevels, airway narrowing after heavy use, lack of chromosomalalteration, and unchanged immune responses (35). Other effects ofchronic cannabis use are related in a specific publication of theNew York Academy of Sciences on chronic cannabis use (31). In summary, we have a very good idea of the acute effects ofcannabis, although these are tempered by the dose of THC, theroute of administration of the previous exposure of the user tothe drug, and possibly by their past experiences with it. Theeffects of chronic use are somewhat less certain. Experimental studies suggest that tolerance develops rapidly,that a mild withdrawal reaction may occur, and that some acuteeffects may be reversed (for instance, a slow heart rate withchronic use rather than a rapid one as seen with acute use).Field studies have failed to detect any major health consequencesfrom chronic heavy use of cannabis, but these studies have manydeficiencies, most studies being far too small to pick up unusualor rare consequences that could be of great importance.Nonetheless, one is forced to conclude that cannabis is arelatively safe drug as social drugs go. To date it comparesfavorably with tobacco and alcohol, if not caffeine. One shouldbear in mind, however, the very long time that it took todetermine the ill effects of these accepted social drugs. III. Possible Adverse effects of Cannabis on Health A. Immunity A number of in vitro studies, using both human and animalmaterial, suggest that cell-mediated immunity may be impairedafter exposure to cannabis. Clinically, one might assume that sustained impairment ofcell-mediated immunity might lead to an increased prevalence ofmalignancy, as seen in the current epidemic of acquired immunedeficiency syndrome (AIDS). No such clinical evidence has beendiscovered. Despite some degree of impairment of immuneresponses, the remaining immune function may be adequate,especially in the young person who are the major users ofcannabis. An impairment of cellular immunity in 51 chronic users ofcannabis was shown by inhibition of lymphocyte blastogenesis frommitogen, phytohemagglutinin (171). A decrease in T-lymphocyteswas found in 9 of 23 chronic cannabis users, employing rosetteformation as a way of quantifying T-lymphocytes; the number oftotal lymphocytes was not different from nonusers (66). Thus, twoearly studies suggested that T-lymphocytes might be decreased innumber as well as in ability to respond to an immunologicchallenge. immunosuppression was shown in animals by prolongedallogenic skin graft survival, inhibited primary antibodyproduction to sheep erythrocytes, and a diminished blastogenicresponse (109). Further studies have tended to confirm an immunosuppressantaction of cannabis in animals, whether the material was givenp.o. or injected i.p. (144, 185). Mice treated with THC andchallenged with gram-negative bacteria showed enhancedsusceptibility (19). However, others using in vitro techniquesfor studying lymphocytes, have found no alteration in nucleicacid synthesis in the presence of as much as 10.6 x 10-4 Mconcentrations of THC (137). Effects of cannabis on T-cells may be transitory. Smoking ofcannabis temporarily decreased T-cell function in 13 chronicusers as compared with 9 matched nonsmokers, but the effectsvaried from subject to subject and were closely related to thetime the blood samples were drawn (134). Although early T-cellrosette formation was impaired in ten chronic cannabis smokers,despite a normal total of circulating T-cells, the absence ofclinical evidence of greater disease susceptibility among suchsubjects makes this observation of dubious clinical importance(45, 126). Other studies cast doubt on some of the earlier positiveobservations of impaired cellular immunity. Dinitrochlorobenzeneis used as a skin test for intact delayed hypersensitivity,mediated by cellular immunity. No differences were observed in 34chronic marijuana smokers as compared with 279 nonsmokers (152).The response of cultured lymphocytes from 12 long-term smokers ofcannabis to two mitogens was not impaired as contrasted withlymphocytes from nonsmokers (178). Even the ingestion of cannabisin amounts of 210 mg daily of THC failed to alter the response ofthe subjects lymphocytes to mitogen stimulation (103). In summary, evidence is difficult to interpret concerning apossible suppressant effect of cannabis on cell-mediatedimmunity. If suppression occurs, it may only be transient, in thesense that recovery can occur. Further, the degree may not be clinically significant as thereserve capacity of the body to respond to immune challenge maynot be exceeded. We simply do not know how much impairment isnecessary to make someone vulnerable. Clinical experience has not yet indicated an increasedvulnerability of cannabis users, but further observations of thepossible contribution of marijuana use to the susceptibility todevelop AIDS must be awaited. B. Chromosomal Damage Adverse effects on chromosomes of somatic cells have beenespecially controversial. The techniques of human cytogeneticstudies still leave much to be desired. Assessing damage tochromosomes is more of an art than a science. Interpretations arehighly subjective, and it is often difficult to get agreementbetween any two readers of the same slide. Further, processing ofcells to make chromosomal preparations may differ from onelaboratory to another, so that it is possible to get conflictingresults from the same specimen even when read by the same reader.One needs only recall the controversy about chromosomal damagefrom lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) a few years ago tointerpret any reports of chromosomal damage with great caution.As similar types and degrees of chromosomal alteration have beenreported in association with other drugs commonly used in medicalpractice, without any clinical evidence of harm, the significanceof such changes remains unclear. Early reports were positive, butmore recent reports were negative. A significant increase (3.4versus 1.2%) of chromosomal abnormalities was reported inmarijuana users as compared to nonusers (155). Changes were largely breaks or translocations of chromosomes.More of the latter were found in chronic cannabis users than innonusers, but when breaks were included in the counts, thedifferences vanished (76). No increase in chromosomal breaks wasfound in cells from subjects taking p.o. hashish extract (whichcontains THC as well as cannabinol), marijuana extract(containing only THC) or synthetic THC (128). After 72 days ofchronic smoking of cannabis, no increase in break frequency wasfound over that which existed prior t the study (116). Both the retrospective and prospective studies have flaws, andone simply cannot conclude that the issue is settled. For thatmatter, it has not yet been settled for a variety of drugs,including aspirin, in which an increased number of chromosomalabnormalities have been described. One must conclude for the timebeing that, even if a small increase in chromosomal abnormalitiesis produced by cannabis, the clinical significance is doubtful. C Pregnancy and Fetal Development This is another area of great uncertainty about the meaning ofdata. Virtually every drug that has been studied for dysmorphogeniceffects has been found to have them if the doses were highenough, if enough species are tested, or if the treatment isprolonged. The placenta is not a barrier to the passage of mostdrugs, so the assumption should be made that they will reach thefetus if taken during pregnancy (3). This assumption is well validated for THC, based onautoradiographic studies (87). A high incidence of stunting offetuses was seen in mice treated on day 6 of pregnancy with asingle i.p. dose of 16 mg of cannabis resin per kg. No reductionin litter size or apparent malformations were seen. When the samedose was given repeatedly from days 1 to 6 of pregnancy. Fetalresorption was complete (133). Treatment of mice from days 6 to15 of gestation with THC doses of 5, 15, 50, and 150 mg/kg had noeffect on fetal weight, prenatal mortality rate, and frequency ofgross external, internal, or skeletal abnormalities (50).Exposure of pregnant rats to either cannabis smoke or smoke fromextracted marijuana throughout the gestation produced lessfertile offspring with smaller reproductive organs in cannabistreated animals (12, 54). Pregnant rabbits treated p.o. with daily doses of THC at 15mg/kg on days 6 to 18 of gestation delivered infants withoutvisible abnormalities (36). Injection s.c. of doses of THC up to 100 mg/kg daily on days 6to 15 of gestation had no teratogenic effect (97). Fetalresorption was seen in rats treated with s.c. doses of THC at 100mg/kg for days 1 to 20 of gestation, but lesser doses had noeffect (18). Clinical studies have also not elucidated the question. Anepidemiological study found more meconium staining of the fetusand more disturbances of the duration of labor (either short orlong) among 35 users of marijuana as compared to 36 nonusers(63). However, no significant difference was found between 19moderate to heavy users and many more nonusers in regard toseveral neonatal outcomes (53). Small sample sizes reduce theconfidence of results of either study. A much larger studyinvolved 12,424 women of whom 1,246 (11%) were marijuana users.Lower birth weights, a shorter gestation period, and more majormalformations were found among the offspring of users (111). Nochanges in serum human chorionic gonadotropin, placentallactogen, progesterone, estradiol, and estriol were found in 13women who smoked marijuana during pregnancy, compared with amatched control number who did not (20). In summary, it is still good practice in areas of ignorance,such as the effects of drugs on fetal development, to be prudent.While no definite clinical association has yet been made betweencannabis use during pregnancy and fetal abnormalities, suchevents are likely to be rare at best and could be easily missed.The belated recognition of the harmful effects on the fetus ofsmoking tobacco and drinking alcoholic beverages indicates thatsome caution with cannabis is wise. D. Cell Metabolism Information currently available for the effect of cannabis oncell physiology and metabolism is limited. Smoke from bothcannabis and tobacco increased the size of cytoplasm, nuclei, andnucleoli along with an increase in DNA content of human lung cellexplants. Mitotic abnormalities were also noted with an increaseof 10 to 25% over those of controls. Combination of both smokesproduced greater abnormalities than either one alone. Malignantcell transformation of hamster lung culture was observed afteradministration of both types of smoke (108). These findingssuggest that cannabis smoke is harmful to lung cells in culturesand contributes to the development of premalignant and malignantlesions. Cannabinoids may also interfere with the normal cell cycle.Experiments with protozoan, Tetrahymena, synchronized in culture,showed a reduction in growth rate during log phase andlengthening of the mean division time upon exposure of THC. Thesechanges were dose dependent (183). Addition of THC to varioushuman and animal cell cultures has been shown to decreasesynthesis of DNA< RNA< and protein (17). The clinical implication of some of these findings is obscure.On the one hand, exposure to smoke from cannabis may becarcinogenic. On the other, the changes in nucleic acidsynthesis, were they to be specific for rapidly dividing cells,such as those of malignancies, might be useful therapeutically intheir treatment. E Psychopathology Cannabis may produce directly an acute panic reaction, a toxicdelirium, an acute paranoid state, or acute mania. Whether it candirectly evoke depressive or schizophrenic states, or whether itcan lead to sociopathy or even to "amotivationalsyndrome" is much less certain. The existence of specificcannabis psychosis, postulated for many years, is still notestablished. The fact that users of cannabis may have higherlevels of various types of psychopathology does not infer acasual relationship. Indeed, the evidence rather suggests that virtually everydiagnosable psychiatric illness among cannabis users began beforethe first use of the drug. Use of alcohol and tobacco, as well assexual experience and "acting-out" behavior, usuallyantedated the use of cannabis (68). When the contributions ofchildhood misbehavior, school behavioral problems, and associateduse of other illicit drugs were taken into account, it wasdifficult to make a case for a deleterious effect of regularcannabis use (69). Thus, it seems likely that psychopathology maypredispose to cannabis use rather than the other way around. 1. Acute panic reaction. This adverse psychological consequence of cannabis use isprobably the most frequent. About one in three users in one highschool and one in five in another reported having anxiety,confusion, or other unpleasant effects from cannabis use. Theseunpleasant experiences were not always associated withunfamiliarity with the drug; some subjects experienced theseadverse reactions after repeated use (7). The conventionalwisdom, however, is that such acute panic reactions occur morecommonly in relatively inexperienced users of cannabis, morecommonly when the dose is larger than that to which users mayhave become accustomed, and more commonly in older users who mayenter the drug state with a higher level of initial apprehension(67). The acute panic reactions associated with cannabis are similarto those previously reported to be caused by hallucinogens. Thesubject is most concerned about losing control or even of losinghis or her mind. Reactions are usually self-limited and mayrespond to reassurance or "talking down"; in the caseof cannabis use, sedatives are rarely required as the inherentsedative effect of the drug, following initial stimulation, oftenis adequate. Occasionally one may see a dissociative reaction,but this complication is readily reversible. Depersonalizationmay be more long-lasting and recurrent, somewhat akin to"flashbacks" reported following hallucinogens; theelectroencephalogram shows no abnormality (158). 2. Toxic delirium. Very high doses of cannabis may evoke a toxic delirium,manifested by marked memory impairment, confusion, anddisorientation (120). This nonspecific adverse psychological effect is seen withmany drugs, but the exact mechanism is not clear in the case ofcannabis as it is in the case of Datra stramonium smoking, forinstance, which produces potent anticholinergic actions. As highdoses of any drug tend to prolong its action, delirium isself-limited and requires no specific treatment. Highly potentpreparations of cannabis are not as readily available in NorthAmerica as in other parts of the world, so these reactions areless commonly observed in the United States and Canada. 3. Acute paranoid states. It is difficult to gauge the frequency of these reactions. Ina laboratory setting, they are frequently encountered. Quitepossibly the experimental setting creates a paranoid frame ofreference to begin with. That this reaction is not peculiar tothe laboratory is evident from reports in which it has beenexperienced in social settings (96). The illegal status of thedrug might contribute in such instances, for while intoxicated,one might be more fearful of the consequences of getting caught. Undoubtedly, the degree of paranoia of the individual is alsoan important determinant, so that this reaction may represent aninterplay between both the setting in which the drug is taken aswell as the personality traits of the user. 4. Psychoses. A variety of psychotic reactions have been ascribed tocannabis use. Many are difficult to fit into the usual diagnosticclassifications. Two cases of manic reaction were reported inchildren who were repeatedly exposed to cannabis by elders. Bothrequired treatment with antipsychotic drugs but ultimately showeda full recovery (16). Hypomania, with persecutory delusions,auditory hallucinations, withdrawal, and thought disorder, wasobserved in four jamaican subjects who had increased their use ofmarijuana (71). Twenty psychotic patients admitted to a mentalhospital with high urinary cannabinoid levels were compared with20 such patients with no evidence of exposure to cannabis. Theformer group was more agitated and hypomanic but showed lessaffective flattening, auditory hallucinations, incoherence ofspeech, and hysteria than the 20 matched control patients. Thecannabis patients improved considerably after a week, while thecontrol patients were essentially unchanged (146). Thus, aself-limiting hypomanic-schizophrenic-like psychoses followingmarijuana has been documented. Psychoses in a group of East Indian marijuana users werepredominantly instances of toxic delirium, but those who had"schizoid" features became overtly schizophrenic duringthe period of intoxication (30). The aggravating effect ofmarijuana on preexisting schizophrenia has been documented (169). However, it was impossible to distinguish retrospectivelythose individuals who exhibited behavioral changes in associationwith marijuana smoking from those who did not (114). A controversial clinical report of 13 adults with psychiatricdisorder associated with the use of cannabis included some whohad schizophrenic-like illnesses and one with depressivefeatures. The majority of these subjects had only used cannabis,which was thought to be the major precipitant of their disorders(98). A similar report from South Sweden involved 11 patientsobserved over a 1-year period. None had previous psychosis orabused other drugs. A mixture of affective and schizophrenic-likesymptoms, as well as confusion and pronounced aggressiveness wasobserved. The mental disturbances were self-limiting and rare(132). It is impossible to think of any controlled trial that couldbe designed to detect adverse psychiatric effects from chronicuse of a drug. Thus, clinical reports have long served as thesurest way to detect adverse effects of both social and medicallyused drugs. Imperfect as such reports are, they can never beignored. Chronic use of hashish among a group of military personnel wastolerated quite well. Panic reactions, toxic psychosis, andschizophrenic reactions were infrequent occurrences among thisgroup of 720 smokers, except when hashish was used in conjunctionwith alcohol or other psychoactive drugs. Rather, these 110 subjects who used the highest doses (over 50g/month) developed a chronic intoxicated state characterized byapathy, dullness, lethargy, as well as impaired judgement,concentration, and memory (163). The paranoid psychosis associated with long-term cannabis usewas contrasted with paranoid schizophrenia in groups of 25 Indianpatients with each syndrome. The cannabis psychosis wascharacterized by more bizarre behavior, more violence and panic,an absence of schizophrenic thought disorder, and more insightthan was seen in the clearly schizophrenic group. The psychosiswith drug use cleared rapidly with hospitalization andantipsychotic drug treatment and relapsed only when drug use wasresumed (164). If there is a true cannabis psychosis, thisdescription is probably most accurate. It would seem reasonable to assume that cannabis might unmasklatent psychiatric disorders and that this action probablyaccounts for the great variety that have been described followingits use. On the other hand, evidence for a specific type ofpsychosis associated with its use is still elusive.Hallucinogenic drugs have a similar property of unmasking latentillness, but a drug such as LSD, being much more disruptive tomental functioning than cannabis, is much more likely toprecipitate a true psychosis or depression. Needless to say, useof cannabis should be discouraged (as would probably be the casewith most socially used psychoactive drugs) in any patient with ahistory of prior emotional disorder (5). 5. Flashbacks This curious phenomenon, in which events associated with druguse are suddenly thrust into consciousness in the nondruggedstate, has never been satisfactorily explained. It is most commonwith LSD and other similar hallucinogens but has been reportedfairly often with cannabis use. At first, it was thought that thephenomenon occurred only in subjects who had used LSD as well ascannabis, but more recent experience indicates that it occurs inthose whose sole drug use is cannabis (153). One possibility isthat flashbacks represent a kind of deja vu phenomenon. Anotheris that they are associated with recurrent paroxysmalseizure-like activity in the brain. The most unlikely possibilityis that they are related to a persistent drug effect. They mayoccur many months removed from the last use of either LSD orcannabis, so that it is highly unlikely that any active drugcould still be present in the body. Further, the interval betweenlast drug use and the flashback is one in which the subject isperfectly lucid. For the most part, the reactions are mild andrequire no specific treatment. 6. Violence. The myth dies hard that cannabis makes otherwise docilesubjects violent. Virtually every experimental study of cannabisthat has tried to measure violent or aggressive behavior orthoughts during cannabis intoxication has come to the sameconclusion; they are decreased rather than increased. A study of40 college students focussed specifically on this problem,comparing cannabis with alcohol. Expression of physicalaggression was related to the quantity of alcohol taken, but notto any dose of THC (64). Similar findings have resulted fromsurveys (162). Aggressive and sexually assaultive behavior indelinquent adolescents was more common following use of alcohol,even in those who also used cannabis (168). A review of the wholesubject of cannabis and violence came to the consensus thatcannabis does not precipitate violence in the vast majority ofusers. The possibility was entertained that a rare individual withsome special predisposition to aggressive or violent behavior maybe triggered into expressing such behavior under the influence ofthe drug (2). 7. Amotivational syndrome Whether chronic use of cannabis changes basic the personalityof the user so that he or she becomes less impelled to work andto strive for success has been a vexing question. As with otherquestions concerning cannabis use, it is difficult to separateconsequences from possible causes of drug use. I has long beenpostulated that the apparent loss of motivation seen in somecannabis users is really a manifestations of a concurrentdepression, for which cannabis may have been a self-prescribedtreatment (102). The demonstration of such a syndrome in field studies hasgenerally been unsuccessful. Cannabis use among working men inCosta Rica did not impair to any detectable degree their abilityto function (26). Much the same was found among Jamaicanlaborers. No signs of apathy, ineffectiveness, nonproductiveness,or deficits in general motivation were found (38). Each of theseapproaches has been criticized on the basis that those surveyedwere unskilled workers in whom subtle impairment might bedifficult to detect. However, a study of college students came to similarconclusions (117). Little evidence was adduced that dropping out of college wasassociated with cannabis use. Family background, relationshipwith parents during high school, and social values were strongerforces than drug use. Thus, in subjects with moderate usepatterns of cannabis, no evidence of the amotivational syndromewas detected (18). A similar survey of college students found nosignificant relationship between marijuana use and achievement,orientation, or actual performance (123). Laboratory studies have provided only scant evidence for thisconcept. A Canadian study showed a decrease in productivityfollowing the smoking of cannabis. The decreased building ofstools was due to less time worked than lessened efficiency atwork (122). Using an operant paradigm, volunteer subjects on aresearch ward worked less as their consumption of cannabisincreased. The decreased work output might have been due todecreased ability to work rather than decreased motivation (119).The former possibility is not suggested by neuropsychologicaltesting of long-term users. No generalized decrement was observedin adaptive abilities or cerebral functions (24). Similar resultswere found in members of a United States religious sect thatrelies on cannabis use. They showed no impairment of cognitivefunctions on a number of neuropsychological tests (150). If this syndrome is so difficult to prove, why does concernabout it persist? Mainly because of clinical observations. Onecannot help being impressed by the fact that many promisingyoungsters change their goals in life drastically after enteringthe illicit drug culture, usually by way of cannabis. While it isclearly impossible to be certain that these changes were causedby the drug (one might equally argue that the use of drugfollowed the decision to change life style). The consequences areoften sad. With cannabis as with most other pleasures, moderation is thekey word. Moderate use of the drug does not seem to be associated withthis outcome, but when drug use becomes a preoccupation, troublemay be in the offing. 8. Residual psychomotor impairment Almost any task, if it is made difficult enough or if enoughdose of drug is given, can be shown to be impaired by acuteadministration of cannabis. More to the point is whetherfollowing chronic use impairment remains a problem. Experimentalstudies in rats suggest that it does, but such studies are alwaysdifficult to extrapolate to man (47). A comparison of 23 chronicusers of bhang (equivalent to about 50 mg of THC daily for atleast 5 years) with 11 nonusers revealed some evidence ofimpairment in the users. The latter had lower intelligence andmemory quotients with lower scores on psychomotor tests (179).For whatever reasons, studies of cannabis done in India tend toshow more evidence of impairment than those done elsewhere. 9. Brain damage. The startling report of cerebral atrophy in ten young men whowere chronic users of cannabis aroused a great deal ofcontroversy (22). The subjects selected for the study were oneswho had come to psychiatric and neurological attention, besideswhich they had used other drugs. Even the validity of the methodof measuring atrophy by comparing pneumocephalograms of thepatients with negative controls was questioned. A study inmonkeys provided some support for this observation. After 2 to 3months of heavy to moderate exposure to marijuana smoke,electrographic recording changes were noted in the septal region,hippocampus, and amygdala which persisted 1 to 8 months aftersmoke exposure stopped. Ultrastructure changes were seen insynapses, as well as destruction of rough endoplasmic reticulumand the presence of nuclear inclusion bodies. No such changeswere observed in animals exposed to smoke from extracted cannabis(73). The advent of computerized tomography reopened the question.Two studies using this technique have effectively refuted theoriginal claim of brain atrophy. Nineteen men with long historiesof heavy cannabis smoking were examined, and none was found tohave brain atrophy as determined by this sensitive technique(101). A similar finding was noted in the other study (33). Onthe other hand, alcohol has long been thought to cause brainatrophy, but recent studies suggest that it may be partiallyreversible (23). As brain atrophy from alcohol requires a substantial amount ofuse, it is possible that with longer exposure, heavy users ofcannabis might show a similar pattern, but at present this seemsunlikely. F. Tolerance and Dependence Tolerance to cannabis has long been suspected to occur duringits continued use. Narrative accounts indicate that chronic usersof the drug either show very little effect from moderate doses orrequire very large doses to produce characteristic intoxication.A pioneer study of subchronic administration of cannabis andsynhexyl, a synthetic cannabinoid, suggests at best some degreeof tolerance to the euphoriant actions (180). Yet it has onlybeen in the past few years that tolerance to cannabis has beenclearly documented experimentally. The demonstration of tolerance in man was delayed by ethicalrestrictions on the amount of exposure permissible to humansubjects. For instance, in an early study subjects were exposedonly to a test dose of 20 mg of THC p.o. and then given the samedoses or placebos repeated at bedtime for 4 more days, followedby the same THC dose as a challenge on the fifth day. Using suchsmall doses and relatively infrequent intervals, it wasimpossible to show tolerance to the psychic effects of the drug,although the tolerance to the tachycardia and dizziness producedby the drug were evident (85). Other early studies likewise suggested tolerance withoutdefinite proof. Tolerance to both tachycardia and "high" wasreported following 21 days of consecutive smoking of only onecigarette a day by experienced smokers. It was possible thatthese subjects may have already been tolerant to the drug (46).Another study, in which subjects smoked a cannabis cigarettecontaining 14 mg THC for 22 days, revealed a progressive declinein the increase of pulse rate following smoking, an increase inalpha rhythm on the electroencephalogram, and more decrement inthe performance of short-term memory and reaction time tasks(49). A number of other early studies provided less evidence oftolerance. Little evidence of tolerance to clinical effects ofcannabis was found from daily smoking of marijuana cigarettesover a period of 10 to 28 days (51, 142). Free choice of marijuana cigarette for 21 days also providedlittle evidence to support the concept of tolerance in man (165).Meanwhile, substantial evidence had accumulated that tolerancecould be shown in various animal species, especially with highdoses of THC given for prolonged periods. Definite evidence of tolerance to the effects of THC in manwas adduced only when it became permissible to use comparablylarge doses over longer periods of time. Subjects in one 30-daystudy were given high doses (70 to 210 mg/day) of THC p.o. aroundthe clock. Tachycardia actually became bradycardia, and aprogressive loss of "high" was noted (49). Similartolerance to cannabis smoking was observed in a 64-day study inwhich at least one cigarette daily had to be smoked with smokingas desired later in the same day. Additionally, in this studytolerance developed to the respiratory depressant effect of THC(13). The pattern that has emerged in man, therefore, is thattolerance is not a problem when the doses are small, orinfrequent, or where the pattern of use of the drug is notprolonged. Tolerance only becomes a major factor with high,sustained, and prolonged use of the drug. It is interesting thatno study in man or animals ever revealed any evidence for"reverse tolerance" or sensitization, such as had beenreported in an early, rather naive clinical study of marijuana(176). 1. Cross-tolerance THC has effects which in man somewhat resemble those ofhallucinogens and strongly resemble those of alcohol, while inanimals it slightly resembles morphine. No cross-tolerance tomescaline or lysergide (LSD) could be shown in rats (151). Ratstolerant to the effects of THC were also tolerant to ethylalcohol, but when the situation was reversed, less tolerance toTHC was seen in the alcohol-tolerant animals (127). Perhaps thisdifference in sequential tolerance is why THC has never becomeestablished as a treatment for alcohol withdrawal, despite someearly clinical trials that suggested a favorable effect.Cross-tolerance between THC and morphine has been shown in ratsusing customary tests of analgesia (95). 2. Physical dependence. Evidence from both animals and man indicates that physicaldependence can be induced by abuse of THC. All monkeys givenautomatic injection doses of THC of 0.1 to 0.4 mg/kg showedabstinence signs when withdrawn. when monkeys were allowed toself-administer the drug for 3 to 8 weeks, the majority had anabstinence syndrome when the drug was abruptly discontinued. thesyndrome appeared approximately 12 h after the lastadministration and lasted about 5 days. it was characterized byirritability, aggressivity, tremors, yawning, photophobia,piloerection, and penile erections (95). In man, a somewhat similar, though mild, withdrawal reactionwas uncovered after abrupt cessation of doses of 30 mg of THCgiven every 4 p.o. for 10 to 20 days. Subjects became irritable,had sleep disturbances, and had decreased appetite. Nausea,vomiting, and occasionally diarrhea were encountered. Sweating, salivation, and tremors were autonomic signs ofabstinence (49). Relatively few reports of spontaneous withdrawal reactionsfrom suddenly stopping cannabis use have appeared, despite theextraordinary amount of the drug consumed, Five young personsexperienced restlessness, abdominal cramps, nausea, sweating,increased pulse rate, and muscle aches when their supplies ofcannabis were cut off. Symptoms persisted for 1 to 3 days (15).The rarity of reports of these reactions may reflect the factthat they are mild, and seldom is a user completely cut off fromadditional drug. Cannabis would have been an exceptional centrally acting drugif tolerance/dependence were not one of its properties. The factthat tolerance was not strongly recognized as an effect ofchronic use was due to the narrative nature of previous accountsof tolerance in man and the lack of systematic animalexperimentation. Tolerance has now been proven for most of theactions of THC. It develops at varying rates for differentactions, but it is rapidly reversible. large doses of THC arerequired over long time periods for tolerance to develop. As mostsocial use of the drug does not meet those requirements, neithertolerance nor dependence has been a major issue in its socialuse. G. Endocrine and Metabolic Effects Changes in male sex hormones have been a source of controversyever since the first report of a cannabinoid-induced decrease inserum testosterone level. Decreased levels were associated with morphologicalabnormalities in sperm and with decreased sexual functioning(100). Such changes must require long-term exposure to cannabis,for subchronic studies in experimental subjects have generallyfailed to confirm these findings (118). During the first 4 weeksof a chronic administration study, no major changes in hormonelevels were detected, but with subsequent exposure a decreasefirst occurred in luteinizing hormone (LH) followed by decreasesin testosterone and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (99).Testosterone synthesis by Leydig cells was decreased in rats,both by THC as well as by other cannabinoids (21). A similarfinding had been reported earlier (57). A review of theliterature on this subject concluded that no significant effectwas found in regard to serum testosterone and that spermproduction was decreased but without evidence of infertility.Ovulation was inhibited, and luteinizing hormone was decreased.Cannabinoids had no evidence of estrogenic activity, which hadbeen postulated earlier (4). The meaning of such changes in man is uncertain, as thehormone levels generally remained within the accepted limits ofnormal. Further, a single hormone level may not be trulyrepresentative of the prevailing levels of hormones that tend tobe secreted episodically or which are subject to many extraneousinfluences. Data on the effects of cannabis on the female reproductivesystem are sparse. Preliminary unpublished data indicate that women who usecannabis 4 times a week or more have more anovulatory menstrualcycles than do nonusers of the same age, Animal work tends tosupport this observation. THC administered to rats suppressed thecyclic surge of LH secretion and of ovulation (11). Gynecomastia has been thought to be a complication of cannabisuse, especially when it was also possible to stimulate breasttissue development in rats with THC (72). Eleven soldiers withgynecomastia of unknown cause were matched with 11 others withsimilar characteristics except for gynecomastia. No difference incannabis use was found between the two groups (27). Such afinding does not disprove the relationship between cannabis andgynecomastia. Indeed, if cannabis increases peripheral conversionof testosterone to estrogens, then it is possible that theincreased estrogens could stimulate breast tissue in a fewsusceptible men. Increased estrogens might also account for somereports of diminution in sexual drive or in performance in men. These endocrine changes may be of relatively littleconsequence in adults, but they could be of major importance inthe prepubertal male who may use cannabis. At least one instanceof pubertal arrest has been documented. A 16-year-old boy who hadsmoked marijuana since age 11 had short stature, no pubic hair,small testes and penis and low serum testosterone. After stoppingsmoking, growth resumed and serum testosterone reached the normalrange (41). As recent surveys of cannabis use indicate that some boys (andgirls) may be exposed to it even as early as the prepubertalyears, this question is of more than academic interest. Although cannabis has been said in the past to causehypoglycemia, this error has been pointed out in numerousstudies. On the contrary, some subjects showed impaired glucosetolerance following experimentally administered i.v. doses of 6mg of THC. Such a dose is probably greater than one generallyattains from usual cigarettes but might be obtained fromhigh-grade hashish. The deterioration of glucose tolerance was accomplished byincreased levels of plasma growth hormone, as well as by a normalplasma insulin response. these findings suggested that growth hormone might beinterfering with the action of insulin (83). A study in rabbitsindicated that blood glucose was increased by single doses of THCbut that this increase could be prevented by adrenalectomy.Increased release of epinephrine following THC was postulated asa possible cause for the hyperglycemia (70). Although large dosesof THC might aggravate diabetes, the rarity of this phenomenon inclinical practice may be due to the lower doses of THC usedsocially or the development of tolerance to this specificpharmacological effect. H. Lung Problems Virtually all users of cannabis in North America take the drugby smoking. As inhaling any foreign material into the lung amyhave adverse consequences, as is well proven in the case oftobacco, this mode of administration of cannabis might also besuspect. Smoking is most efficient method for administering thedrug, due to the enormously high lipid solubility of THC. The pulmonary surfactant is a perfect trap for THC which isthen rapidly absorbed into the blood. the kinetics of the THCadministered by smoking are similar to those of its i.v.administration. Heavy use of hashish by soldiers produced a number ofbronchopulmonary consequences, including chronic bronchitis,chronic cough, and mucosal changes of squamous metaplasia, aprecancerous change (74). Although at first THC was thought to bea respiratory depressant, more careful studies indicated that itwas when given p.o. in doses of 22.5 mg (14). thus, its use inany form by patients with impaired pulmonary function would behazardous. Young, healthy volunteer subjects in a chronic smokingexperiment had pulmonary function tests before and after 47 to 59days of daily smoking of approximately five marijuana cigarettesa day. Decreases were found in forced expiratory volume in 1 s,in maximal midexpiratory flow rate, in plethysmographic specificairway conductance, and in diffusing capacity. Thus, very heavy marijuana smoking for 6 to 8 weeks causedmild but significant airway obstruction (161). Quite possibly such dramatic early changes are not progressivewith continued smoking (171). Compared with tobacco, cannabissmoking yields more residue ("tar"), but the amount ofsmoke inhaled is very likely to be considerably less. The studyin which five cigarettes were consumed daily represented heavyuse of the drug, compared with 20 to 40 tobacco cigarettes whichmight be consumed by a heavy tobacco smoker. Low values forspecific airway conductance were found in marijuana smokers, achange not observed in tobacco smokers. This change indicatesmild impairment of large airway function. No differences werefound between marijuana smokers and nonsmokers in spirometricindices, closing volumes, or nitrogen concentrations between 750and 1250 ml of expired air (159). Marijuana smoke inhibitspulmonary antibacterial defense systems, mainly alveolarmacrophages, in a dose-dependent manner. The cytotoxin involvedis not related to any psychoactive component (86). One wouldassume that marijuana smokers might be more susceptible tobacterial infections of the lung, yet such increasedsusceptibility has not been clinically documented. The issue of damage to lungs from cannabis is somewhatconfounded by the fact that many cannabis users also use tobacco.As yet, it is far easier to find pulmonary cripples from theabuse of tobacco than it is to find any evidence of clinicallyimportant pulmonary insufficiency from smoking of cannabis. I. Cardiovascular Problems Tachycardia, orthostatic hypotension, and increased bloodconcentrations of carboxyhemoglobin from cannabis smoking wouldundoubtedly have deleterious effects on persons with heartdisease due to arteriosclerosis of the coronary arteries orcongestive heart failure. Although a slight trend towardincreased use by persons over age 30 years has been detected inrecent epidemiological studies, it is unlikely that many personswith serious heart disease will be exposed to this hazard fromcannabis use. Tachycardia is a consequence of almost every acute dose ofcannabis, although some degree of tolerance develops to thiseffect. Evidence suggests that it is mainly due to an inhibitionof vagal tone (32). Increasing the heart rate and thereby cardiacwork might be harmful to patients with angina pectoris orcongestive heart failure. A direct test of the effects ofmarijuana smoking in exercise-induced angina proved this harmfuleffect of the drug. Smoking one cigarette containing 19 mg of THCdecreased the exercise time until angina by 48%. Smoking amarijuana placebo cigarette decreased the exercise time untilangina by only 9%. thus, smoking marijuana increased myocardialoxygen demand and decreased myocardial oxygen delivery (9). Asubsequent study compared the effect of this type of marijuanacigarette with that of a high nicotine cigarette. the marijuanacigarette decreased the exercise time by 50%; the nicotinecigarette decreased the exercise time to angina by 23% (10).Clearly, smoking of any kind is bad for patients with angina, butthe greater effect of cannabis in increasing heart rate makesthis drug especially bad for such patients. Fortunately, fewangina patients are devotees of cannabis. A rapid heart rate might be expected to aggravate congestiveheart failure. Actually, little is known about the direct effects of THC onmyocardium. A single study using an isolated rat heart reported anegative inotropic effect from THC, i.e., weaker contractibilityof muscle (115). If so, the use of cannabis by patients incongestive heart failure could make matters even worse. Premature ventricular contractions have been reportedfollowing marijuana smoking (91). However, when subjects werecontinually monitored electrocardiographically while smokingcigarettes containing approximately 20 mg of THC, no increase insuch premature beats was found (145). Ventricular premature beatsare rarely observed and do not seem to be of any great clinicalimportance. J. Eye Problems Eye complaints of cannabis users are vague and mild. All 350cannabis users had some eye complaints. Several consistentfindings were (a) photophobia and belpharospasms; (b) injectionof the globe; (c) increased visibility of the corneal nerves; and(d) accommodative or refractive changes. Visual acuity waspreserved, but pupillary reactions were sluggish. Both alcoholand cannabis produced a moderately debilitating effects onlateral phoria and abduction. During smoking, lacrimation may beobserved along with the characteristic marked conjunctivalinjection. Despite the fact that numerous and complex changesoccur in the eyes of cannabis users, these effects are confinedto the anterior segment and in most respects mimic an irritativeprocess of that region. they are transient and not cumulative.the are probably of little clinical significance (60). Reduction intraocular pressure is a characteristic effect fromcannabis. this action provides distinct therapeutic possibilitiesand will be discussed later. K. Contamination of Cannabis The most definite health hazard was contamination of cannabis,largely of Mexican origin, by the herbicide paraquat. Inhalationof toxic amounts of this material could lead to severe lungdamage, and some instances of acute toxicity have occurred.Paradoxically, this hazard stemmed from efforts to save cannabisusers from less well-documented hazards to their health. Estimates of the amount of contaminated cannabis reachingNorth America may have been grossly exaggerated due to falsepositive results in testing for paraquat. Formerly as much asone-third to one-half of Mexican cannabis was assumed to becontaminated. the results of later analyses suggest that onlyabout 10% is contaminated. the problem still remains for theusers as to how to identify such a contaminated product. One thought has been to look for red spots on the marijuanaleaves. this approach may be difficult for the leaves are usuallyavailable in a finely ground form. A red fluorescence is seenunder ultraviolet light, such as is commonly used indiscotheques. A similar red fluorescence may be seen on the lipsof the smoker of paraquat contaminated cannabis. After the experience with paraquat in Mexico, its use wastemporarily discontinued. Recently, the possibility that it maybe used against cannabis crops in California and Hawaii hassurfaced. One would hope that over-zealous law enforcement wouldnot once again pose a serious health risk to marijuana users. Cannabis is generally harvested like any other crop. The finalproduct of ground leaves and stems look very much like grass cutby a mower. usual insecticides and fungicides are rarely used, asthe plant grows abundantly with minimal care. Other sources ofcontamination may include insects and fungi. L. Possible Accumulation of Drug The major if not sole active component of cannabis, THC, ishighly lipid soluble. As the human body has a high lipid content,which includes not only body fat, but also brain and most cellmembranes, lipid-soluble drugs tend to leave the blood rapidly tobe distributed to fatty tissues. It is characteristic of suchdrugs that the action of a single dose is terminated not by theelimination of the drug through metabolic processes, but byredistribution to sites in the body where it cannot act. Theprime example of such a drug is pentothal sodium, which rapidlyproduces anesthesia when given i.v. but which has a very shortspan of action. the drug still remains in the body, but in placeswhere it cannot act. A similar situation applies to the widelyused sedative drug, diazepam. An early study of the pharmacokinetics of THC examined itstissue distribution following a single injection of radiolabeledmaterial, the concentration of THC in fat was 10 times greaterthan for any other tissue examined and persisted in this tissuefor 2 weeks. Thus, there is good evidence that THC and itsmetabolites might accumulate not only in fat, but also in brain(107). Obviously, similar studies could not be done in man. One canmeasure in man the extraction of cannabis metabolites followingsingle or repeated doses, to get some idea of their persistence.Following both single and repeated doses (at least single dosesfor several days), metabolites of cannabis of cannabis can befound in urine for varying periods, up to several days followingthe last dose (94). All of these metabolites are ones that areknown to have no mental effects, except for a minuscule amount ofunchanged THC which is excreted during the first 4 h following adose, while the drug is having definite clinical effects. Theexcretion of these metabolites is not accompanied by any evidenceof cannabis-like effects. We may conjecture that THC rapidly leaves the blood to besequestered in fatty tissues. It is either gradually metabolizedin these tissues to inactive metabolites which are then excretedin the urine, or it may be gradually released from these tissuesin small amounts to be metabolized by the liver before attainingeffective plasma concentrations. In either case, there is noevidence of a continuing drug effect from this accumulation ofdrug in the body. No one has yet reported on the excretion of metabolitesfollowing prolonged exceedingly high dose administration of THC.In one study in which doses of up to 210 mg of THC were givenp.o., abrupt discontinuation of the drug led quickly to mildsigns of a withdrawal reaction (49). As the development ofwithdrawal reactions is contingent upon a rapid decline to thepint of absence of active drug in the body, one must assume thatno accumulation of active drug occurred even under extremecircumstances. In short, the apprehension about accumulation of THC fromrepeated use is based on evidence indicating only theaccumulation of drug that is either in inactive form to beginwith or which is rendered inactive before reaching thecirculation in any pharmacologically active amount. We do notknow the full toxicity of many of the possible metabolites whichmight accumulate, but generally toxicity studies of cannabis andits constituents lead to the inescapable conclusion that it isone of the safest drugs ever studied this way. M. Effects on Driving an Automobile If marijuana is to become an accepted social drug, it would beimportant to know its effects on driving ability. Fully one-halfof the fatal car crashes in the United States are associated withanother social drug, alcohol. Neither experimental nor epidemiological approaches to themarijuana question have yet provided definitive answers. Many studies have used acute doses of marijuana or THC tostudy various psychomotor functions. these can be summarized bysaying that, if the dose of drug was high enough or the taskdifficult enough, impairments were shown. It is difficult todetermine how pertinent these tests are to the actual driving ofan automobile. Furthermore, it is difficult to relate the effectsof acute consumption of marijuana, often in relatively naivesubjects, to effects that may be found in chronic users, who mayhave developed some degree of tolerance. Studies on the acute effects of marijuana on simulated drivinghave shown mixed results. the first compared smoked marijuana(doses uncertain) with ethanol in sufficient quantities toproduce alcohol levels of 100 mg/dl. Marijuana increased speedometer errors but produced nodeviation from the norm on accelerator, brake, signal, steering,or total errors. Alcohol had a far more deleterious effect (43).Marijuana administered p.o. in doses of 8. 12 and 16 mg was compared with a dose of 70 g of alcohol ineight volunteer subjects performing a simulated driving task.Both marijuana and alcohol increased the time to brake and tostart, but these changes were confined to the 16 mg dose of THC(138). Marijuana was smoked with the intention of administeringdoses of 0, 50, 100, and 200 *g/kg, a most dubious assumption. No significant deviations from the norm were noted in carcontrol and tracking aspects (124). Actual driving in normal traffic situations would more closelymimic real-life situations, including the dangers. Sixty-fourvolunteer subjects smoked cigarettes containing 0, 4.9, or 8.4 mgof THC. Oddly enough, THC had a biphasic effect, causingdeterioration of driving skills in some subjects and improvementin others. A recently completed study compared the effects ofsmoking a marijuana cigarette with or without alcohol, alcoholalone, and placebos for each drug. Actual driving was done over acourse rigged with various traffic problems. Both drugs producedimpairment of driving performance, the combination being worsethan either alone (141). Fifty-nine subjects smoked marijuana cigarettes until"high" and then were periodically tested by highwaypatrol officers on the roadside sobriety test. Overall, 94% of the subjects failed to pass the test 90 minafter smoking and 60% after 150 min, despite the fact that bythen plasma concentrations of THC were rather low (81). Itappeared that establishing a clear relation between THC plasmaconcentrations and the degree of clinical impairment will be muchmore difficult than has been found in the case of alcohol (140).The exact prevalence of persons who might be picked up whiledriving under the influence of marijuana is uncertain. One surveyfound at least 5 ng of THC per ml in blood specimens of 14.4% ofa random sample of 1792 drivers detained for erratic driving.Many were associated with blood levels of alcohol as well (184). Flying an airplane is much more difficult than driving anautomobile, but the general principle of impairment are similar.Ten certified pilots who smoked marijuana or placebo were testedon a simulator. The results were highly variable from pilot topilot and from skill to skill. It was assumed that the pilots hadregained full function after 4 h (90). Somewhat contrary resultswere obtained in another similar study which found, however, somedegree of impairment in flying skills as long as 24 h after anexposure to marijuana. The subjects were unaware of any such impairment (182). The issue is not clearly settled, but common sense wouldsuggest that it would be unwise to try to drive an automobilesoon after exposure to marijuana. In our first study with thedrug, the subjects were asked during the period of theirintoxication, "Would you be able to drive a car now?"Their uniform answer was, "You've got to be kidding."The biggest areas of doubt are how long the impairment, eventhough subtle, may last and how to deal forensically with drivingwhile under the influence of marijuana. the best evidence atpresent would be to assume that any amount of THC more than 10ng/ml in plasma is presumptive evidence of impairment. such adecision is arbitrary, but so have been forensic decisions aboutthe presumed level of intoxication with alcohol. IV. Therapeutic Uses For many centuries, cannabis was used as a treatment, but onlyduring the 19th century did a particularly lively interestdevelop for exploiting its therapeutic potential. Cannabis wasreported to be effective in treating tetanus, convulsivedisorders, neuralgia, migraine, dysmenorrhea, post partumpsychoses, senile insomnia, depression, and gonorrhea, as well asopium or chloral hydrate addiction. In addition, it was used tostimulate appetite and to allay the pain and anxiety of patientsterminally ill with cancer (64, 121). However, the advent ofmodern pharmacology beginning in the 20th century discovered manyother drugs more definitely effective in these disorders, with asubsequent decrease in the enthusiasm for cannabis as atherapeutic agent. Advances in the chemistry of cannabis during the 1940sestablished tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) as the major activecomponent. A semisynthetic THC-like material, synhexyl, wastested as a therapeutic agent during the late 1940s and early1950s. Initial trials reported efficacy as an antidepressant andas a treatment for alcohol or opiate withdrawal, but subsequentclinical evaluations were negative (156,166). The exact structure of THC was shown in 1964 to bedelta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol, which was soon synthesized.The relative abundance of this material permitted extensivelaboratory and clinical studies from 1968 onwards. These studieshave included potential therapeutic uses. At the present time, a number of pharmaceutical houses haveprograms to develop cannabinoids as therapeutic agents. The majorproblem is to separate the specific desired pharmacologicaleffect from the pronounced mental effects of cannabinoids. Anumber of reviews of the potential therapeutic uses of cannabishave been published recently (36, 92, 104). We will now discusssome indications of current interest. A Antiemetic for Patients in Cancer Chemotherapy Cancer chemotherapy, especially with the agent cisplatin,produces severe nausea and vomiting, which is extremely difficultto treat with ordinary antiemetic drugs, such asprochlorperazine. This complication is so severe that manypatients forego effective cancer chemotherapy. The antiemeticeffects of cannabis had been suggested as early as 1972 (6). THCwas first tried as an antiemetic in a controlled trial comparingit with placebo in 20 patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy.Fifteen mg were given to some patients and 20 mg to the others inthe form of gelatin capsules containing THC dissolved in sesameoil. The initial dose was started 2 h before chemotherapy andrepeated 2 and 6 h later. Fourteen of the 20 patients in whom anevaluation could be made reported a definite antiemetic effectfrom THC, while none was observed from placebo during 22 coursesof that drug (149). Since then, studies have been largely confirmatory but notentirely so. Fifty-three patients refractory to other treatments werestudied in an uncontrolled fashion. Ten had complete control ofvomiting when THC was administered prior to chemotherapy and for24 h thereafter. Twenty-eight had 50% or more reduction invomiting, and only 15 patients showed no therapeutic effectwhatsoever. However, four patients were dropped from the studybecause of adverse effects (113). Fifteen doses of 15 mg of THCwere compared with 10-mg doses of prochlorperazine in acontrolled cross-over trial in 84 patients. THC produced completeresponse in 36 of 79 courses, while prochlorperazine waseffective in only 16 of 76 courses. Twenty-five patients receivedboth drugs, of whom 20 preferred THC. Of the 36 courses of THCthat resulted in complete antiemetic response, 32 were associatedwith mental effects characterized as a "high" (148).Another comparison between THC in 15-mg doses andprochlorperazine in 10-mg doses versus a placebo control was madein 116 patients who received p.o. doses 3 times a day. The THCregimen was equal to prochlorperazine, and both were superior toplacebo. However, many patients who received THC found it to beunpleasant (55). A comparison of THC with placebo was made in 15patients with each patient acting as his or her control. Fourteenof the 15 patients given THC obtained more relief of nausea andvomiting than from placebo during a course of high-dosemethotrexate chemotherapy (28). Best results were obtained whenplasma concentrations of THC were more than 120 ng/ml. Suchconcentrations would ordinarily be expected to produce ratherdefinite mental effects, THC was compared with two otherantiemetics, thiethylperazine and metoclopramide, in a controlledcross-over trial. No difference was found between the antiemeticeffect of these three agents. However, adverse effects of THCwere sufficiently greater than those from the other two drugs,which raised questions about its clinical utility (37). When THCwas compared with prochlorperazine and placebo, the latter twotreatments were not found to differ, but THC was superior toeither one (131). In summary, it would appear that THC has definite antiemeticeffects, that these are comparable to many other commonly usedantiemetic agents such as prochlorperazine, thiethylperazine, andmetoclopramide, but that the major disadvantage of the drug isthe mental effects produced by the doses given. A synthetic homolog of THC, nabilone, was developed in 1972and has been tested extensively for antiemetic activity.Across-over study comparing nabilone with prochlorperazine in 113patients revealed significantly greater response rates followingnabilone therapy. However, side effects from nabilone were alsomore common (77). Although it was hoped that nabilone separatedthe antiemetic effects from the mental effects of THC, this goalwas not fully achieved. Levonantradol and BRL 4664 are two othersynthetic THC homologs which showed antiemetic effects in openstudies (43, 154). The exact role of synthetic homologs of THC asantiemetic agents remains to be determined. Currently, a large amount of data on the clinical use of THCas an antiemetic is being accumulated in therapeutic situationsmonitored by the Food and Drug Administration. Unfortunately,this massive amount of clinical experience has no control, sothat it may be impossible to conclude more than what is alreadyknown. Meanwhile, extremely promising results have been obtainedwith larger than usual i.v. doses of metoclopramide. When thisdrug was compared with prochlorperazine and placebo, it was moreeffective than either, the only disturbing side effect beingsedation (59). The doses used of metoclopramide were 1 mg/kg i.v.before treatment with cisplatin (perhaps the most emeticanticancer drug) and several times after treatment. Protectionwas total in 48% of courses and major in another 23% (157). This experience with metoclopramide suggests that the wholeissue of the antiemetic effects of THC may become moot, as thereare other drugs such as domperidone, which may also be effectivein this situation. B. Glaucoma Discovery of the ability of cannabis to lower intraocularpressure was more or less fortuitous. Intraocular pressure wasmeasured as part of a multifaceted study of the effects ofchronic smoking of large amounts of cannabis. Intraocularpressure was found to decrease as much as 45% in 9 of 11subjects, 30 min after smoking (75). Lowered intraocular pressurelasted 4 to 5 h after smoking a single cigarette. Its magnitudewas unrelated to the total number of cigarettes smoked. themaximal effect on intraocular pressure was produced by the amountof THC absorbed in a single cigarette containing 19 mg of THC.When patients with ocular hypertension or glaucoma were tested 7of 11 showed a fall of intraocular pressure of 30%. Confirmatoryevidence was obtained from a trial in which i.v. injection of THCin doses of 22 *g/kg and 44 *g/kg produced an average fall inintraocular pressure of 37%, with come decreases as much as 51%(40). Many experiments done in rabbits using various routes ofadministration, including instillation of cannabinoids into theeye, have confirmed the ability of cannabis to reduce intraocularpressure. Topical administration would ne especially desirable fortreating glaucoma as with other drugs used for this purpose.Smoking cannabis or taking THC i.v. would be totally unsuitable for patients with glaucoma.Rabbits have been used traditionally for studying eyemedications. The lipid solubility of THC has been overcome byusing mineral oil as the vehicle for its instillation into theeye. The degree of lowering of intraocular pressure is at leastas great as that with conventional eye drops, such aspilocarpine, and the duration of effect is often longer. Someminimal systemic absorption of the drug occurs when it is appliedto the conjunctivae, but it is of no consequence in producingmental effects. Other cannabinoids besides THC, such ascannabinol or 8-alpha- and 8-beta-11-dihydroxy-delta-9-THC, havealso produced this effect in rabbits (62). These agents have nomental effects, which makes them of considerable interest fortherapeutic use. An extract of nonpsychoactive components of cannabis whosecomposition is still uncertain has been tested both alone and incombination with timolol eye drops in patients with increasedintraocular pressure. The effects of the two agents are additiveand are said to be effective when other measures have failed(177). BW 146Y, a synthetic THC homolog, has been given p.o. toglaucomatous patients. Unfortunately, mild orthostatichypotension and subjective effects were noted in addition toreduced intraocular pressure (167). No psychoactive component of cannabis can be considered as afeasible therapeutic agent in this situation. Intraocularpressures, although they are reduced acutely, have not been shownto be reduced following long-term treatment, nor has there beenany demonstration that visual function is preserved by the use ofcannabinoids in glaucoma. Some of the problems associated withthe development of cannabinoids as treatment for glaucoma havealready been cited (61). The exploitation of cannabinoids fortreatment of glaucoma will require much further developmentalwork to ascertain which cannabinoid will be lastingly effectiveand well tolerated. The potential benefits could be great, aspresent-day glaucoma treatment still does not prevent blindnessas often as it might. If the effects of cannabinoids are additiveto those of other drugs, the overall benefit to patients may begreater than is currently possible with single drugs. C. Analgesia Smoking of material estimated to deliver 12 mg of THCincreased sensitivity to an electric shock applied to the skin(78). Single p.o. doses of 10 mg and 20 mg of THC were comparedwith codeine (60 mg and 120 mg) in patients with cancer pain. A20 mg dose of THC was comparable to both doses of codeine. The 10mg dose, which was better tolerated, was less effective thaneither dose of codeine (129). THC given i.v. in doses of 44 *g/kgto patients undergoing dental extraction produced an analgesiceffect, which was less than that achieved from doses of 157 *g ofdiazepam per kg i.v. Several of these patients actually preferredplacebo to the dose of 22 *g of THC per kg because of anxiety anddysphoria from the latter drug (139). The apparent paradox is that THC both increases and decreasespain. Traditionally, aspirin-like drugs, which work peripherally byinhibiting the synthesis of prostaglandins, are used to treatpain derived from the integument. The initial mental stimulationfrom THC might increase sensitivity to this kind of pain.Visceral pain, such as that of cancer patients, is usuallytreated by opiates, which have both peripheral and central sitesof action. Recent evidence suggests that opiates may act directlyon pain pathways in the spinal cord as well as reducing theeffect that produces pain. Cannabis could conceivably modify theeffective response. Thus, when the two types of pain are distinguished from eachother, the apparent paradox is solved. THC, nantradol, and nabilone shared some properties withmorphine in chronic spinal dog model. Latency of the skin twitchreflex was increased, and withdrawal abstinence was suppressed.Naltrexone did not antagonize these actions, suggesting that theyare not mediated through opiate receptors (56). Levonantradol i.m. was compared with placebo in postoperativepain, and a significant analgesic action was confirmed. Nodose-response relationship was observed, and the number of sideeffects from levonantradol was rather high (89). It seemsunlikely that any THC homolog will prove to be analgesic ofchoice, when one considers the present array of very effectivenew analgesics of the agonist-antagonist type. It is too early tobe sure, however. D. Muscle Relaxant Patients with spinal cord injuries often self-treat theirmuscle spasticity by smoking cannabis. cannabis seems to helprelieve the involuntary muscle spasms that can be so painful anddisabling in this condition. A muscle relaxant or antispasticaction of THC was confirmed by an experiment in which p.o. dosesof 5 or 10 mg of THC were compared with placebo in patients withmultiple sclerosis. The 10 mg dose of THC reduced spasticity byclinical measurement (135). Such single small studies can onlypoint to the need for more study of this potential use of THC orpossibly some of its homologs. Diazepam, cyclobenzaprine, baclofen, and dantrolene, which areused as muscle relaxants, all have major limitations. A newsleetal muscle relaxant would be most welcome. E. Anticonvulsant One of the first therapeutic uses suggested for cannabis wasas an anticonvulsant. Such an effect was documentedexperimentally many years ago (112). Subsequent studies invarious animal species have validated this action. THC in catstemporarily reduced the clinical and electrographic seizureactivity induced by electrical stimulation of subcorticalstructures (175). Mice were protected by cannabidiol againstmaximal electroshock seizures but not against those caused bypentylenetetrazole. Its profile of activity more resembled thatof phenytoin than that of THC (170). THC and cannabidiol bothpotentiated the anticonvulsant effects of phenytoin againstelectrically induced seizures in mice. The two cannabinoids incombination produced the most effect (29). Kindling involves theonce-daily application of initially subconvulsive electricalstimulation to culminate in generalized convulsive seizures. THCgiven chronically to rats prevented the kindling effect (174). Clinical testing has been rare, despite all these variouslines of evidence supporting an anticonvulsant effect ofcannabinoids. Better control of seizures following regularmarijuana smoking was reported in a not very convincing singlecase (39). Fifteen patients not adequately controlled byanticonvulsants were treated with additional cannabidiol in dosesof 200 or 300 mg or placebo. Cannabidiol controlled seizuressomewhat better that the addition of placebo (25). Cannabidiolhas little if any psychoactivity, making it a good candidate forthis use. F. Bronchial Asthma A general study of the effects of marijuana on respirationrevealed a bronchodilating action in normal volunteer subjects.Marijuana smoke was calculated to deliver 85 or 32 *g of THC perkg. A fall of 38% in airway resistance and an increase of 44% inairway conductance occurred in the high-dose group. The low-dosegroup showed lesser changes, but they were still significant ascompared with baseline. The sensitivity of the respiratory centerto carbon dioxide was not altered by either dose, indicating nocentral respiratory depression (172). Asthma was deliberately induced by either inhalation ofmethacholine or exercise in asthmatic patients. They were thentreated with inhalation of placebo marijuana, of saline, ofisoproterenol, or of smoke derived from marijuana containing 1 gof THC. Both marijuana smoke and isoproterenol aerosoleffectively reversed both methacholine- and exercise-inducedasthma, while saline and placebo marijuana had no effect (160).Aerosols of placebo-ethanol, of THC (200 *g) in ethanol, or ofsalbutamol (100 *g) were tested in another study of ten stableasthmatic patients. Forced expiratory volume in 1-s forced vitalcapacity, and peak flow rate were measured on each occasion. Bothsalbutamol and THC significantly improved ventilatory function.Improvement was more rapid with salbutamol, but the twotreatments were equally effective at the end of 1 h (181). Both delta-8 and delta-9-THC have bronchodilating effects,while neither cannabinol nor cannabidiol has such actions. Thus,this action resides only in the psychoactive material. Noevidence of tolerance to this effect developed over 20 days ofcontinual administration (58). The treatment of asthma is muchmore chronic; further studies of tolerance will be needed. Some patients might experience bronchoconstriction followingTHC. Doses of 10 mg p.o. produced mild and inconsistentbronchodilator effects as well as significant nervous systemeffects. One patient of the six studied developed severebronchial constriction (1). Mild but significant functionalimpairment, predominantly involving the large airways, was foundin 74 regular smokers of cannabis. Such impairment was notdetectable in individuals of the same age who regularly smokedtobacco (64). THC would be best administered by aerosol for this purpose,but whether effective doses would avoid the mental effects isuncertain. The mechanism of action by which THC increases airwayconductance may be different from the usual beta-adrenergicstimulants. Resistance to repeated applications ofbeta-adrenergic stimulants does occur. Another type ofbronchodilator might help some patients. The recent introductionof highly effective steroid aerosols, such as beclomethasone,meets that need to a considerable extent. G. Insomnia THC does not differ from conventional hypnotics in reducingrapid eye movement (REM) sleep (136). THC in doses ranging from61 to 258 *g/kg produces in normal subjects increments in stage 4sleep and decrements in REM sleep, but without the characteristicREM rebound which follows chronic treatment with hypnotics. WhenTHC was administered p.o. as a solution in doses of 10, 20, and30 mg, our subjects fell asleep faster after having moodalterations consistent with a "high." Some degree of"hangover" the day following was noted from largerdoses (42). Another sleep laboratory study showed that a dose of20 mg of THC given p.o. decreased REM sleep. After four to sixnights of use, abrupt discontinuation of THC produced mildinsomnia but not marked REM rebound (52). REM rebound may not beapparent after low doses of THC. However, very high doses (70 to210 mg) reduced REM sleep during treatment and were followed bymarked REM rebound after withdrawal (48). The sleep produced by THC does not seem to differ much fromthat of most currently used hypnotics. Side effects before sleepinduction as well as hangover effects make the drug lessacceptable than currently popular benzodiazepines. It seemsunlikely that THC will supplant existing hypnotics in treatmentof insomnia. H. Miscellaneous Uses 1. Hypertension. Orthostatic hypotension occasionally follows use of THC (5). Adimethylheptyl side-chain derivative has more profound andconstant effects on blood pressure. In man, this compound showeda marked orthostatic hypotensive effect, as well as tachycardiaand some mental symptoms resembling THC. While the latter areless than from THC in proportion to the blood pressure-loweringeffect, a definite separation of pharmacological effects has notbeen attained (106). Effective antihypertensive drugs have been one of theoutstanding achievements of pharmacology over the past 30 years.A new antihypertensive based on orthostatic hypotension, perhapsthe least desirable mode of lowering blood pressure, is hardlyvery enticing (8). The issue seems hardly worth pursuing further. 2. Abstinence syndromes due to central nervous systemdepressants. Synhexyl, the first THC homolog to be synthesized, was testedas a treatment for withdrawal reactions from opiates and alcoholwith little evidence of efficacy. Withdrawal symptoms experiencedby rats following morphine pellet implantation, followed bysubsequent injection of naloxone, were reduced by THC.Cannabidiol, without any direct effect itself, augmented theaction of THC (79). This relatively weak effect of cannabinoids in opiatedependence is unlikely to be of clinical use. Detoxificationprograms using methadone have been highly successful andacceptable. 3. Antineoplastic activity Both the delta-8 and delta-9-THC isomers, as well ascannabinol, have some antineoplastic effect on transplanted lungtumors in animals, as well as on tumors in vitro (125). THC mayhave a general ability to reduce the synthesis of nucleic acids,which may account for reported immunosuppressant effects as well.Many agents are available that inhibit nucleic acid synthesis, sothe possibility that THC or other cannabinoids might beadvantageous seems rather unlikely. 4. Antimicrobial action Both THC and cannabidiol inhibit and kill staphylococci andstreptococci in vitro at concentrations of 1 to 5 *g/ml (173).Such concentrations are well above those reported for use of THCin man, even at the highest tolerated doses. Thus, this effectseems to have little practical application. 5. Migraine This indication has not been studied systematically in recentyears, although it has a long history. In one patient I treated,the mental effects sought socially caused the patient to abandontreatment. Innumerable successful treatments for migraine havebeen reported at one time or another. 6. Appetite stimulant Most antipsychotic agents will stimulate appetite, but fewother drugs do. THC as compared with ethanol and dextroamphetamine produced avariable response on appetite, both in fed and fasted subjects.The majority had increased appetite and food consumption ascompared with placebo (80). Anorexia nervosa might be helped by an appetite stimulant. Atest of the presumed appetite-stimulating properties of THC inpatients with anorexia nervosa failed over a 4-week period. Dosesof THC ranged between 7.5 and 30 mg/day and were compared with 30mg of diazepam per day and placebo. Three of the 11 patientstreated with THC experienced severe dysphoria (65). 7. Alcoholism. Cannabis users are said not to drink, but most do. Theprospect of changing an alcoholic into a cannabinolic has someappeal. A study showed that cannabis was not very attractive toalcoholics. Little difference in retention occurred among thosegiven no medication, or a cannabis cigarette, or disulfiram orthe combination of the cigarette and disulfiram (143). V. Summary Marijuana seems firmly established as another social drug inWestern countries, regardless of its current legal status.Patterns of use vary widely. As with other social drugs, thepattern of use is critical in determining adverse effects onhealth. Perhaps the major area of concern about marijuana isamong the very young. Using any drug on a regular basis thatalters reality may be detrimental to the psychosocial maturationof young persons. Chronic use of marijuana may stunt theemotional growth of youngsters. Evidence for an amotivationalsyndrome is largely based on clinical reports; whether marijuanause is a cause or effect is uncertain. A marijuana psychosis,long rumored, has been difficult to prove. No one doubts thatmarijuana use may aggravate existing emotional disorders. Braindamage has not been proved. Physical dependence is rarelyencountered in the usual patterns of social use, despite somedegree of tolerance that may develop. The endocrine effects of the drug might be expected to delaypuberty in prepubertal boys, but actual instances have been rare.As with any material that is smoked, chronic smoking of marijuanawill produce bronchitis; emphysema or lung cancer have not yetbeen documented. Cardiovascular effects of the drug are harmfulto those with preexisting heart disease; fortunately the numberof users with such conditions is minimal. Fears that the drugmight accumulate in the body to the point of toxicity have beengroundless. The potential deleterious effects of marijuana use on drivingability seem to be self-evident; proof of such impairment hasbeen more difficult. The drug is probably harmful when takenduring pregnancy, but the risk is uncertain. One would be prudent to avoid marijuana during pregnancy, justas one would do with most other drugs not essential to life orwell-being. No clinical consequences have been noted from theeffects of the drug on immune response, chromosomes, or cellmetabolites. Contamination of marijuana by spraying withdefoliants has created the clearest danger to health; suchattempts to control production should be abandoned. Therapeutic uses for marijuana, THC, or cannabinoid homologsare being actively explored. Only the synthetic homolog,nabilone, has been approved for use to control nausea andvomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy. While little doubt remains that marijuana, THC, and nabiloneare effective for this use, the advent of other drugs that areequally effective but with fewer adverse effects may make thisuse moot. Use of marijuana to reduce intraocular pressure inpatients with glaucoma requires a feasible topical preparation ofcannabinoids. Although some cannabinoids have analgesic activity,the abundance of new opioid analgesics with little dependenceliability provides tough competition. The use of marijuana as amuscle relaxant, though promising, has not yet been adequatelystudied. Clinical studies to establish the efficacy ofcannabidiol as an anticonvulsant or to compare it with otheranticonvulsants are still to be done. Other potential therapeuticuses, such as treatment of bronchitis, asthma, insomnia,hypertension, abstinence syndromes, migraine, anorexia, andalcoholism, are most unlikely prospects. Compared with other licit social drugs, such as alcohol,tobacco, and caffeine, marijuana does not pose greater risks. Onewould wonder, however, if society were given a choice based oncurrent knowledge, whether these drugs would have been grantedtheir present status of acceptance. Marijuana may prove to havegreater therapeutic potential than these other social drugs, butmany questions still need to be answered. REFERENCES 1. Abboud, T.T., and Sanders, H.D.: Effect of oraladministration of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on airwaymechanics in normal and asthmatic subjects. Chest 70: 480-485,1976. 2. Abel, E.L.: The relationship between cannabis and violence:a review. Psychol. Bull 84: 193-211, 1977 3. Abel, E.L.: Prenatal exposure to cannabis. A criticalreview of effects on growth, development, and behavior. Behav.Neural. Biol. 29: 137-156, 1980. 4. Abel, E.L.: Marijuana and sex. A critical survey. DrugAlcohol Depend. 8: 1-22, 1981. 5. Abruzzi, W.: Drug induced psychosis. Int. J. Addict. 121:183-193, 1977. 6. Allen, T.: Tetrahydrocannabinol and chemotherapy. N. Engl.J. Med. 294: 168, 1976. 7. Annis, H.M., and Smart, R.G.: Adverse reactions andoccurrences from marijuana use. Br. J. Addict. 68: 315-319, 1973. 8. Anonymous Editorial. Cannabis and the cardiovascularsystem. Br. Med. J 1: 460, 1978. 9. Aronow, S., and Cassidy, J.: Effect of marijuana andplacebo-marijuana on angina pectoris. N. Engl. J. Med. 291:65-67, 1974. 10. Aronow, S., and Cassidy, J.: Effect of smoking marijuanaand of a high nicotine cigarette on angina pectoris. Clin.Pharmacol. Ther. 17: 549-554, 1975. 11. Ayalon, D., and Tsafriri, A.: Suppression of the cyclicsurge of luteinizing hormone secretion and of ovulation in therat by delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol. Nature (Lond.) 243: 470-471,1973. 12. Bannerjee, B. N., Galbreath, C., and Sofia, R.D.:Teratologic evaluation of synthetic delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinolin rats. Teratology 11: 99-102, 1975. 13. Belleville, J.W., Gasser, J.C., and Miyake, T.: Toleranceto the respiratory effects of marijuana in man. J. Pharmacol.Exp. Ther. 197: 326-331, 1976. 14. Belleville, J.W., Swanson, G.D., Halderman, G., Aqleh, K.,and Sato, T.: Respiratory effects of tetrahydrocannabinol,pentobarbital, and alcohol. Proc. West. Pharmacol. Soc. 17:215-218, 1974. 15. Bensusan, S.D.: Marijuana withdrawal symptoms, Br. Med. J.1: 112, 1971. 16. Binitie, A.: Psychosis following ingestion of hemp inchildren. Psychopharmacologia 44: 301-302, 1975. 17. Blevins, R.D., and Regan, J.D.:Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol effect on macromolecular synthesisin human and other mammalian cells. Arch. Toxicol. 34: 127-135,1976. 18. Borgen, A., Davis, W.M., and Pace, H.B.,: Effects ofprenatal delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the development of ratoffspring. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 1: 203-206, 1973. 19. Bradley, S.G., Munson, A.E., Dewey, W.L., and Harris,L.S.: Enhanced susceptibility of mice to combinations ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and live or killed gram negativebacteria. Infect. Immun. 17: 325-329, 1977. 20. Braunstein, G.D., Buster, J.E., Soares, J.R., and Gross,S.J.: Pregnancy hormone concentrations in marijuana users. LifeSci. 33: 195-199, 1983. 21. Burstein, S., Hunter, S.a., and Sedor, C.:Further studiesin the inhibition of Leydig cell testosterone synthesis bydelta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol. Biochem. Pharmacol. 29: 2152-2154,1980. 22. Campbell, A.M.G., Evans, M., Thompson, J.L.G., andWilliams, M.R.: Cerebral atrophy in young cannabis smokers.Lancet 2: 1219-1224, 1971. 32. Carlen, P.L., Wortzman, G., Holgate, R.C., Wilkinson,D.A., and Rankin, R.G.: Reversible cerebral atrophy in recentlyabstinent chronic alcoholics measured by computed tomographyscans. Science (Wash.DC) 200: 1076-1078, 1978. 33. Co, B.T., Goodwin, D.W., Gado, M., Mikhael, M., and Hill,S.Y.: Absence of cerebral atrophy in chronic cannabis users bycomputerized transaxial tomography. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 237:1229-1230, 1977. 34. Coggins, W.J.: Costa Rica cannabis project: an interimreport on the medical aspects. In Pharmacology of Marihuana, ed.by M.C. Braude and S. Szara, pp. 667-670, Raven Press, New York,1976. 35. Cohen, S.: The 94-day cannabis study. Ann. NY Acad. Sci.282: 211-220, 1976. 36. Cohen, S., and Stillman, R.C.: The Therapeutic Potentialof Marihuana, 515 pp., Plenum Press, New York, 1976. 37. Colls, B.M., Ferry, D.G., Gray, A.J., Harvey, A.J., andMcQueen, E.G.: The antiemetic activity of tetrahydrocannabinolversus metoclopramide and thiethylperazine in patients undergoingcancer chemotherapy. N.Z. Med. J. 91: 449-151, 1980. 38. Comitas, L.: Cannabis and work in Jamaica: a refutation ofthe amotivational syndrome. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 282: 24-32, 1976. 39. Consroe, P.F., Wood, G.C., and Buchsbaum, H.:Anticonvulsant nature of marijuana smoking. J. Am. Med. Assoc.234: 306-307, 1975. 40. Cooler, P., and Gregg, J.M.: Effect ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on intraocular pressure in humans.South. Med. J. 70: 951-954, 1977. 41. Copeland, K.C., Underwood, L.C., and Van Wyk, J.J.:Marijuana smoking and pubertal arrest. J. Pediatr. 96: 1079-1980,1980. 42. Cousens, K., and Dimascio, A.: Delta-9-THC as an hypnotic.An experimental study of three dose levels. Psychopharmacologia33: 355-364, 1973. 43. Crancer, A., Dille, J.M., Delay, J.C., Wallace, J.E., andHaykins, M.D.: Comparison of the effects of marijuana and alcoholon simulated driving performance. Science (Wash. DC) 164:851-854, 1969. 44. Cronin, C.M., Sallan, S.E., Gelber, R., Lucas, V.S., andLaszlo, J.: Antiemetic effect of intramuscular levantradol inpatients receiving antiemetic chemotherapy. J. Clin. Pharmacol.21: 43S-50S, 1981. 45. Cushman, P., and Khurana, R.: A controlled cycle oftetrahydrocannabinol smoking: T and B cell rosette formation.Life Sci. 20: 971-980. 1977. 46. Dornbush, R., Clare, G., Zaks, A., Crown, P., Volavka, I.,and Fink, M.: Twenty-one day administration of marihuana in malevolunteers. In Current Research in Marihuana, ed by M. Lewis, pp.115-127, Academic Press, new York, 1972. 47. Fehr, K.A., and LeBlanc, A.E.: Residual learning deficitafter heavy exposure to cannabis or alcohol in rats. Science(Wash. DC) 192: 1249-1251, 1976. 48. Feinberg, I., Jones, R., Walker, J., Caveness, C., andFloyd, E.: Effects of marijuana extract and tetrahydrocannabinolon electroencephalographic sleep patterns. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther.19: 782-794, 1976. 49. Fink, M., Volavka, J., Panayiotopoulos, C. and Stefanis,C.: Quantitative EEG studies of marihuana, delta-9-THC, andhashish in man. In Pharmacology of Marijuana, ed. by M. Braudeand S. Szara, pp. 383-392, Raven Press, New York, 1976. 50. Fleischman, R.W., Hayden, D.W., Rosenkrantz, H., andBraude, M.C.: Teratologic evaluation ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in mice, including a review of theliterature. Teratology 12: 47-50, 1975. 51. Frank, I., Lessin, P., Tyrrell, Hahn, P., and Szara, S.:Acute and cumulative effects of marijuana smoking on hospitalizedsubjects: a 36-day study. In Pharmacology of Marijuana, ed. by M.Braude and S. Szara, pp. 673-680, Raven Press, New York, 1976. 52. Freemon, F.R.: The effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinolon sleep. Psychopharmacologia 35: 39-44, 1974. 53. Fried, P.A., Buckingham, M., and Von Kulmiz, P.: Marijuanause during pregnancy and perinatal risk factors. Am. J. Obstet.Gynecol. 146: 992-994, 1983. 54. Fried, P.A>, and Charlebois, A.T.: Cannabisadministered during pregnancy: first and second generationeffects in rats. Physiol. Psychol. 7: 307-310, 1979. 55. Frytak, S., Moertel, C., O'Fallon, J., Creagan, E.,O'Connell, M., Schutt, A., and Schwartau, N.:Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic for patientsreceiving cancer chemotherapy. Ann. Int. Med. 91: 825-830, 1979. 56. Gilbert, P.E.: A comparison of THC, nantradol, nabilone,and morphine in the chronic spinal dog. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 21:311S-319S, 1981. 57. Goldstein, H., Harclerode, J., and Nyquist, S.E.: Effectsof chronic administration of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol andcannabidiol on rat testicular esterase isozymes. Life Sci. 20:951-954, 1977. 58. Gong, H., Jr., Tashkin, D.P., Simmons, M.S., Calvarese,B., and Shapiro, B.J.: Acute and subacute branchial effects oforal cannabinoids. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 35: 26-32, 1984. 59. Gralla, R.J., Itri, L.M., Pisko, S.E., Sqillante, A.E.,Kelsen, D.P., Braun, D.W., Jr., Borden, L.A., Brown, T.J., andYoung, C.W.:Antiemetic efficacy of high-dose metoclopramide:randomized trials with placebo and prochlorperazine in patientswith chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. N. Engl. J. Med.303: 905-909, 1981. 60. Green, K.: Marihuana and the eye. Invest. Opthalmol. 14:261-263, 1975. 61. Green, K., and Roth, M.: Marijuana in the medicalmanagement of glaucoma. Perspect. Opthalmol. 4: 101-105, 1980. 62. Green, K., Wynn, H., and Bowman, K.A.: A comparison oftopical cannabinoids on intraocular pressure. Exp. Eye Res. 27:239-246, 1978. 63. Greenland, S., Staisch, K.J., Brown, N., and Gross, S.J.:The effects of marijuana use during pregnancy. I. A preliminaryepidemiologic study. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 143: 408-413, 1982. 64. Grinspoon, L: Marijuana Reconsidered, pp 218-230, HarvardUniversity Press, Cambridge, MA, 1971. 65. Gross, H., Ebert, M.H., Faden, V.B., Goldberg, S.C., Kaye,W.H., Caine, E.D., Hawks, R., and Zinberg, N.: A double-blindtrial of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in primary anorexianervosa. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 3: 165-171, 1983. 66. Gupta, S., Grieco, M.A., and Cushman, P.: Impairment ofrosette forming T lymphocytes in chronic marihuana smokers. N.Engl. J. Med. 291: 874-877, 1974. 67. Halikas, J.A.: Marijuana use and psychiatric illness. InMarijuana: Effects on Human Behavior, ed. by L.L. Miller, pp.265-302, Academic Press, New York, 1974. 68. Halikas, J.A., Goodwin, D.W., and Guze, S.B.: Marihuanause and psychiatric illness. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 27: 162-165,1972. 69. Halikas, J.A., Welles, R.A., Morse, C.L., and Hoffman,R.G.: Regular marijuana use and its effect in psychosocialvariables: a longitudinal study. Comp. Psychiatry 24: 229-235,1983. 70. Ham, M., and De Jong, Y.: Effects ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on blood glucoseconcentrations in rabbits and rat. Pharm. Weekbl. 110: 1157-1161,1975. 71. Harding, T., and Knight, F.: Marihuana modified mania.Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 29: 635-637, 1973. 72. Harman, J., and Aliapoulios, M.A.: Marijuana inducedgynecomastia: clinical and laboratory experience. Surg. Forum 25:423-425, 1974. 73. Heath, R.C., Fitzjarrell, A.T., Fontana, C.J., and Casey,R.E.: Cannabis sativa: effects on brain function andultrastructure in rhesus monkeys. Biol. Psychiatry 15: 657-690,1980. 74. Henderson, R.L., Tennant, F.S., and Guerney, R.:Respiratory manifestations of hashish smoking. Arch. Otolaryncol.95: 248-251, 1972. 75. Hepler, R.S., and Frank, I.M.: Marijuana smoking andintraocular pressure. J. Am Med. Assoc. 217: 1392-1394, 1971. 76. Herha, J., and Obe, G.: Chromosomal damage in chronicusers of cannabis. Pharmakopsychiatrie 7: 328-337, 1974. 77. Herman, T.S., Einhorn, L.H., Jones, S.E., Nagy, C.,Chester, A.B., Dean, J.C., Furnas, B., Williams, S.D., Leigh,S.A., Dorr, R.T., and Moon, T.E.: Superiority of nabilone overprochlorperazine as an antiemetic in patients receiving cancerchemotherapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 300: 1295-1298, 1979. 78. Hill, S.Y., Schwin, R., Goodwin, D.W., and Powell, B.J.:Marihuana and pain. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 188: 415-418, 1974. 79. Hine, B., Torrelio, M., and Gershon, S.: Interactionsbetween cannabinidiol and delta-9-THC during abstinence inmorphine dependent rats. Life Sci. 17: 851-858, 1975. 80. Hollister, L.E.: hunger and appetite after single doses ofmarihuana, alcohol, and dextroamphetamine. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther.12: 44-49, 1971. 81. Hollister, L.E., Gillespie, H.K., Ohlsson, A., Lindgren,J.E., Wahlen, A., and Agurell, S.: Do plasma concentrates ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol reflect the degree of intoxication?J. Clin. Pharmacol. 21: 1715-1775, 1981. 82. Hollister, L.E., Overall, J.E., and Gerber, M.L.:Marihuana and setting. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 32: 798-801, 1975. 83. Hollister, L.E., and Reaven, G.M.:Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and glucose tolerance. Clin.Pharmacol. Ther. 16: 297-302, 1974. 84. Hollister, L.E., Richards, R., and Gillespie, H.:Comparison of tetrahydrocannabinol and synhexyl in man. Clin.Pharmacol. Ther. 9: 783-791, 1968. 85. Hollister, L.E., and Tinklenberg, J.R.: Subchronic oraldoses of marihuana extract. Psychopharmacologia 29: 247-252,1973. 86. Huber, G.L., Pochay, V.E., Percira, W., Shen, J.W., Hinds,W.C., First, M.W., and Sornberger, G.C.: Marijuana,tetrahydrocannabinol, and pulmonary antibacterial defenses. Chest77: 403-410, 1980. 87. Idanpaan-Heikkila, J., Fritchie, E.G., Englert, L.F., Ho,T.B., and McIsaac, W.M.: Placental transfer of tritiateddelta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol. N. Engl. J. Med. 281: 330, 1969. 88. Isbell, H., Gorodetsky, C.W., Jasinski, D., Clausen, V.,Von Spulak, F., and Korte, F.: Effects of (-)delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. Psychopharmacologia 11:184-188, 1967. 89. Jain, A.K., Ryan, J.R., McMahon, F.G., and Smith, G.:Evaluation of intramuscular levontradol and placebo in acutepostoperative pain. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 21: 320S-326S, 1981. 90. Janowsky, D.S>, Meacham, M.P., Blaine, J.D., Schoor,M., and Bozzetti, L.P.: Marihuana effects on simulated flyingability. Am. J. Psychiatry 133: 384-388, 1976. 91. Johnson, S., and Domino, E.F.: Some cardiovascular effectsof marihuana smoking in normal volunteers. Clin. Pharamacol.Ther. 12: 762-768, 1971. 92. Jones, R.C.: Cannabis and health. Annu. Rev. Med. 34:247-253, 1983. 93. Jones, R.T., and Benowitz, N.: The 30-day trip-clinicalstudies of cannabis tolerance and dependence. In Pharmacology ofMarihuana, ed. by M.C. Braude and S. Szara, pp 627-642, RavenPress, New York, 1976. Kanter, S.L., and Hollister, L.E.: Marihuana metabolites in urine of man. VII. Excretion patterns of acidic metabolites detected by sequential thin-layer chromatography. Res. Commun. Chem. Pathol. Pharmacol. 17: 421-431, 1977. 95. Kaymakcalan, S.: Tolerance to and dependence on cannabis.Bull. Narc. 25: 39-47, 1973. 96. Keeler, M.H., and Moore, E.: Paranoid reactions whileusing marihuana. Dis. Nerv. Syst. 35: 535-536, 1974. 97. Keplinger, M.L.: The effect of natural and syntheticdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on reproductive and lactationperformance in albino rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 25: 449,1973. 98. Kolansky, H., and Moore, W.T.: Toxic effects of chronicmarihuana use. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 222: 35-40, 1972. 99. Kolodny, R.C., Leasin, P., Tora, G., Masters, W.H., andCohen, S.: Depression of plasma testosterone with acute marihuanaadministration. In Pharmacology of Marihuana, ed by M.C. Braudeand S. Szara, pp. 217-225, Raven Press, New York, 1976. 100. Kolodny, R.C., Masters, W.H., Kolodny, R.M., and Toro,G.: Depression of plasma testosterone levels after chronicintensive marihuana use. N. Engl. J. Med. 290: 872-874, 1974. 101. Kuehnle, J., Mendelson, J.H., Davis, K.R., and New,P.F.J.: Computed tomographic examination of heavy marihuanasmokers. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 237: 1231-1232, 1977. 102. Kupfer, D.J., Detre, T. Koral, J., and Fajans, P.: Acomment on "Amotivational Syndrome" in marijuanasmokers. Am. J. Psychiatry 130: 1319-1321, 1973. 103. Lau, R.J., Tubergen, D.G., Barr, M., Jr., Domino, E.F.,Benowitz, N. and Jones, R.T.: Phytohemagglutinin-inducedlymphocyte transformation in humans receivingdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Science (Wash. DC) 192: 805-807,1976. 104. Lemberger, L.: Potential therapeutic usefulness ofmarihuana. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 20: 151-172, 1980. 105. Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J., and Kopin, I.J.: Metabolismand disposition of tetrahydrocannabinols in naive subjects andchronic marihuana users. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 191: 142-154, 1971. 106. Lemberger, L., McMahon, R., Archer, R., Matsumoto, K.,and Rowe, H.: Pharmacologic effects and physical disposition ofdelta-6a, 10a-dimethyl heptyl tetrahydrocannabinol (HMHP) in man.Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 15: 380-386, 1974. 107. Lemberger, L., Silberstein, S.D., Axelrod, J., and Kopin,I.J.: Marihuana: studies on the disposition and metabolism ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. Science (Wash. DC) 170:1320-1321, 1970. 108. Leuchtenberger, C., and Leuchtenberger, R.: Correlatedcytological and cytochemical studies of the effects of freshsmoke from marijuana cigarettes on growth and DNA metabolism ofanimal and human lung cultures. In Pharmacology of Marihuana, ed.by M.C. Braude and S. Szara, pp. 595-612, Raven Press, New York,1976. 109. Levy, J.A., Munson, A.E., Harris, L.S., and Dewey, W.L.:Effect of delta-8-and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the immuneresponse in mice. Pharmacologist 16: 259, 1974. 110. Lindgren, J.E., Ohlsson, A., Agurell, S., Hollister, L.,and Gillespie, H.: Clinical effects and plasma levels ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC) in heavy and lightusers of cannabis. Psychopharmacology 74: 208-212, 1980. 111. Linn, S., Schoenbaum, S.c., Monson, R.R., Rosner, R.,Stubblefield, P.C., and Ryan, K.J.: The association of marijuanause with outcome of pregnancy. Am J. Public Health 73: 1161-1164,1983. 112. Loewe, S., and Goodman, L.S.: Anticonvulsant action ofmarihuana active substances. Fed. Proc. 6: 352, 1947. 113. Lucas, V.S.,Jr., and Laszlo, J.:Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol for refractor vomiting induced bycancer chemotherapy. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 243: 1241-1243, 1980. 114. Magliozzi, Jr., Kanter, S.L., Csernansky, J.G., andHollister, L.E.: Detection of marijuana use in psychiatricpatients by determination of urinarydelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-11-oic acid. J. Nerv. Ment. Dia.171: 246-249, 1983. 115. Manno, J.E., Kilsheimer, G.S., and Forney, R.B.: Responseof isolated perfused rat heart to delta-9-THC. Appl. Pharmacol.17: 311, 1970. 116. Matsuyama, S.s., Jarvik, L.F., Fu, T.K., and Yen, F.S.:Chromosomal studies before and after supervised marihuanasmoking. In Pharmacology of Marihuana , ed. by M.C. Braude and S.Szara, pp. 723-729, Raven Press, New York, 1976. 117. Mellinger, G.D., Somers, R.H., Davidson, S.J., andManheimer, D.I.: The amotivational syndrome and the collagestudent. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 282: 37-55, 1976. 118. Mendelson, J.H., Kuehnle, J.C., Greenberg, I., and Mello,N.:Plasma testosterone levels before, during, and after chronicmarihuana smoking. N. Engl. J. Med. 291: 1051-1055, 1974. 119. Mendelson, J.H., Kuehnle, J.C., Greenberg, I., and Mello,N.: Operant acquisition of marihuana in man. J. Pharmacol. Exp.Ther. 198: 42-53, 1976. 120. Meyer, M.E.: Psychiatric consequences of marihuana use:the state of the evidence. In Marijuana and Health Hazards:Methodologic Issues in Current Research, ed. by J.R. Tinklenberg,pp. 133-152, Academic Press, New York, 1975. 121. Mikuriya, T.: Marijuana in medicine: past, present, andfuture. Calif. Med. 110: 34-40, 1969. 122. Miles, C.G., Congreve, G.R.S., Givvins, R.J., Marshman,J., Devenga, P., and Hicks, R.C.: An experimental study of theeffects of daily cannabis smoking on behavior patterns. ActPharmacol. Toxicol. 34: 1-44, 1974. 123. Miranne, A.C.: Marihuana use and achievement orientationof collage students. J. Health Soc. Behav. 20: 194-199, 1979. 124. Moskowitz, H., Hulbert, S., and McGlothlin, W.:Marihuana: effect on simulated driving performance. Accid. Anal.Prev. 8: 45-50, 1976. 125. Munson, A.E., Harris, L.S., Friedman, M.A., Dewey, W.L.,and Carchman, R.A.: Antineoplastic activity of cannabinoids. J.Natl. Cancer Inst. 55: 597-602, 1975. 126. Nahas, G.G., Suciv-Foca, N., Armand, J.P.,and Morishima,A.: Inhibition of cellular mediated immunity in marihuanasmokers. Science (Wash. DC) 183: 419-420, 1974. 127. Newman, L.M., Lutz, M.P., Gould, M.H., and Domino, E.F.:Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and ethyl alcohol: evidence forcross tolerance in the rat. Science (Wash. DC) 17: 1022-1023,1972. 128. Nichols, W.W., Miller, R.C., Heneen, W., Bradt, C.,Hollister, L., and Kanter, S.: Cytogenetic studies on humansubjects receiving marihuana and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol.Mutat. Res. 26: 413-417, 1974. 129. Noyes, R., Brunk, S.T., Avery, D.H., and Canter, A.: Theanalgesic properties of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and codeine.Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 18: 84-89, 1975. 130. Ohlsson, A., Lindgren, J.E., Wahlen, A., Agurell, S.,Hollister, L.E., and Gillespie, H.K.: Plasmadelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration and clinical effectsafter oral and intravenous administration and smoking. Clin.Pharmacol. Ther. 28: 409-416, 1980. 131. Orr, L.E., McKernan, J.F., and Bloome, B.: Antiemeticeffect of tetrahydrocannabinol compared with placebo andprochlorperazine in chemotherapy-associated nausea and emesis.Arch, Int. Med. 140: 1431-1433, 1980. 132. Palsson, A., Thulin, S.O., and Tunving, K.: Cannabispsychosis in south Sweden. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 66: 311-321,1982. 133. Persaud, T.V.N., and Ellington, A.C.: Cannabis in earlypregnancy. Lancet 2: 1306, 1967. 134. Petersen, B.H., Grahan, J., and Lemberger, L.: Marihuana,tetrahydrocannabinol, and T-cell function. Life Sci. 1976:395-400, 1976. 135. Petro, D.J., and Ellenberger, C.E.: Treatment of humanspasticity with delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. J. Clin. Pharmacol.21: 413S-416S, 1981. 136. Pivik, R.T., Zarcone, V., Dement, W.C., and Hollister,L.E.:Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and synhexyl; effects on humansleep patterns. Clin. Pharmacol. ther. 13: 426-435, 1972. 137. Rachelefsky, G.S., and Opedz, G.: Normal and lymphocytefunction in the presence of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Clin.Pharmacol. Ther. 21: 44-46, 1977. 138. Rafaelsen, O.J., Bech, P., Christiansen, T., Christrup,H., Nyboe, J., and Rafaelson, L.: Cannabis and alcohol: effectson simulated car driving. Science (Wash. DC) 179: 920-923, 1973. 139. Raft, D., Gregg, J., Ghia, J., and harris, L.: Effect ofintravenous tetrahydrocannabinoids on experimental and surgicalpain. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 21: 26-33, 1977. 140. Reeve, V.C., Grant, J.D., Robertson, W., Gillespie, H.K.,and Hollister, L.E.: Plasma concentrations ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and impaired motor function. DrugAlcohol Depend. 11: 167-175, 1883. 141. Reeve, V.C., Peck, R., Boland, P., and Mallory, C.:Marijuana-alcohol related driving performance study. A summary ofpreliminary findings. Proceedings of the Ninth InternationalConference on Alcohol, Drugs, and Traffic Safety, in press, 1985. 142. Renault, P., Schuster, C., Freedman, D., Sikic, B., NebelDe Mello, D., and Halaris, A.: Repeat administration of marihuanasmoke to humans. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 31: 95-102, 1974. 143. Rosenberg, C.M., Gerrein, J.R.,and Schnell, C.: Cannabisin the treatment of alcoholism. J. Stud. Alcohol 39: 1955-1958,1978. 144. Rosenkrantz, H.: The immune response and marihuana. InMarihuana: Chemistry, Biochemistry, and Cellular Effects, ed. byG.G. Nahas, pp. 441-456, Springer Verlag, New York, 1976. 145. Roth, W.T., Tinklenberg, J.R., Kopell, B.S., andHollister, L.E.: Continuous electrocardiographic monitoringduring marihuana intoxication. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 14:533-540, 1973. 146. Rottanburg, D., Robins, A.H., Ben-Arie, O., Teggin, A.,and Eik, R.: Cannabis associated behavior with hypomaniacfeatures. Lancet 2: 1364-1366, 1982. 147. Rubin, V., and Comitas, L.: Ganja in Jamaica. In AMedical Anthropological Study of Chronic Marihuana Use. Mouton,The Hague, 1975. 148. Sallan, S.E., Cronin, C., Zelen, M., and Zinberg, N.E.:Antiemetics on patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer. N.Engl. J. Med. 302: 135-138, 1980 149. Sallan, S.E., Zinberg, N.E., and Frei, E.: Antiemeticeffect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients receivingcancer chemotherapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 293: 795-797, 1975. 150. Schaeffer, J., Andrysion, T., and Unferleider, J.T.:Cognition and long-term use of ganja (cannabis). Science (Wash.DC) 213: 465-466, 1981. 151. Silva, M.T.A., Carlini, E.A., Claussen, U., and Korte,F.: Lack of cross-tolerance in rats amongdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC), cannabis extract,mescaline, and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD-25).Psychopharmacologia 13: 332-340, 1968. 152. Silverstein, M.J., and Lensin, P.:2,4-Dinitrochlorobenzene skin testing in chronic marihuana users.In Pharmacology of Marihuana, ed. by M.C. Braude and S. Szara,pp. 199-203, Raven Press, New York, 1976. 153. Stanton, M.D., Mintz, J., and Franklin, R.M.: Drugflashbacks. II. Some additional findings. Int. J. Addict. 11:53-69, 1976. 154. Staquet, M., Bron, D., Rosencweig, M., and Kenis, Y.:Clinical studies with a THC homolog (BRL-4664) in prevention ofcisplatin-induced vomiting. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 21: 60S-63S,1981. 155. Stenchever, M.A., Kunysz, T.J., and Allen, M.A.:Chromosome breakage in users of marijuana. Am. J. Obstet.Gynecol. 118: 106-113, 1974. 156. Stockings, G.T.: A new euphoriant for depressive mentalstates. Br. Med. J. 1: 918-922, 1947. 157. Strum, S.B., McDermed, J.E., Optell, R.W., and Riech,L.P.: Intravenous metoclopramide. An effective antiemetic incancer chemotherapy. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 247: 1683-1686, 1982. 158. Szmanski, H.V.: Prolonged depersonalization aftermarijuana use. Am. J. Psychiatry 138: 231-233, 1981. 159. Tashkin, D.P., Calvarese, B.M., Simmons, M.S., andShapiro, B.J.: Respiratory studies of seventy-four habitualmarijuana smokers. Chest 78: 699-706, 1980. 160. Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Lee, V.E., and Harper,C.E.: Effects of smoked marihuana in experimentally inducedasthma. Am Rev. Respir. Dis. 112: 377-385, 1975. 161. Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Lee, Y.E., and Harper,C.E.: Subacute effects of heavy marihuana smoking on pulmonaryfunction in healthy men. N. Engl. J. Med. 294: 125-129, 1976. 162. Taylor, S.P., Vardaris, R.M., Rawtitch, A.B., Gammon,C.B., Cranston, J.W., and Lubetkin, A.L.: The effects of alcoholand delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on human physical aggression.Aggressive Behav. 2: 153-161, 1976. 163. Tennant, F., Jr., and Groesbeck, J.: Psychiatric effectsof hashish. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 27: 133-136, 1972. 164. Thacore, V.R., and Shukla, S.R.P.: Cannabis psychosis andparanoid schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 33: 382-386, 1974. 165. The Use of Marihuana, Psychological Inquiry, ed. by M.Mendelson, A.Rossi, and R. Meyer, Plenum Press, New York, 1974. 166. Thompson, L.J., and Proctor, R.C.: Pyrahexyl in treatmentof alcoholic and drug withdrawal conditions.North Carolina Med.J. 14: 520-523, 1953. 167. Tiedman, J.S., Shields, M.B., Wever, P.A., Crow, J.N.,Cochetto, D.M., Harris, W.A., and Howes, J.P.: Effect ofsynthetic cannabinoids on elevated intraocular pressure.Opthalmology 88: 270-277, 1981. 168. Tinklenberg, J.R.: Marihuana and human aggression. InMarijuana: Effects on Human Behavior, ed. by L.L. Miller, pp.339-357, Academic Press, New York, 1974. 169. Treffert, D.A.: Marijuana use in schizophrenia: a clearhazard. Am. J. Psychiatry 135: 1213-1215, 1978. 170. Turkanis, S.A., Cely, W., Olsen, D.M., and Kaarler, R.:Anticonvulsant properties of cannadidiol. Res. Commun. Chem.Pathol. Pharacol. 8: 231-246, 1974. 171. Vachon, L.: The smoke in marihuana smoking. N. Engl. J.Med. 294: 160-161, 1976. 172. Vachon, L., Fitzgerald, M.X., Solliday, N.H., Gould,I.A., and Gaensler, E.A.: Single-dose effect of marihuana smoke.Bronchial dynamics and respiratory-center sensitivity in normalsubjects. N. Engl. J. Med. 288: 985-989, 1973. 173. Van Klingeren, B., and Ten Ham, M.: Antibacterialactivity of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol. AntonieLeeuwenhoek J. Microbiol. 42: 9-12, 1976. 174. Wada, J.A., Osawa, T., and Corcoran, M.E.: Effect oftetrahydrocannabinoids on kindled amygdaloid seizures inSenegalese baboons. Epilepsia 16: 439-448, 1975. 175. Wada, J.A., Sato, M., and Corcoran, M.E.: Antiepilepticproperties of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Exp. Neurol. 39:157-165, 1973. 176. Weil, A.T., Zinberg, N.E., and Nelson, J.M.: Clinical andpsychological effects of marihuana in man. Science (Wash. DC)162: 1234-1242, 1968. 177. West, M.E., and Lockhart, A.B.: The treatment of glaucomausing a non-psychoactive preparation of Cannabis sativa. WestIndian Med. J. 29: 390, 1980. 178. White, S.C., Brin, S.C., and Janicki, B.W.:Mitogen-induced blastogenic responses to lymphocytes frommarihuana smokers. Science (Wash. DC) 188: 71-72, 1975. 179. Wig, N.N., and Varma, V.K.: Patterns of long-term heavycannabis use in North India and its effects on cognitivefunctions: a preliminary report. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2: 211-219,1977. 180. Williams, E., Himmelsbach, C., Ruble, D.C., and Lloyd,B.J.: Studies in marihuana and pyrahexyl compound. Public HealthRep. 61: 1059-1083, 1946. 181.Williams, S.J., Hartley, J.P.R., and Graham, J.D.P.:Bronchodilator effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinoladministered by aerosol to asthmatic patients. Thorax 31:720-723, 1976. 182. Yesavage, J.A., Leirer, V.O., Ditman, J. and Hollister.L.E.: "Hangover" effects of marijuana intoxication onaircraft pilot performance. Am. J. Psychiatry, in press, 1985. 183. Zimmerman, A.M., and McClean, D.K.: Action of narcoticand hallucinogenic agents on the cell cycle. In Drugs and CellCycle, ed. by A.M. Zimmerman, Padilla, and Cameron, p.67,Academic Press, New York, 1973. 184. Zimmerman, E.G., Yeager, E.P., Soares, J.R., Hollister,L.E., and Reeve, V.C.: Measurement ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in whole blood samples fromimpaired motorists. J. Forensic Sci. 28: 957-962, 1981. 185. Zimmerman, S., Zimmerman, A.M., Cameron, I.L., andLaurence, H.L.: Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol, andcannabinol effects on the immune response of mice. Pharmacology15: 10-23, 1977. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-19IA087-000627-B014-281http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/hollis2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051204 text/html 35128HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:11:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:47 GMTContent-length: 34910 Marijuana and Immunity by Leo Hollister, M.D. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information MARIJUANA and IMMUNITY by LEO E HOLLISTER, M.D. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs p159-163 Vol.24 Apr-Jun 1992 Few areas of scientific research have been as controversial asthe effect of marijuana on immune defenses. The effects ofmarijuana on health in general have been marked by polarities ofbelief or interpretation of evidence often due to the prejudicesof investigators. In addition, evidence of altered immunefunctions is derived mainly from in vitro tests or ex vivoexperiments, which employed doses of cannabinoids far in excessof those that prevail during social use of marijuana. Finally,the clinical significance of the experimental observations isdifficult to assess. The present review will attempt toobjectively assess the evidence. Other recent reviews of thesubject have also appeared, with varying degrees of intensity ofcoverage (Hollister 1986); Maykut 1985; Munson & Fehr 1983;Rosenkrantz 1976). For purposes of a more systematic discussion,immunity will be considered as several separate topics: (1)cell-mediated immunity, (2) humoral mechanisms, (3) cellulardefenses, and (4) immunogenicity of marijuana or cannabinoids. CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITY LYMPHOCYTE TRANSFORMATION Lymphocytesexposed to several mitogens divide rapidly, increase protein andnucleic acid synthesis, and show morphological changes resemblingblasts. This test of the ability of T-lymphocytes to transformthemselves measures one potential aspect of cell-mediatedimmunity. A direct way to measure the activation of lymphocytesis to measure the rate of incorporation of nucleic acid, such as3H-thymidine, into the cells following addition of the mitogen tothe culture. All studies are conducted in vitro. An early study (Nahas et al. 1976) measured 3H-thymidineuptake in normal human lymphocytes stimulated by bothphytohemagglutinin (PHA) and allogenic cell mixed lymphocyteculture (MLC). The incorporation of 3H-thymidine was equallyinhibited by 10-5M to 10-4M concentrations ofD9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), D8-tetrahydrocannabinol (D8-THC),their corresponding 11-OH metabolites, a variety of otherinactive cannabinoids, and olivetol. THC in similarconcentrations also depressed 3H-uridine uptake, indicating aneffect of protein and RNA synthesis as well. These concentrationswere 10 to 20 times greater than those reported earlier by thesame group (Nahas et al. 1974) as having similar effects. In thisstudy, cell-mediated immunity was evaluated in 51 young, chronicmarijuana smokers whose lymphocytes were stimulated in vitro byPHA and MLC. As compared with normal controls, 3H-thymidineuptake was reduced. Klein and colleagues (1985) added the predominantly T-cellmitogens, PHA and concanavalin A (Con A), and the B-cell mitogen,E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS), to mice spleen cells treatedwith varying concentrations of THC and its active metabolite11-OH-THC. Both T-cell lymphocyte and B-cell lymphocyteproliferation in response to mitogens were suppressed by THC, butconsiderably less by 11-OH-THC. Proliferation of both types oflymphocytes was completely inhibited by concentrations of THC(10ug/ml) that were not directly lytic to the cells. Lowerconcentrations of THC were found to inhibit B-cell lymphocytesthan those required for T-lymphocytes, suggesting that humoralimmunity was more impaired than cell-mediated immunity in thissystem. By no means have all studies of cell-mediated immunity inmarijuana smokers or in vitro exposure of T-cells tocannabinoids-often conducted in exactly the same way-shownevidence of immunosuppression. Indeed, the inconsistency of studyfindings has led to the present state of ambiguity. White, Brin and Janicki (1975) obtained peripheral bloodlymphocytes from 12 healthy long-term marijuana smokers. Theblastogenic response to PHA and pokeweed mitogen were measured invitro by 3H-thymidine uptake. The responses of lymphocytes fromthe marijuana smokers were not significantly different from thosewho did not smoke the drug. Lau and colleagues (1976) observed eight chronic smokers ofmarijuana in a hospital setting over a 30-day period. Eachsubject received a placebo during the first six days, followed byTHC in oral doses up to 210 mg/day for the next 18 days, then aplacebo for the last six days. The response of their lymphocytesto PHA stimulation, as measured by 3H-thymidine uptake, was nodifferent in either of the three periods. Rachelfsky and Opedz (1977) stimulated normal humanlymphocytes with PHA and with MLC, and 3H-thymidine uptake wasmeasured. The uptake of thymidine was unchanged in lymphocytesexposed to 1.9 x 10-4M or 12.0 x 10-4M concentrations of THC.Higher concentrations of THC precipitated in the medium. Changeswere comparable in cells exposed to THC and in those not soexposed. Kaklamani and colleagues (1978) obtained peripherallymphocytes from 12 chronic users of marijuana and 15 nonusingcontrol subjects. Lymphocytes from the experienced marijuanausers were obtained before and after smoking hashish.Incorporation of 14C-thymidine, after PHA stimulation andformation of rosettes of sheep erythrocytes, was no differentbetween the normal controls and the marijuana users either beforeor after the latter had smoked hashish. Whatever immunosuppressive effects marijuana may have, theyare not dependent on psychoactive components. A variety ofcannabinoids, which have no apparent central nervous systemactivity, share an apparent immunosuppressive action (Smith etal. 1978). T-Lymphocyte Rosette Formation Another commonly used measureof cell-mediated immunity is the ability of T-lymphocytes to formin vitro rosettes of sheep erythrocytes surrounding T cells. Adose-related decrease in rosette formation was found insensitized T cells exposed in vitro to various concentrations ofTHC in this medium (Cushman, Khurana & Hashim 1976). Cushmanand Khurana (1977) tested 10 subjects during a four-week cycle ofmarijuana smoking, so that the subjects were exposed chronicallyrather than acutely, and the results showed a decrease in earlyT-cell formation, but no change in either late T-cell or B-cellrosettes. When Gupta, Grieco and Cushman (1974) compared 23chronic marijuana smokers with 23 nonsmokers, T-cell rosetteswere decreased in the users as compared with nonusers, butassociated with B-lymphocytes were not different, suggesting aselective effect on cell-mediated immunity. Petersen, Graham and Lemberger (1976) tested three subjectswho smoked "street" marijuana for rosette formation andblastogenesis. Two of three showed decreased rosette formationand impaired blastogenesis following stimulation of theirlymphocytes with PHA. In another trial, rosette formation wasmeasured in six persons three to six hours after they smoked amarijuana cigarette containing 10mg of THC. Rosette formation wasimpaired in five of the subjects, and became normal 24 hourslater in all but one subject. Thus, it appeared that the effectsof marijuana on T-lymphocytes are variable and reversible,suggesting that factors other than exposure to marijuana itselfmay be involved. Mice immunized with sheep erythrocytes were treated withintraperitoneal doses of 10, 25, and 40mg/kg/day of THC for sevento eight days. Both plaque-forming and rosette-forming cells weredecreased by the 25mg/kg/day dose (Lefkowitz et al. 1978).Monkeys were exposed to three levels of marijuana smoke over asix-month period. Plasma immunoglobulins (IgG and IgM) weredecreased in those monkeys exposed to medium and highconcentrations of smoke. In vitro tests by Dual and Heath (1975)of the response of lymphocytes to Con A were decreased. Thus,both humoral and cell-mediated immunity appeared to be affected.However, the authors asserted that it is impossible to assess thein vivo implications from tests of this sort. Cushman and Khurana (1977) tested 10 subjects during afour-week cycle of marijuana smoking, so that the subjects wereexposed chronically rather than acutely. the results showed adecrease in early T-cell rosette formation, but no change ineither late T-cell or B-cell rosettes. These studies also indicated that T-lymphocyte function, asmeasured by rosette formation, was decreased when the cells areexposed to cannabinoids either in vitro or ex vivo. However,these impairments were rapidly reversible. Other Measurements of Cell-mediated Immunity A number of othermeasurements of cell-mediated immunity have pointed in the samedirection. Although both impaired allograft rejection anddecreased hemagglutinin titers were found in animals treated withcannabinoids, the effect on allograft rejection as a measure ofcell-mediated immunity was greater (Munson et al 1976).Susceptibility to infection with herpes simplex virus type 2applied directly to the vagina was increased in mice that hadreceived doses of 100mg/kg/day of THC (Mishkin & Cabral1985). A similar increased susceptibility was found in guineapigs treated with doses of 4.0 and 10mg/kg/day (Cabral et al.1986). Morohan and colleagues assessed the LD50 dose of Listeriamonocytogenes in mice treated with THC in doses of 38, 75 and150mg/kg. The LD50 was decreased 10-, 17- and 657-fold by eachdose, respectively. The marijuana extract was less active. Asimilar challenge with herpes simplex type 2 virus showed a96-fold decrease following administration of marijuana extract.These situations are not at all comparable to human exposure. The vast majority of people can be made sensitive todinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB), a powerful skin sensitizer. DNCB isoften used with "recall" antigens (eg. tuberculin andmumps) to test patients for anergy. Sensitivity to DNCB was foundin all 34 chronic marijuana smokers who were tested as comparedwith 96 percent of 279 healthy nonsmokers. On the other hand, 384patients with cancer, whose cell-mediated immunity is sometimesdecreased, showed a positive reaction in only 70 percent of thosetested (Silverstein & Lessin 1974). Such evidence raisesquestions about the clinical significance of experiments thathave shown evidence of cell-mediated immunity from cannabinoids. It has been hypothesized that the membrane-disordering effectsof THC may affect the binding of antigens to cellular receptors,accounting for a decrease in cell-mediated immunity. On the otherhand, the combination of increased membrane disorder andinhibition of acyltransferase activity in B cells and T cellscould impair the transfer of cellular constituents (Baczynsky& Zimmerman 1983b). Regardless of whether the action is anonspecific one at the cell membrane or at a more primary site,impaired immunity remains precisely that. However, a cellmembrane site of action could explain the apparent transitorynature of the observed alterations in cell-mediated immunity, aswell as the requirement for much larger concentrations ofcannabinoids than those usually encountered during social use ofmarijuana Summary of Effects of Cell-mediated Immunity In summary, theeffects of cannabinoids on cell-mediated immunity arecontradictory. Such evidence as has been obtained to support suchan effort has usually involved doses and concentrations that areorders of magnitude greater than those obtained when marijuana isused by human subjects. Clinically, one might assume thatsustained impairment of cell-mediated immunity might lead to anincreased prevalence of opportunistic infections, or an increasedprevalence of malignancy, as seen in the current epidemic ofacquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). No such clinicalevidence has been discovered or has any direct epidemiologicaldata incriminated marijuana use with the acquisition of humanimmunodeficiency virus infection or the clinical development ofAIDS. Even though some degree of impairment of immune responseswere to occur, the remaining immune function may be adequate,especially in the young persons who are major users of cannabis. HUMORAL IMMUNITY Transformation of B-LymphocytesTransformation of B cells stimulated by the mitogen PLPS wasinhibited more than were T cells stimulated by PHA following thesame doses of THC in mice (Klein et al. 1985). This evidence ofdiminished B-cell reactivity following the administration of THCwas confirmed in another study (Munson et al. 1976) that showed adose dependent suppression from doses of 50, 100, and 200mg/kg ofTHC in mice. These doses are enormous, of course. Antibody Formation A frequently used measure of humoralimmunity is the ability of splenic lymphocytes from mice that areimmunized against sheep erythrocytes to form plaques when exposedto in vitro to sheep erythrocytes. Levy and Heppner (1981) foundthat both THC and haloperidol produced dose-dependent reductionsin hemolytic plaque-forming cell (PFC) numbers at the time ofpeak reactivity (day 4) in control mice. Treatment with THC andhaloperidol only delayed the time of peak PFC formation by 24 to48 hours (doses were high enough to produce signs of grossbehavioral toxicity). Neither THC nor other cannabinoids had anyeffect on the titer of serum hemagglutinating antibody measuredseven days after immunization. Baczynsky and Zimmerman (1983a) immunized mice with sheeperythrocytes on Day 1 (primary immune response) and on Days 1 and28 (secondary immune response) and measured hemagglutinin titers.Mice treated with 10 mg or 15 mg of THC during the primaryimmunization period exhibited a suppression of the primaryhumoral immune response. These doses also suppressed thesecondary immune response, even when given during the period ofprimary immunization. Mice treated with THC during the secondaryimmunization period showed no measurable response. Othercannabinoids had no effect. Immature mice immunized with sheep erythrocytes also showedsuppression of the immune response when treated with THC in dosesof 1.0, 5.0, and 10.0 mg/kg. Splenic weight was reduced and PFCas well as hemagglutinin titers were lower than controls. Thesuppression was specific for THC and was not observed withcannabidiol or cannabinol, even at doses of 25 mg/kg (Zimmermanet al. 1977). Some evidence of tolerance or hyporesponsiveness tothis humoral antibody suppression by THC was found when mice weretreated with THC for five days prior to immunization as well asafterward (Loveless, Harris & Munson 1981-82). Rosenkrantz, Miller and Esber (1975) immunized rats with asingle intraperitoneal dose of sheep erythrocytes during, beforeand after administration of THC in order to determine its effecton the inductive and productive phases of the primary immuneresponse. following a dose of 10 mg/kg, THC decreased the primaryimmune response 33 to 40 percent; the inductive phase wasdecreased by 48 to 78 percent by all doses of THC and theproductive phase was decreased by 26 to 59 percent by the higherdoses. The same group (Luthra et al. 1980) tested the primary immuneresponse of rats to intraperitoneal administration of sheeperythrocytes after five to 26 days following pretreatment withTHC in order to determine if tolerance developed to theimmunosuppressant effects. As measured by splenicantibody-forming cells and hemagglutinin/hemolysin titers, noevidence of tolerance was found. Summary of Effects of Humoral Immunity In summary, humoralimmunity, as tested by a number of in vitro procedures, seemsalso to be impaired by cannabinoids, but this effect was mostevident for THC. The clinical significance of such changes isquestionable due to the great concentrations of cannabinoids usedand the lack of any epidemiological evidence of increasedbacterial infections in chronic users of marijuana. CELLULAR DEFENSES Leukocytes and Lymphocytes When 10 subjectswere followed through a four-week cycle of marijuana smoking, nochange was observed in either peripheral leukocyte or absolutelymphocyte counts (Cushman & Khurana 1977). Leukocytes fromfive chronic marijuana smokers were compared with those from fivenonusers of the drug for their ability to migrate after exposureto THC or marijuana extract. Both treatments inhibited leukocytemigration without killing the cells, both in cells from users andnonusers of marijuana. The prevailing THC concentration needed toaccomplish this was 2.0ug/ml, a couple of orders of magnitudegreater than any THC plasma concentrations usually foundclinically (Schwartzfarb, Needle & Chavez-Chase 1974). Natural Killer-cell Activity Natural killer-cell activity inrats was decreased by subchronic treatment (25 days) with THC,but not after acute treatment (one day). this effect was notfound in rats treated simultaneously with naloxone, suggestingpossible involvement with the opiate system (Patel et al 1985).when injected into mice, both THC and its active metabolite11-OH-THC suppressed splenic natural killer-cell activity invitro. The tissue concentrations of the cannabinoids werereported as being 5.0-10.0 ug/ml, about two orders of magnitudegreater than those that might be experienced during the socialuse of marijuana (Klein, Newton & Friedman 1987). Macrophages Macrophages work closely with T-cells as part ofthe immunological defense system. On glass surfaces, macrophagecultures normally show spreading, which is an indication of theirmobility. the addition of THC to the medium inhibited the degreeof spreading. It also inhibited the phagocytosis of yeastparticles (Lopez-Cepero et al 1986). However, another experiment(Munson et al. 1976) using intact mice that were treated with asingle dose or multiple doses of THC could not demonstrateimpairment in reticuloendothelial activity, as measured by theintravascular clearance of colloidal carbon. Summary of Effects on cellular Defenses It is somewhatsurprising that newer techniques of cell sorting, which permitdetermination of absolute counts of T- and B-lymphocytes as wellas subsets of T-lymphocytes, have not been utilized. the evidencefrom the in vitro studies is weakened by the high concentrationsof drug that were used. Clinically, evidence for impairment ofcellular defenses has not been forthcoming. IMMUNOGENICITY OF CANNABINOIDS Laboratory Studies It has beenhypothesized that THC, a relatively simple chemical, can act as ahapten and become an immunogen. If such were the case, toleranceto THC might be explained on an immunological basis as well asthe rare reports of allergic reactions. Azathioprine, animmunosuppressant, had a modest effect in mitigating thehypotensive effects of THC in spontaneously hypertensive rats.Spleen cells from mice treated with THC showed slightly moreblast transformation in culture than untreated spleen cells,either with or without THC being added to the culture medium.However, the degree of blast transformation was far less thanthat produced by PHA. This somewhat weak evidence for animmunogenic action of THC came from a laboratory that laterstressed the immunosuppressant effects of marijuana (Nahas,Zugary & Schwartz 1973). Watson, Murphy & Turner (1983) employed a technique usedto test compounds for their potential for producing allergiccontact dermatitis and that also maximizes the degree of skinsensitization of guinea pigs. Sensitivity was greatly increasedby THC and cannabinol, but less so with other cannabinoids. Clinical Studies In a clinical study conducted in thesouthwestern United States (Freeman 1983), skin tests wereapplied to 90 patients with various forms of atopy. The test waspositive for 63 patients for marijuana pollen as compared to only18 who reacted to tobacco leaf. However, it is unlikely thatmarijuana pollen contains many cannabinoids, but rather containsproteins that many be sensitizing. A series of 28 marijuana smokers showed precipitins forAspergillus antigens: 13 were positive as compared to one of 10controls. Lymphocytes showed significant blastogenesis in threeof those subjects who tested positive. Seven of these 23 subjectsreported bronchospasm following the smoking of marijuana, and onepatient had evidence of systemic aspergillosis (Kagen et al.1983). As it is well known that marijuana contains contaminants,including molds and fungi, it is not surprising that these shouldcause allergic reactions in some users. The study does notindicate that cannabinoids themselves are immunogens. Skin testing with cannabinoids seems to be useless fordetermining the rare patient with sensitivity to marijuana. Avariety of intradermal tests with various cannabinoids and commonallergens was applied to 63 marijuana users by Lewis and Slavin(1975). Two users, who were clearly atopic with a past history ofbronchial asthma, also reported experiencing asthma after someexposures to marijuana. A third subject with a history ofallergic rhinitis also experienced similar symptoms followingmarijuana use. All three of these subjects had negative skintests to cannabinoids. On the other hand, seven subjects whotested positive for hemp and one who tested positive to D8-THChad no clinical manifestation of marijuana sensitivity. A 29-year-old woman (known to be allergic to ragweed)experienced symptoms of ananaphylactoid reaction that lasted 20to 30 minutes immediately after smoking marijuana. Skin testswith THC showed a 2+ reaction, and with cannabidiol a 1+ reaction(Liskow, Liss & Parker 1971). The weakly positive skin testsdo not necessarily indicate that the reaction was duespecifically to cannabinoids. Summary of Immunogenicity While it is possible that a fewpersons may become truly allergic to cannabinoids, it is far morelikely that allergic reactions, which have been exceedingly rarefollowing the use of marijuana, are due to contaminants.Marijuana is grown in the field and harvested along witheverything else (eg., bacteria, fungi, molds, parasites, worms,chemicals) that may be found in such field plants. That suchimpure material, when smoked and inhaled into the lungs, causesso little trouble is really a marvel. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Despite the fairly large literaturethat developed during the past 15 years or so, the effect ofcannabinoids on the immune system is still unsettled. Theevidence has been contradictory and is more supportive of somedegree of immunosuppression only when one considers in vitrostudies. These have been seriously flawed by the very highconcentrations of drug used to produce immunosuppression and bythe lack of comparisons with other membrane-active drugs. Thecloser that experimental studies have been to actual clinicalsituations, the less compelling has been the evidence. Although the topic was of great interest during the 1970s, asindicated by the preponderance of references from that period,interest has waned during the present decade. This waning ofinterest suggests that perhaps most investigators feel that thisline of inquiry will not be rewarding. the AIDS epidemic has alsodiverted the attention of the immunologists to the far moreserious problem of the truly devastating effects a retrovirus canhave on a portion of the immune system. The relationship between the use of social drugs and thedevelopment of clinical manifestations of AIDS has been of someinterest, however. Persons infected with the virus but notdiagnosed as AIDS have been told to avoid the use of marijuanaand/or alcohol. This advice may be reasonable as a general healthmeasure, but direct evidence that heeding this warning willprevent the ultimate damage to the immune system is totallylacking. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author wishes to thank Matthew Edlund,M.D., who provided useful critical comments during thepreparation of this article. REFERENCES Baczynsky, W.O. & Zimmerman, A.M. 1983a. Effects of D9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol and cannabidiol on the immunesystem of mice. I. In vivo investigation of the primary andsecondary immune response. Pharmacology Vol. 26(1):1-11. Baczynsky, W.O. & Zimmerman, A.M. 1983b. Effects of D9tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol and cannabidiol on the immunesystem of mice. II In vitro investigation using cultured mousesplenocytes. Pharmacology Vol. 26(1):12-19. Bradley, S.G.; Munson, A.E.; Dewey, W.L. & Harris, L.S.1977. Enhanced susceptibility of mice to combinations ofD9-tetrahydrocannabinol and live or killed gram negativebacteria. Infection and Immunity Vol. 17:325-329. Cabral, G.A.; Mishkin, E.M.; Marciano-cabral, F.; Coleman, P.;Harris, L. & Munson, A.E. 1986. Effect ofD9-tetrahydrocannabinol on herpes simplex virus type 2 vaginalinfection in the guinea pig. Proceedings of the Society forExperimental Biology and Medicine Vol. 182:181-186 Cushman, P. & Khurana, R. 1977. A controlled cycle oftetrahydrocannabinol smoking: T and B cell rosette formation.Life Sciences Vol. 20: 971-980. Cushman, P. & Khurana, R. & Hashim, G. 1976Tetrahydrocannabinol: Evidence for reduced rosette formation bynormal T lymphocytes. In: Braude, M.C. & Szara, S. (Eds.).The Pharmacology of Marihuana. New York: Raven Press. Dual, C.B. & Heath, R.G. 1975. The effect of chronicmarihuana usage on the immunological status of rhesus monkeys.Life Sciences Vol.17:875. Freeman, G.L. 1983. Allergic skin test reactivity to marijuanain the Southwest. Western Journal of Medicine Vol.138(6):829-831. Gupta, S.; Grieco, M.A. & Cushman, P. 1974. Impairment ofrosette forming T lymphocytes in chronic marihuana smokers. NewEngland Journal of Medicine Vol. 291:874-877. Hollister, L.E. 1986. Health aspects of cannabis.Pharmacological Reviews Vol. 38(1):1-20. Kagen, S.L.; Kurup. V.P.; Sohnle, P.G. & Fink, J.N. 1983.Marijuana smoking and fungal sensitization. Journal of Allergyand Clinical Immunology Vol. 71(4):389-393. Kaklamani, E.; Trichopoulos, D.; Koutselinis, A.; Brouja, M.& Karalis, B. 1978. Hashish smoking and T-lymphocytes.Archives of Toxicology Vol. 40: 97 101. Klein, T.W.; Newton, C. & Friedman, H. 1987. Inhibition ofnatural killer cell function by marijuana components. Journal ofToxicology and Environmental Health Vol. 20(4):321-332. Klein, T.W.; Newton, C.; Widen, R. & Friedman, H. 1985.The effect of D9 tetrahydrocannabinol and11-hydroxy-D9-tetrahydrocannabinol on T lymphocyte andB-lymphocyte mitogen responses. Journal of ImmunopharmacologyVol. 7:451-456. Lau, R.J.; Tubergen, D.G.; Barr, M., Jr.; Domino, E.F.;Benowitz, N. & Jones, R.T. 1976. Phytohemagglutinin-inducedlymphocyte transformation in humans receivingD9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Science Vol 192:805-807. Lefkowitz, S.S.; Klager, K.; Nemeth, D. & Preuss, M. 1978.Immunosuppression of mice by D9-THC. Research Communications inchemical Pathology and Pharmacology Vol.19:101-107. Levy, J.A. & Heppner, G.H. 1981. Alterations of immunereactivity by haloperidol and D9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal ofImmunopharmacology Vol. 3:93-109. Levy, J.A.; Munson, A.E.; Harris, L.S. & Dewey, W.L. 1974.Effect of D8- and D9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the immune responsein mice. Pharmacologist Vol. 16:259. Lewis, C.R. & Slavin, R.G. 1975. Allergy to marihuana: Aclinical and skin-testing study. Journal of Allergy and ClinicalImmunology Vol. 55:131-132. Liskow, B.; Liss, J.L. & Parker, C.W. 1971. Allergy tomarihuana. Annuls of Internal Medicine Vol. 75:571-573. Lopez-Cepero, M.; Friedman, M.; Klein, T. & Friedman, H.1986. Tetrahydrocannabinol-induced suppression of macrophagespreading and phagocyte activity in vitro. Journal of LeukocyteBiology Vol. 39:679-686. Loveless, S.E.; Harris, L.S. & Munson, A.E. 1981-1982.Hyporesponsiveness to the immunosuppressant effects ofD9-tetrahydrocannabinol Journal of Immunopharmacology Vol.3(3-4):371-383. Luthra, Y.K.; Esber, H.J.; Laviriere, D.M. & Rosenkrantz,H. 1980. Assessment of tolerance to immunosuppressive activity ofin rats. Journal of Immunopharmacology Vol. 2:245. Maykut, M.O. 1985 Health consequences of acute and chronicmarijuana use. Progress In Neuropsychopharmacology and BiologicalPsychiatry Vol. 9(3):209-238. Mishkin, M.O. & Cabral, G.A. 1985. D9-tetrahydrocannabinoldecreases host resistance to herpes simplex virus type 2 vaginalinfection in the B6C3F1 mouse. Journal of General Virology Vol.66:2539-2549. Morahan, P.S.; Klykken, P.C.; Smith, S.H.; Harris, L.S. &Munson, A.E. 1979. Effects of cannabinoids on host resistance toListeria monocytogenes and herpes simplex virus. Infection andImmunity Vol. 23:670-674. Munson, A.E. & Fehr, K.O. 1983. Immunological effects ofcannabis. In: Fehr, K.O. & Kalant, H (Eds.). Cannabis andHealth Hazards. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation. Munson, A.E.; Levy, J.A.; Harris, L.S. & dewey, W.L. 1976Effects of D9 tetrahydrocannabinol on the immune system. In:Braude, M.C. & Szara, S. (Eds.). Nahas, G.G.; Desoize, B.; Armand, J.P.; Hsu, J. &Morishima, A. 1976 Natural cannabinoids: Apparent depression ofnucleic acids and protein synthesis in cultured lymphocytes. In:Braude, M.C. & Szara, S. (Eds). The Pharmacology ofMarihuana. New York: Raven Press. Nahas, G.G.; Suciv-Foca, N.; Armand, J.P. & Morishima, A.1974. Inhibition of cellular mediated immunity in marihuanasmokers. Science Vol. 183:419 420. Nahas, G.G.; Zagury, D. & Schwartz, I.W. 1973. Evidencefor the possible immunogenecity of D9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)in rodents. Nature Vol. 243:407-408. Patel, V.; Borysendo, M.; Kumar, M.S.A. & Millard, W.J.1985. Effects of acute and subchronic D9-tetrahydrocannabinoladministration on the plasma catecholamine,B-endorphin, andcorticosterone levels and splenic natural killer activity inrats. Proceedings of the Society of Experimental Biology andMedicine Vol. 180:400-404. Petersen, B.H.; Grahan, J. & Lemberger, L. 1976.Marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol, and T-cell function. LifeSciences Vol. 1976:395 400. Rachelfsky, G.S. & Opedz, G. 1977. Normal lymphocytefunction in the presence of D9-THC. Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics Vol. 21:44 46. Rosenkrantz, H. 1976. The immune response and marihuana. In:Nahas, G.(Ed.). Marihuana: Chemistry, Biochemistry, and CellularEffects, New York: Springer-Verlag. Rosenkrantz, H.; Miller, A.J. & Esber, H.J. 1975.D9-Tetrahydrocannabinol suppression of the primary immuneresponse in rats. Journal of Toxicological and EnvironmentalHealth Vol. 1:119. Schwartzfarb, L.; Needle, N. & Chavez-Chase, M. 1974.Dose-related inhibition of leukocyte migration by marijuana andD9 tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology Vol.14:35-41. Silverstein, M.J. & Lessin, P.J. 1974. Normal skin testresponses in chronic marijuana users. Science Vol. 186:740-741. Smith, S.; Harris, L.; Uwaydah, L. & Munson, A. 1978.Structure-activity relationships of natural and syntheticcannabinoids in suppression of humoral and cell-mediatedimmunity. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental TherapeuticsVol. 207:165-170. Watson, E.S.; Murphy, J.D. & Turner, C.E. 1983. Allergenicproperties of naturally occurring cannabinoids. Journal ofPharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics Vol. 72: 954-955. White, S.C.; Brin, S.C. & Janicki, B.W. 1975.Mitogen-induced blastogenic responses of lymphocytes frommarihuana smokers. Science Vol. 188:71 71. Zimmerman, S.; Zimmerman, A.M.; Cameron, I.L. & Laurence,H.L. 1977. D9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol, and cannabinoleffects on the immune response of mice. Pharmacology Vol.15:10-23. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-20IA087-000627-B015-40http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/meduse.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051236 text/html 97249HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:12:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:26 GMTContent-length: 97031 Medical Uses of Illicit Drugs by Dr. Lester Grinspoon andJames Bakalar Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Medical Uses of Illicit Drugs by Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalar INTRODUCTION Most of the psychoactive drugs banned or severely restrictedby law in modern industrial societies have had significantmedical uses at some places and times. In the case of naturalplant drugs like opium, coca, cannabis, mescaline, andpsilocybin, this medical history usually reaches back thousandsof years and through a variety of cultures. The general tendencyhas been to restrict the uses of these drugs as their dangers aremore strongly emphasized and substitutes become available.Although the trend toward greater precision in the use of drugsand greater concern for safety is a medical advance, there is adanger that legal and social restrictions will prevent therealization of some genuine medical potential. As we suggest inthis chapter, establishing the balance is a difficult processthat has not yet been worked out adequately. (The use of illicitdrugs also raises other issues, such as individual freedom ofchoice, that are outside the scope of this essay.) Different drugs are assigned to different social categories indifferent cultures. The spectrum includes magic, religion,medicine, recreation, disease, vice, crime, and madness. inmodern industrial societies, we put great emphasis on keepingthese categories separated, and that is one reason whypsychoactive drugs are so difficult for us to deal with. Forindustrial societies, medicine or therapy is one thing, funanother, religious ritual still another-an attitude reflected inseparate formal and informal institutions. The distinctions amongmagic, religion, and medicine have not always been so clear as wemake them, or at least profess to make them. The words health andholiness have a common root meaning "whole." Inpreindustrial societies medical diagnosis and prognosis have anaura of the occult, something resembling divination, and diseaseis usually considered an instrument of gods or evil spirits. By the early nineteenth century, healers in Europe and in theUnited States no longer attributed illness to spirits orconsciously identified the power of drugs as magical. Thescientific revolution had convinced physicians that most diseaseshad physical and chemical causes, but a medical science createdin the image of physics remained only a hope. This uncertainsituation, together with the growth of manufacturing, capitalistentrepreneurship, and the spirit of liberal individualism, madethe nineteenth century a great age of self-medication andcompeting medical authorities. The patent medicine industrytherefore flowered in the late nineteenth century United States.Many of the proprietary medicines contained psychoactivedrugs-alcohol, opium, cocaine, or cannabis. Orthodox physiciansused them extensively as well; as late as 1910, morphine was thefourth most commonly used drug, and alcohol was the fifth. IThese drugs were not specific cures for specific diseases, andlittle was known of their mechanism of action, but they providedrelief from suffering in varied situations. They were the classicpanaceas. Opium, alcohol, or cocaine, like faith in somepharmacologically inactive proprietary nostrum, actually reducedthe pain while nature took its course, often toward a restorationof health. It was a familiar fact that psychoactive drugs, like moststrong medicine, could also be powerfully poisonous. Alternative,often synthetic drugs, with less apparent abuse potential, weredeveloped in the late nineteenth century, and consciousness ofthe dangers of the familiar natural drugs became more intense.Problems were magnified by the isolation of drug substances inpure form and the development of such technologies as thehypodermic syringe. But the public and medical professionals alsobegan to mistrust psychoactive drugs because of theirindeterminate and apparently uncontrollable powers. Alcohol, forexample, lost its status as a medicine in the first two decadesof the twentieth century. Psychoactive drugs had been used too freely in the nineteenthcentury, and often the distinction between use for health and usefor pleasure was not carefully made. This ambiguity now began toseem dangerous, just as the primitive ambiguity between healthand holiness had long been obsolete. Taking opium to relax orcocaine to feel vigorous would no longer be regarded as a cure ortreatment. The common man's right to make choices about thesesubstances (even, for a time, alcohol) was repudiated. Thegovernment and organized medicine took control over theirmanufacture and distribution, carefully restricting their medicaluses and rejecting almost all other uses. This was part of theprocess by which nineteenth century liberal capitalismtransformed itself into a more "orderly" statecorporate system; at the same time, the organized medical andpharmaceutical professions and the larger drug companiesconsolidated their power. In what is now known as the ProgressiveEra, the Pure Food and Drug Act, the Harrison Narcotic Act, andthe Volstead Act were as much characteristic legislation as theFederal Reserve Act. The impulse to clean up society and reduce disorder washostile to free self-medication and chaotic small-scaleentrepreneurial competition. Professional hygiene required newstandards for medical and pharmaceutical practice, andintellectual hygiene required clear and enforceable categoriesfor psychoactive drugs. Changes in medicine itself were alsoimportant. Synthetic chemistry, experimental physiology, andbacteriology advanced. The promise of a materialist medicinebased on the recognition of specific agents for specific diseasesseemed about to be fulfilled. Psychoactive drugs, with theirnonspecific and merely palliative effects, became more suspect. The system established during the Progressive Era haspersisted until the present. As the medical and alliedprofessions expand, divide, and send out new branches, theyincorporate more and more social functions. This has sometimesbeen called "moral entrepreneurship" or "medicalimperialism." More recently, the right of medicalprofessionals to interpret the meaning of psychoactive drug usehas been challenged by scholars and social critics as well asillicit drug users. In some cases they have advocated an openlyreligious conception of psychoactive drug use, a recommendationthat we apply the standards of preindustrial cultures. Thepractical merit of this idea may be dubious, but it does raisetwo interesting issues: the dangers of technological advance andthe protective function of ritual. Technical advances in science and manufacturing have increasedthe danger of drug abuse by producing chemicals in pure form andpermitting their production on a vast scale. On the other hand,these products of modern industry have powers commensurate withtheir dangers: the face of Dr. Jekyll as well as Mr. Hyde. Itcould be argued that in modern industrial societies the medicalprofession has to provide the same kind of ritual orquasi-religious context that makes drug use relatively safe inprimitive cultures. The priestly role of doctors in prescribingoccasions for drug use and warning against possession by thedemons in these drugs may sometimes seem arrogant, but it isdoubtful whether nineteenth century individualism or a return topreindustrial cultural and technological forms would be better,even if they were possible. Physicians are now in a good position to examine rationallyhow and when to use their authority in controlling psychoactivedrugs. They do not have to regard the complex powers of thesedrugs as a challenge to their own domination of territory theyhave legitimately staked out. Psychoactive drugs are still animportant part of the medical armamentarium, although most ofthose in use today are synthetic. The doctrine of specificetiology, based on infectious and dietary deficiency diseases, isthe source of modern medicine's great triumphs, and yet itremains inadequate. For the vaguely defined functional problemsthat still account for many visits to doctors, we often stillhave no clear explanations and no better remedies than drugs thataffect the mind. This situation naturally causes much unease.Doctors are accused by lay people and accuse one another of usingpills to resolve problems of living that demand more complex anddifficult adjustments. These fears are reasonable. On the otherhand, there remains a large area in which diseases and problemsof living overlap. What a doctor does in prescribing atranquilizer is not always different in a fundamental way fromwhat lay persons do in prescribing a beer or marijuana cigarettefor themselves. Twentieth century societies have kept increasing governmentcontrol of therapeutic drugs on the ground that authoritativeknowledge about their efficacy and safety makes free individualchoice illusory. Psychoactive substances used as pleasure drugswere the first to be restricted, but all prescription medicinesnow have to go through an elaborate procedure of testing andcertification before they are approved for medical use. Of allfederal drug laws, only the Pure Food and Drug Act (1906) wasdesigned to encourage free choice by consumers, because it wasaimed at simple fraud-false statements about the contents of thepackage. Since the passage of the Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act of1938, the power to decide the availability of most drugs hasgradually been transferred, first from consumers to doctors andthen from doctors to the government. Before allowing a drug onthe market, the federal government must now judge whether it iseffective as well as whether it is safe. Although most drugs are now illicit except when taken byprescription, the common understanding of the term "illicitdrugs" includes only psychoactive drugs used for pleasure,most of which are covered by the federal criminal provisions ofthe Controlled Substances Act of 1970 and similar state laws. Itwould be impossible to discuss all of them here. Some are amongthe most commonly used drugs and have a variety of medicalapplications-notably the benzodiazepine tranquilizers, thebarbiturates, and the synthetic and natural opioids. We willconcentrate here on four classes of drugs that have much morelimited medical acceptability. All four are placed in the twomost restricted schedules under the Controlled Substances Act.Cocaine and amphetamines have currently accepted medical uses;marijuana and psychedelic drugs do not. We will explore the pastand present, potential and actual, experimental and established,legal and illegitimate therapeutic uses of these drugs. COCA AND COCAINE Cocaine is an alkaloid extracted from the leaves of the shrubErythroxylon coca, which has long been cultivated in Bolivia andPeru as a stimulant and for medicinal purposes. For thousands ofyears, inhabitants of the Peruvian and Bolivian highlands and thewestern Amazon region have been mixing coca leaves with ash orlime, putting the wad in a cheek, and letting the juice trickleinto their stomachs. In many parts of the Amazon and the Andestoday, coca is the everyday stimulant drug, used more or less ascoffee, tea, chewing tobacco, and khat are used in other areas ofthe world. In one study of a mountain village in Peru, coca was found tobe the standard remedy for symptoms of hunger and cold and fortwo folk illnesses: el soka, a condition of weakness, fatigue,and general malaise; and el fiero, a chronic wasting illness.Coca was also the treatment of choice for stomach upset andstomachache and for colic, or severe gastrointestinal distressincluding diarrhea, cramps, and nausea. 2 In the form of leaf powder or tea, coca is taken fortoothache, ulcers, rheumatism, asthma, and even malaria. Coca teais often served to tourists arriving in hotels and inns in thehigh Andes as a remedy for the nausea, dizziness, and headache ofsoroche (altitude sickness). Unlike other stimulants, coca isalso a local anesthetic. The juice of the leaf can be applied tosoothe eye irritations or gargled for hoarseness and sore throat.Coca leaves are also used as a topical anesthetic for mouthsores. Coca contains minerals, vitamin C, and some B vitamins,and it is sometimes said to be an important source of thesenutrients in the Andean diet. An American physician, Andrew Weil, has recently been tryingto revive interest in the therapeutic uses of coca, which hebelieves have been neglected because of the medical profession'sfascination and subsequent disillusionment with the pure alkaloidcocaine. He has found coca useful in the symptomatic relief ofindigestion, gastritis, constipation, motion sickness,laryngitis, and other ailments. He believes that it could serveas a substitute for coffee in persons who find that theirstomachs are upset by that stimulant. He also proposes its use asan appetite-reducing drug and as an energizer for physical labor,and he suggests that it might serve as a relatively safesubstitute in treating amphetamine and cocaine dependence. Hepoints out that coca differs from cocaine in several ways. Itcontains a number of related alkaloids rather than a single one,and it is less subject to abuse because it enters the body by thenormal gastrointestinal route rather than intranasally,intravenously, or through the lungs. He believes that coca mightbest be administered in the form of a chewing gum. Ever since the Spanish conquest there has been controversyabout the health effects of habitual coca use. The evidence isunreliable, contradictory, and heavily colored by the politicaland social biases of observers. A number of studies havesuggested that coca chewers are apathetic, subnormal inintelligence, or subject to various physical illnesses becausethey are weakened by the drug.' But even these results areambiguous and inconclusive.' The biggest problem is separatingcause from effect. If coca users in the high Andes seemundernourished, demoralized, and unhealthy, that is easilyexplained by the miserable physical and social conditions underwhich many of them live-conditions for which coca use apparentlygives them some relief. It is significant that many Indians inthe Amazon who use coca are reported to be strong and healthy.'In any case, the people of the Andes themselves, including thosewho do not use coca, usually reject the suggestion that it is adrug problem, a threat to health, or a danger to their community. Cocaine was isolated from the coca leaf in 1860. Throughoutthe late nineteenth century, both coca itself (that is, anextract from the leaf including all of its alkaloids) and thepure chemical cocaine were popular as medicines in Europe andNorth America. In 1863 Angelo Mariani, a Corsican chemist,patented a preparation of coca extract and wine, which he calledVin Mariani; it became one of the most popular prescriptionmedicines of the era, and was used by such celebrities as ThomasEdison, Ulysses Grant, Henrik Ibsen, Pope Leo XIII, Emile Zola,Jules Verne, and the Prince of Wales. Mariani wrote severalarticles and monographs on coca in which he combined historical,botanical, and medical information with the promotion of hiscompany's product; he could list thousands of physicians whorecommended it.' By 1878 coca was being promoted in advertisements in theUnited States for young persons suffering from shyness and as astimulant. In the same year, an American physician, W. H.Bentley, began to recommend coca as a cure for morphineaddiction. Extract of coca was admitted to the United StatesPharmacopoeia in 1882. In July 1884, Sigmund Freud published afamous paper, "On Coca," in which he recommendedcocaine or coca extract for a variety of illnesses including thesyndrome of fatigue, nervousness, and minor physical complaintsthen known as neurasthenia.' Referring to Freud's writings, theParke-Davis Company declared in its pamphlet "CocaErythroxylon and Its Derivatives": "If these claims aresubstantiated . . . [cocaine] will indeed be the most importanttherapeutic discovery of the age, the benefit of which tohumanity will be incalculable."' This article and later articles by Freud were influential, butthe rediscovery of cocaine's local anesthetic properties by hiscolleague Karl Koller proved to be of more permanent importance.Koller introduced topical cocaine in eye operations, and sooncocaine was being used in many other forms of surgery. WilliamHalsted of Johns Hopkins University invented nerve block orconduction anesthesia by injecting cocaine into nerve trunks.Soon regional anesthesia and spinal anesthesia were introduced.It was not until the early twentieth century that synthetic localanesthetics without the stimulant properties of cocaine weredeveloped. Meanwhile, cocaine was triumphing as what would now bedisparagingly called a panacea. It was recommended for exhaustiveand irritative conditions of the central nervous system,seasickness, trigeminal neuralgia, hay fever, head colds, andwhat was then called "catarrh." In 1901 the Americanphysician W. Golden Mortimer published an encyclopedic volume,History of Coca, in which he recommended coca wine, coca extract,or cocaine for a great variety of purposes. In an appendix hecited the responses to a letter he had sent to "a selectedset" of more than 5,000 physicians asking for theirobservations on coca. Of the 1,206 replying, 369 said that theyhad used coca in their own practices. They commonly observed thatit increased appetite, raised blood pressure, stimulatedcirculation, strengthened the heart, improved digestion,stimulated the mind, and worked as an aphrodisiac. The mostpopular therapeutic uses were for exhaustion, overwork, andneurasthenia. Few thought there was a dangerous tendency to forma coca habit.10 One of the most popular drinks containing cocaine wasCocaCola, first concocted in 1886 by a Georgia pharmacist. TheCoca-Cola Company was founded in 1892, and throughout the 1890sCocaCola was advertised as a headache remedy and stimulant aswell as an enjoyable drink. In 1903 coca extract was removed fromCoca-Cola and replaced with caffeine. A de-cocainized extract ofthe coca leaf is still used for flavoring. In the medical use of coca and cocaine, it is hard to separatethe central stimulant from the digestive, respiratory, and localanesthetic effects. A singer or actor who drank Mariani's winecould hardly know how much of the improvement he or she noticedwas caused by local anesthesia or constriction of blood vesselsin the throat and how much by euphoria and a feeling of mastery.As for stomach and intestinal problems, the gastrointestinalsystem is probably the most common site of psychosomaticsymptoms. The use of coca or cocaine in convalescence fromlong-lasting debilitating diseases represents a similarcombination of central and peripheral effects. Abuse and dependence became problems almost as soon as cocainewas introduced into medicine. Cocaine dependence first appearedin morphine addicts who took the cocaine cure recommended byBentley and Freud. Halsted, the inventor of nerve blockanesthesia, appears to have cured himself of a craving forcocaine by taking up morphine and paying the price of physicaladdiction. In his last paper on cocaine, published in 1887, Freudadmitted that the cocaine habit could be more dangerous to healththan morphine addiction." Later in life he seldom referredto cocaine. The growing fear of cocaine changed attitudes toward coca.Advocates of coca then began to fight a rear-guard action in itsdefense, insisting that coca never caused the kinds of problemsthat were ruining the reputation of cocaine, and even saying thatthe effects of coca might be caused primarily by other chemicalsin the leaf. But by 1900 public and medical opinion had begun toturn against both coca and cocaine. In 1906 the Pure Food andDrug Act banned food and drinks containing cocaine, and furtherlegal restrictions soon followed, culminating in the Harrison Actof 1914, which regulated cocaine as well as opiates. Cocaine andthe coca leaf were still prescribed occasionally through the1920s for many of the same purposes as in the late nineteenthcentury, although criminal laws and other restraints made it lesseasily available. But its use gradually declined until, by 1930,it was rarely being used except as a surgical anesthetic and anillicit pleasure drug. Today cocaine is used in medicine mainly as a topicalanesthetic in eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery and fiber tubeoptical examinations of the upper respiratory and digestivetracts. It has a combination of properties that cannot beduplicated by any of the synthetic local anesthetics: intenseconstriction of blood vessels (important whenever bleeding mustbe prevented), long duration of anesthesia (one hour), and lowtoxicity. Cocaine is no longer used in infiltration anesthesia(subcutaneous injection), in nerve block anesthesia, or in spinalanesthesia. 12 Recently topical application of cocaine to theupper palate has been recommended as a way of aborting the severepain of cluster headaches. 13 Other medical uses are rare. Cocaine is an ingredient inBrompton's mixture, a preparation used in Great Britain fortreating the chronic pain of terminal cancer, but controlledstudies at a hospice in England have suggested that the cocainein this drink provides no advantage over morphine alone."Cocaine was never tested seriously as a treatment for severedepression, but this idea is unlikely to be revived because thepharmacologically similar amphetamines have proved a failure forthat purpose. Today substitutes have been found for mosttherapeutic uses of cocaine, and in most cases its dangers arebelieved to outweigh its potential benefits. Despite the recentand so far uncertain signs of reviving interest, coca and cocainewill never again be so widely used in medicine as they once were. Legally, the coca leaf and all its derivatives containingcocaine are classified under the Controlled Substances Act asSchedule 11 drugs: This means that there is a currently acceptedmedical use but also a high potential for abuse and dependence.Schedule 11 drugs may be prescribed under special restrictions;hospitals and pharmacies are required to keep them in a lockedplace. AMPHETAMINES Amphetamines and amphetamine congeners are a large group ofchemically related central stimulant drugs; among the best knownare dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), methamphetamine (Methedrine)and methylphenidate (Ritalin). Racemic amphetamine sulfate(Benzedrine) was first synthesized in 1887, but it was notintroduced as a medicine until 1932, when the Benzedrine inhalerbecame available over the counter in drugstores as a treatmentfor nasal congestion and asthma. In late 1937 the new drug wasintroduced in tablet form to treat narcolepsy andpostencephalitic parkinsonism. It was also recommended fordepression and to heighten energy and capacity for work. Soonamphetamine was receiving sensational publicity with numerousreferences to "brain," " pep," and"superman" pills. Even when phrased as warnings, thesereports served mainly to arouse curiosity. But amphetamine use spread mainly because the medicalprofession was so enthusiastic about the drugs. Many doctorsregarded amphetamines as remedies with extraordinary scope,efficacy, and safety. By 1943 more than half the sales ofBenzedrine went to fill prescriptions written for people whowanted to lose weight, obtain a temporary lift in spirits, orstay awake for extended periods. In 1946 W. R. Bett asserted thatamphetamine had thirty-nine clinical uses, including treatmentfor epilepsy, postencephalitic parkinsonism, schizophrenia,alcoholism, behavior problems in children, migraine, muscularrigidity and spasm, head injuries, dysmenorrhea, andhypotension.15 Although not all these uses were generally adopted, by 1971the total production of amphetamines had reached the equivalentof more than 10 billion 5 mg tablets. Until 1971, amphetamineswere sold freely over the counter without prescription in theform of inhalers such as the Dristan inhaler. They were also easyto obtain in the form of pills, capsules, or injectable liquids,with or without a visit to the doctor for a prescription. TheArmy used amphetamines heavily during the Vietnam War, andamphetamine abuse became a problem among the troops. 16 From themid-1960s on there was also a growth in both illicit bathroomlaboratory synthesis of amphetamines and black market diversionof legitimately produced drugs. Since 1970 use and abuse of amphetamines have declined becauseof legal restrictions and a better understanding of theirdangers, which include weight loss, psychosis, severe dependence,and depression on withdrawal. It is as though the career ofamphetamines from 1940 to 1970 recapitulated the career ofcocaine in the late nineteenth century. Not having learned fromhistory, we were condemned to repeat it. Although chemicallydifferent from cocaine, the amphetamines have similar stimulanteffects and similar liabilities. After the first flush ofenthusiasm, the range of accepted medical uses for amphetaminesnarrowed, just as it had for cocaine a generation earlier. Theonly present widely accepted medical uses for amphetamines are intreating narcolepsy and attention deficit disorder. They areoccasionally used as an adjunct to tricyclic antidepressants inthe treatment of depression. They are also still prescribed forweight loss, but this practice is becoming less and less commonbecause of wellfounded doubts about their safety andeffectiveness. The amphetamines used in medicine are placed in Schedule 11under the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 as later amended.Like cocaine, they are regarded as drugs having a currentlyaccepted medical use but a high potential for abuse, which maylead to severe psychological or physical dependence. An applicantto manufacture such drugs must register with the attorneygeneral. The attorney general establishes production quotas, andthere are special restrictions on prescriptions. Weight Loss Until the early 1970s, amphetamines were overwhelmingly thedrug of choice in treating overweight by appetite reduction.Their anorectic effect is apparently secondary to the stimulatingeffect. Controlled studies have found that amphetamines increaseweight loss, at least in the first few months, by making it easyto adhere to a diet. But the user rapidly grows tolerant to theanorectic effect, and it can rarely be sustained more than a fewmonths without an increase in the dose. 17 It also appears thatmost patients, once they stop using amphetamines or becometolerant to them, go back to their former eating habits andregain the weight they have lost. The favorable results of clinical studies on the appetitereducing effects of amphetamines must also be balanced by aconsideration of adverse effects, including the danger of abuse.Even if the intention is to expose the patient to amphetamineonly for a short period, compulsive eaters who have a need forconstant gratification may find it hard to put aside a medicationthat makes them feel good. They may also discover, when they nolonger have the magic potion that protects them from themselves,that a psychological vacuum has developed that needs to be filledwith food. Appetite is governed by physiology, habit, and emotionalstate. Tension and depression, inability to delay gratification,and the substitution of food for other forms of pleasure, all ofwhich are common in cases of overweight, increase the danger ofdrug dependency. A drug that reduces appetite without requiringany solution to emotional problems may seem to be a reasonablealternative at first, but the short-term weight loss may causepatients to avoid the issue of changing their eating and exercisehabits. (The same problem, of course, often occurs when drugs areadministered for other emotional problems and habitual behavior.) It is doubtful whether amphetamines should be used for weightreduction under any circumstances. All anorectic drugs, andespecially amphetamines, have a limited value in the treatment ofobesity; because of their potential for dependence and abuse,they should be used with extreme care, if at all. Theprescription of amphetamines for weight loss has properlydeclined in the last decade. Narcolepsy Narcolepsy, first described ninety years ago, is a disordermarked by an uncontrollable desire for sleep or sudden attacks ofsleep during the daytime. It usually begins in adolescence, andit never completely remits. Narcolepsy is considered rare, but itis not clear just how common it is, and in any case, it is acomplicated problem. It may involve either REM (dreaming) sleepor non-REM sleep, and it may be complicated by cataplexy (loss ofmuscle tone), sleep paralysis, or hypnagogic hallucinations.Tricyclic antidepressants are used to treat these symptoms, butthey do not eliminate the sleep attacks themselves. There is noevidence of brain pathology in narcolepsy, but heredity may be afactor. Amphetamine was first introduced as a treatment for narcolepsyin 1935, and one or another amphetamine congener continues to bethe drug treatment of choice. Dextroamphetamine ormethylphenidate may be necessary for a narcoleptic person whosework is dangerous, but most victims of narcolepsy can performsatisfactorily without drugs if they take at least one nap a day.The risk of dependence, toxic reactions, and psychosis must beweighed against the advantages of drug-induced wakefulness. Depression Depression is probably the most common complaint of adults.Its symptoms are both physical and emotional: loss of appetiteand energy, insomnia, fatigue, difficulty in concentration,feelings of worthlessness and self-reproach, thoughts of deathand suicide, anxiety and irritability. Amphetamines were one ofthe first classes of drugs to be used in the treatment ofdepression, beginning in 1936. Early studies sometimes led toexcessive enthusiasm, because they were not controlled and theclinical symptoms of depression show a strong tendency tospontaneous remission. Even in the early stages, amphetamineswere generally found to be ineffective in severe depressions andin treating the depressed phase of bipolar (manicdepressive)illness. Early studies of less serious depressions demonstratedsome effectiveness but raised questions about possible dangers.Even at that time researchers mentioned the possibility ofincreasing the risk of suicide by heightening energy andmobility. Suicide attempts may also occur during the severedepression that sometimes follows withdrawal. Nevertheless, aslate as 1958, C. D. Leake strongly recommended amphetamines fordepression in an authoritative book. 18 As the dangers of insomnia and anxiety became more apparent,interest developed in using amphetamines together with sedativessuch as the barbiturate sodium amytal. Each drug, it was thought,would counteract the unfortunate side effects of the other.Although doubt soon developed about the effectiveness of thesecombinations, they were marketed for years under various tradenames and soon became sources of a new kind of drug abuse. By the 1950s, new amphetamine congeners with fewer sideeffects, such as methylphenidate, had been developed, but theyproved to be no more effective in treating depression. Eventuallytwo new groups of drugs, the monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitorsand the tricyclics, revolutionized the field. Tricyclicderivatives, along with lithium for manic-depressive illness, arenow believed to be the most effective drug treatment fordepression. Controlled studies comparing tricyclicantidepressants to amphetamines or placebo have foundamphetamines ineffective in the treatment of all types ofdepression." But amphetamine-related stimulants maypotentiate the effects of the tricyclics by slowing theirmetabolism in the body; and they may also evoke an immediateresponse that encourages the depressed patient to keep taking atricyclic whose effects do not become apparent for a few weeks.20 A few other uses for amphetamines in the treatment ofdepression are still occasionally recommended. Methylphenidatehas been proposed to treat depression in patients who aremedically ill or recovering from surgery and therefore unable totolerate the side effects of tricyclic antidepressants. This isespecially true of heart patients and elderly people with organicbrain disease." Amphetamines taken intravenously incombination with morphine have also been recommended in thetreatment of postoperative pain." in some studiesamphetamines seem to be effective in obsessive-compulsivedisorder, but other drugs are available for this purpose aswell." Drugs should not be used as a substitute for reassurance andexploration of the patient's concerns in cases of milddepression, fatigue, or anxiety. If amphetamines are used torelieve symptoms that are often indistinguishable from thetensions of everyday life, they may make the patient feel goodbut they will only mask the underlying problem. A patientcomplaining of fatigue, nervousness, anxiety, or insomnia may beasking for a kind of short-term psychotherapy from a personbelieved to be trustworthy. When a doctor responds with astimulant pill, he or she may be depriving the patient of aservice that should be provided and may perpetuate a pattern ofdrug use as a substitute for coping with the problems of dailylife. Fortunately, most physicians have come to recognize this,and amphetamines are no longer commonly used in treatingdepression. Attention Deficit Disorder The most controversial remaining medical use of amphetaminesis the treatment of the syndrome known variously ashyperactivity, hyperkinesis, minimal brain dysfunction, and, mostrecently, attention deficit disorder. It is probably the mostcommon behavioral disorder of childhood; boys are affected fiveto ten times as often as girls. The main symptoms are extremephysical restlessness (hyperactive children move more, even insleep) and short attention span; other symptoms are poorcoordination, intolerance for frustration, aggressive andimpulsive behavior, and learning disabilities. The problemusually begins in infancy, but it becomes especially troublesomein the classroom. Hyperactive children do not usually outgrowtheir problems, although the symptoms may change. In adolescencethey are often academic underachievers with poor social skillsand low self-esteem, who may become juvenile delinquents. Many ofthe symptoms also persist in adult life. Attention deficit disorder overlaps in its symptoms withdisorderly behavior and more serious developmental disorders ofchildhood. Symptoms found in hyperactive children are also foundin some children with known brain injuries and are oftenassociated with neurological signs of central nervous systemmalfunction. The term " minimal brain dysfunction"suggests an organic cause, but so far no specificallycharacteristic neurological disorder or brain pathology has beenfound. The current term "attention deficit disorder"suggests that the problem reflects the way activity is organizedin response to social demands as much as it involves physicalmotion. Hyperactivity is probably a mixture of symptoms withdifferent origins in different children; in many cases a geneticfactor may be involved. The use of amphetamines in treating hyperactive children beganin 1937, when Charles Bradley observed that it produced strikingeffects on a number of schoolchildren showing various kinds ofdisturbance. Their problems, aside from hyperactive behavior,included specific learning disabilities, aggressivenessassociated with epilepsy, and schizoid withdrawal. The drugreduced their motor activity and impulsive behavior, improvedtheir attention, diminished mood swings, increased their interestin the surroundings, made them less anxious and irritable, andimproved their school achievement. 24 Studies on the amphetaminetreatment of disturbed children with a variety of diagnosesreported a substantial improvement in behavior and schoolperformance as judged by parents, teachers, and caregivers .25 There is still much confusion about what symptoms respond toamphetamines. Some studies suggest that children who show signsof a neurological disorder do better on amphetamines than otherrestless children who do not show such signs. Others find thatamphetamines contribute to relieving the symptoms of disturbedchildren in general, whether or not there is evidence of alearning disorder or brain injury.26 The apparent calming effectof these stimulant drugs on hyperactivity in children has beencalled paradoxical, with the implication that the effect isspecifically related to the disorder. But it turns out thatsingle doses of amphetamine affect normal boys the same way theyaffect hyperkinetic boys-increasing attention span and reducingmotor activity.27 Amphetamines have serious limitations and dangers. The resultsof treatment are more variable and less spectacular than they mayappear. Amphetamines probably do not help hyperkinetic preschoolchildren or improve specific learning disorders such as readingproblems .28 The symptoms usually return when the drug iswithdrawn, and in any case its benefits seem to occur mainly inthe first few months; long-term treatment does not lead to abetter outcome.29 Attention problems, impulsiveness, and academicfailure persist in adolescence among children diagnosed ashyperactive whether or not they have taken amphetamines. Some hyperactive children even get worse on amphetamines; inone study, 16 percent of the children showed an exaggeration ofthe original symptoms." A few serious adverse reactions havealso been reported, including an amphetamine psychosis andmovement disorders." Even children who are benefited byamphetamines may suffer from loss of appetite, dizziness, pallor,and digestive troubles. These symptoms usually diminish ordisappear after the first week, and they can usually be minimizedby adjusting the dose. (Methylphenidate has fewer toxicside-effects than do other forms of amphetamine.) A more seriousproblem is that some amphetaminetreated hyperactive children failto achieve expected gains in weight and height. The effect isstatistically significant but generally not large. It might beneutralized by the spurt in growth that begins in adolescence;the evidence is not yet available. In any case, the growth ofchildren taking stimulant drugs must be carefullymonitored." For educational psychologists who found that many disturbedchildren did not respond to psychotherapy and for educatorsinterested in the relationship between learning disabilities andbehavior problems, amphetamines have suggested new approaches totreatment. But children should not be given drugs as soon as theybecome restless or unruly. Often the problem lies in the schoolor home as much as in the child. Children need an educationalenvironment that will help them come to grips with their problemswithout using pharmacological shortcuts unless they areabsolutely necessary. Teachers, parents, and physicians shouldtry other methods before resorting to amphetamines. Physiciansmust be certain that their diagnoses are accurate. At one timeamphetamines may have been used excessively in treatinghyperactivity because of imprecise diagnosis and overzealouspromotion by drug companies and educators, but it is ourimpression that physicians and educators now have a betterunderstanding of the limitations as well as the advantages ofamphetamines and are using them with more care. PSYCHEDELIC DRUGS The psychedelics or hallucinogens are a large group of drugs,some natural and some synthetic, with a variety of chemicalstructures. The best known are mescaline, derived from the peyotecactus; psilocybin, found in over a hundred species of mushrooms;and the synthetic drug lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), which ischemically related to certain alkaloids found in morning gloryseeds, the lysergic acid amides. This class of drugs alsoincludes the natural substances harmine, harmaline, ibogaine, anddimethyltryptamine (DMT), as well as a large number of syntheticdrugs that are chemically described as tryptamines ormethoxylated amphetamines. A few of these are diethyltryptarnine(DET), 3,4,-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), and2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine (DOM, also known as STP). The natural hallucinogens have long been used by preindustrialcultures, especially in Mexico and South America, for magical,religious, and healing purposes, and today the peyote cactus isthe sacrament of the Native American Church, a religiousorganization with branches in all western states of the UnitedStates. Peyote became known in industrial society toward the endof the nineteenth century, and many other plant hallucinogenshave been discovered since. LSD was first synthesized in 1938 andits psychoactive properties were discovered in 1943; since thenmany other synthetic psychedelic drugs have been developed inlaboratories. The psychedelic drugs differ somewhat in their subjectiveeffects and greatly in the effective dosage. LSD is the mostpotent and produces the widest range of effects; it can be takenas a prototype. Although the response to LSD varies withpersonality, expectations, and setting, it almost always producesprofound changes in perception, mood, and thinking. Perceptionsbecome unusually brilliant and intense; normally unnoticeddetails capture the attention and ordinary things are seen withwonder. Synesthesia, changes in body image, and alterations intime and space perception are common. Vivid dreamlike imageryappears before closed eyes. True hallucinations are rare, butvisual distortions and pseudohallucinations are common. Emotionsbecome unusually intense and may change abruptly and often.Suggestibility is greatly heightened. The experience is suffusedby a heightened sense of reality and significance, and it oftenproduces feelings of religious and philosophical insight. Thesense of self is greatly changed, sometimes to the point ofmerging with the external world, separation from the body, ordissolution in mystical ecstasy. The most common adverse effect of LSD and related drugs is the"bad trip," which occasionally produces a truepsychotic reaction. Another common effect is the flashback, a spontaneoustransitory recapitulation of drug-induced experience in adrug-free state. Prolonged adverse reactions, which areconsiderably less common, include anxiety reactions, depressivereactions, and psychoses. They are most likely to occur inschizoid and prepsychotic personalities with barely stable egoswho cannot cope with the mind alterations produced by the drugtrip. There is a close resemblance between people hospitalizedfor LSD reactions and those hospitalized for psychoses notproduced by drugs." A persistent issue has been possible genetic damage and birthdefects. The available evidence suggests that LSD produces nochromosome damage in reproductive cells of a kind that is likelyto cause birth defects; the same is true of other psychedelicdrugs to the extent that they have been tested. There is also noevidence that LSD is teratogenic in human users at normal doses. Ever since experimentation with psychedelic drugs began, someusers and psychotherapists have maintained that a singlepsychedelic experience or several such experiences can providereligious insight, heightened creative capacity, psychologicalinsight, or relief from neurotic symptoms. From 1950 to themid-1960s, psychedelic drugs especially LSD, mescaline, andpsilocybin-were used extensively in experimental psychiatry. Thedrugs were studied as a chemical model for natural psychoses andalso used extensively in psychotherapy. More than a thousandclinical papers were published discussing forty thousandpatients; there were several dozen books and six internationalconferences on psychedelic drug therapy. It was recommended atone time or another for a wide variety of problems, includingalcoholism, obsessional neurosis, and childhood autism. Beginningin the mid-1960s, with the increase of illicit use, it becamedifficult to obtain the drugs or get funding for research, andprofessional interest declined. There is now only one legallyapproved project in the United States involving the therapeuticuse of psychedelic drugs; it is located at the MarylandPsychiatric Research Institute in Baltimore. Maybe those twodecades of psychedelic research will eventually be written off asa mistake that has only historical interest, but it might bewiser to see if something can be salvaged from them. One source of the therapeutic interest was the belief of someexperimental subjects after taking a psychedelic drug that theywere less depressed, anxious, and guilty, and moreself-accepting, tolerant, or sensually alert. Interest also arosefrom the possibility of making therapeutic use of the powerfulpsychedelic experiences of regression, abreaction, intensetransference, and symbolic drama to improve the results ofpsychodynamic psychotherapy. Two kinds of therapy emerged, onemaking use of the mystical or conversion experience and the otherexploring the unconscious in the manner of psychoanalysis.Psychedelic therapy, as the first kind was called, involved theuse of a large dose (200 micrograms of LSD or more) in a singlesession; it was thought to be potentially helpful in reformingalcoholics and criminals as well as improving the lives of normalpeople. The second type, psycholytic (literally, mind-loosening)therapy, required relatively small doses and several or even manysessions; it was used mainly for neurotic and psychosomaticdisorders. In practice, many combinations, variations, andspecial applications with some of the features of bothpsycholytic and psychedelic therapy evolved. Neurotic Disorders In a book about her LSD treatment, one woman described theresult this way: I found that in addition to being, consciously, a lovingmother and a respectable citizen, I was also, unconsciously, amurderess, a pervert, a cannibal, a sadist, and a masochist. Inthe wake of these dreadful discoveries, I lost my fear ofdentists, the clicking in my neck and throat, the arm tensions,and my dislike of clocks ticking in the bedroom. I also achievedtranscendent sexual fulfillment.... At the end of nine sessions over a period of nine weeks I wascured of my hitherto incurable frigidity, and at the end of fivemonths I felt that I had been completely reconstituted as a humanbeing. I have continued to feel that way ever since." These passages were written three years after a five-monthperiod during which this woman took LSD twenty-three times.Before that she had had four years of psychoanalysis, but it wasonly after LSD that she became convinced of the value of Freud'stheories. The literature contains a number of such impressive casehistories, but these anecdotal accounts can always be questioned;placebo effects, spontaneous recovery, special and prolongeddevotion by the therapist, and the therapist's and patient'sbiases in judging improvement must be considered. The mostserious deficiencies in psychedelic drug studies were absence ofcontrols and inadequate follow-up. And psychedelic drug effectsare so striking that it is difficult to design a double-blindstudy, in which neither the person administering the drug nor theperson taking it knows whether it is the active substance or aplacebo. No form of psychotherapy for neurotics has ever beenable to justify itself under stringent controls, and LSD therapyis no exception. Furthermore, psychiatrists did not agree about details. Shouldthe emphasis be on expression of repressed feelings or on workingthrough a transference attachment to the psychiatrist? How muchtherapy is necessary in the intervals between LSD treatments?Because of the complexity of psychedelic drug effects, there areno general answers to these questions. It appeared that LSDtreatment sometimes produced spectacular improvement in neuroticsymptoms, but no reliable formula for success was derived fromthese results. But again, in these respects psychedelic drugtherapy seems to be in no better or worse position than mostother forms of psychotherapy. Alcoholism Psychedelic therapy for alcoholism is based on the assumptionthat one overwhelming experience sometimes changes theself-destructive drinking habits of a lifetime, and the hope thatpsychedelic drugs can consistently produce such an experience. Inone reported case, a 40-year-old black, unskilled laborer wasbrought to a hospital from jail after drinking uncontrollably forten days. He had been an alcoholic for four years, and he wasalso severely anxious and depressed. He described his experiencesduring an LSD session as follows: I was afraid. I started to run, but something said "Stop!Stop!" then I felt as if ten tons had fallen from myshoulders. I prayed to the Lord. Everything looked better allaround me.... I changed my mind from alcohol toward Christ andthe rose came back into my life.... As I sat up and looked in themirror I could feel myself growing stronger. I feel now that myfamily and I are closer than ever before and I hope that ourfaith will grow forever and ever. One week later his score on a questionnaire testing neurotictraits had dropped from the 88th to the 10th percentile. Sixmonths later his psychological tests were within normal limits;he had been totally abstinent from alcohol for all that time anddespite a temporary relapse when he lost his job, he was stillsober after twelve months .36 LSD undoubtedly produces powerfuleffects on alcoholics; the question is whether they can bereliably translated into enduring change. Early studies reporteddazzling success. About 50 percent of severe chronic alcoholicstreated with a single high dose of LSD were said to be recoveredand sober a year or two later. 37 But the early studies proved tobe inadequate. When the patients were randomly assigned to drugand control groups it proved difficult to demonstrate anyadvantage for LSD treatment, even in studies conducted byadvocates of the drug .38 The problem is that many alcoholicswill improve, at least temporarily, after any treatment becauseexcessive drinking is often sporadic and periodic relapses arecommon. The alcoholic who arrives at a clinic or hospital isprobably at a low point in the cycle and has nowhere to go butup. It would be wrong to conclude that a psychedelic experiencecan never be a turning point in the life of an alcoholic. AsWilliam James said, "Religiomania is the best cure fordipsomania." Unfortunately, psychedelic experiences have thesame limitations as religious conversions. Their authenticity andemotional power are not guarantees against backsliding when theold frustrations, constraints, and emotional distress have to befaced in everyday life. Even when the revelation does seem tohave lasting effects, it might have been merely a symptom ofreadiness to change rather than a cause of change. The fact remains that there is no proven treatment foralcoholism. Where so little is known, it may not make sense to give upentirely on anything that has possibilities. In the religiousceremonies of the Native American Church, periodic use of highdoses of mescaline in the form of peyote is regarded as, amongother things, part of a treatment for alcoholism. Both theIndians themselves and outside researchers believe that those whoparticipate in the peyote ritual are more likely to abstain fromalcohol. Peyote sustains the ritual and religious principles ofthe community of believers, and these sometimes confirm andsupport an individual commitment to give up alcohol. Even federalalcoholism clinics for Indians now recognize that peyote mighthave some value." If, for whatever reasons, psychedelicdrugs work for at least some Indians some of the time, they mightalso help some non-Indian alcoholics. Dying There is a new consciousness today of the significance ofdying as part of life. As we look for ways to change the pattern,so common in chronic illness, of constantly increasing pain,anxiety, and depression, the emphasis is shifted away fromimpersonal prolongation of physical existence toward a conceptionof dying as a psychiatric crisis, or even, in older language, areligious crisis. The purpose of giving psychedelic drugs to thedying might be stated as reconciliation: reconciliation withone's past, one's family, and one's human limitations. Beginning in 1965, the experiment of providing a psychedelicexperience for the dying was pursued at Spring Grove StateHospital in Maryland and later at the Maryland PsychiatricResearch Institute. Walter Pahnke, the director of the projectfrom 1967 until 1971, was a Doctor of Divinity as well as apsychiatrist, and he first reported on his work in an article inthe Harvard Theological Review in 1969. When terminal cancerpatients received LSD or DPT after appropriate preparations,about one-third were said to have improved"dramatically," one-third improved"moderately," and one-third were unchanged; the testsof improvement were reduced tension, depression, pain, and fearof death." Later experiments with terminal cancer patients produced similar results." Therewere no control groups in these studies, and there is no certainway to separate the effects of the drug from those of the specialtherapeutic arrangements and increased attention that were partof the treatment. Nevertheless, the case histories areimpressive, and it would be interesting to renew the research;the present work at the Maryland Psychiatric Research Instituteis an attempt to do that. Complications and Dangers Like any probing psychotherapy, psychedelic drug therapypresents the danger that unconscious material will come up and beneither accepted and integrated nor totally repressed; in thatcase, symptoms will become worse. Psychosis and even suicide havebeen reported in the course of psychedelic drug treatment. On theother hand, some people who have worked with psychedelic drugsconsider them more likely to prevent suicide than to cause it,and most studies questioning psychiatrists about adversereactions to psychedelic drugs in experimental or therapeuticresearch have revealed a low rate of serious complications .42 All such studies have limitations. Some psychiatrists may haveminimized the dangers out of therapeutic enthusiasm or reluctanceto admit mistakes; some may have exaggerated the dangers underthe influence of bad publicity; long-term risks may have beenunderestimated if follow-up was inadequate. The studies provideno basis for comparison with patients who were not treated withpsychedelic drugs or not treated at all. But the fact remainsthat psychedelic drugs were used for more than fifteen years byhundreds of psychiatrists who considered them reasonably safe astherapeutic agents. Conclusion When a new kind of therapy is introduced, especially a newpsychoactive drug, events often follow a pattern of spectacularsuccess and enormous enthusiasm followed by disillusionment. Butthe rise and decline of psychedelic drug therapy took a somewhatunusual course. From the early 1960s on, the revolutionaryproclamations and religious fervor of the nonmedical advocates ofpsychedelic drugs began to evoke hostile incredulity rather thansimply the natural skeptical response to extravagant claimsbacked mainly by intense subjective experiences. Twenty yearsafter their introduction, psychedelics were pariah drugs, scornedby the medical establishment and banned by the law. In rejectingthe absurd notion that these drugs were a panacea, we have chosento treat them as entirely worthless and extraordinarilydangerous. Maybe the time has come to find an intermediateposition. If the therapeutic results have been erratic andinconsistent, that is partly because of the complexity ofpsychedelic drug effects. For the same reason, we may simply notyet have had enough time to sort out the best uses of thesedrugs. An informal kind of research continues anyway. Illicitpsychedelic drug use is an underground spring that continues tofeed the stream of interest in systematic, publicly controlledexperimentation. Ironically, the illicit drug use that was one ofthe reasons for the interruption of legitimate research nowserves to keep alive efforts aimed at resuming that research.Interest also persists among some psychologists andpsychiatrists. We quote a letter written in 1979 by HanscarlLeuner of the University of Gottingen: Though in several European countries therapists in this fieldcould apply for licenses to continue using the drugs, thegovernment authorities over the years started to make thingsdifficult.... I myself was convinced that science does not dependon ideologies. This seems to be an error. The continuation ofpsycholytic therapy during the last years led us to newtechniques and conceptions. The results in practical therapy areeven more convincing than before. We would like not to stop doingpsycholytic therapy. Optimistically, I hope that in time we canpublish these results. For so many patients there is a tremendousneed for deep probing and intensity in psychotherapy whichpsycholytic and related therapies could fill." There are now dozens of known psychedelic drugs, some of themsynthesized only in the last twenty years. Few have been testedseriously in human beings. Their effects are sometimes differentfrom those of LSD and other familiar substances. Thesedifferences may be significant for the study of the human mindand for psychotherapy, but we cannot analyze them properlywithout more controlled human research. A Chilean psychiatrist,Claudio Naranjo, has pioneered in the use of psychedelic drugsthat do not produce the same degree of perceptual and emotionalchange as does LSD. He has worked especially with MDA and arelated shorter-acting amphetamine, MMDA, which give a heightenedcapacity for introspection and intimacy along with a temporaryfreedom from anxiety and depression.44 These and related drugsmight be useful in marital counseling, in diagnostic interviews,and in helping patients decide whether they want to go throughthe process of psychotherapy. 45 It is a misunderstanding to regard psychedelic drug therapy asa form of chemotherapy, like giving lithium to manic patients.Patients are not maintained for a long time on psychedelic drugs,and these drugs do not produce dependence or addiction. On theother hand, the claims of psychedelic drug therapy are subject tothe same doubts as those of psychoanalysis or religiousconversions. The mixture of mystical and transcendental claimswith therapeutic ones is an aspect of psychedelic drug therapytroubling to our culture. The pronouncements of drug enthusiastsare sometimes too much like religious testimonials to pleaseeither psychiatrists or priests and ministers. Preindustrialcultures seem to tolerate more ambiguity in this matter, andthere is now a growing interest in the ideas and techniquesshared by primitive shamans, Eastern spiritual teachers, andmodern psychiatrists. The word "cure," after all, meansboth treatment for disease and the care of souls. The role of the guide on a psychedelic drug trip, which hasboth religious and medical aspects, is spontaneously reproducedin all cultures where psychedelic drugs come to be used. Much ofthe controversy about psychedelic drugs in the 1960s was ineffect concerned with the question of who was qualified to be aguide. For the moment we have made the curious decision that noone in modern industrial society is qualified for this position.Nevertheless, psychedelic drug therapy apparently still goes onunderground, in one form or another. Many have regarded it as anexperience worth having, some as a first step toward change, anda few as a turning point in their lives. They might be deceivingthemselves, but we do not know enough to be certain; the fieldhas potentialities that are not being allowed to revealthemselves. A Note on Legal Status The publicly familiar psychedelic drugs are classified inSchedule I of the Controlled Substances Act; they are regarded ashaving a high potential for abuse, no current medical use, and alack of safety for use under medical supervision. They areavailable for medical experimentation as investigational drugs,but present research is confined almost entirely to animals. Anumber of psychedelic drugs that were recently synthesized orthat have never been available in any quantity on the illicitmarket are not scheduled. It is legal for physicians to workclinically with these substances, although experimental researchin human beings is not permissible until animal tests have beendone. CANNABIS Marijuana is derived from the hemp plant (Cannabis sativa).Its most important psychoactive chemical,delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-l-tetrahydrocannabinol inanother nomenclature), is contained in a resin that covers theflower clusters and top leaves of the plant; the resin alsocontains many chemically related substances with lesser effects.Cannabis preparations vary widely in quality and potencydepending on the type of plant, climate, soil, and methods ofcultivation and manufacture. The resin can be ingested in theform of a drink or in foods, but usually the leaves and floweringtops are smoked, either in a pipe or in a cigarette called ajoint. History Like cocaine and other psychoactive drugs derived from naturalplant sources, marijuana has been used for thousands of years asa medicine as well as an intoxicant. It was listed in an herbalpublished by a Chinese emperor that may go back to 2800 B.C. InJamaica, where it was introduced in the seventeenth century byAfrican slaves, it has become the most popular folk medicine.Cannabis in the form of an alcoholic tincture was commonly usedin nineteenth-century Europe and the United States as ananticonvulsant, sedative, and analgesic, and also in tetanus,neuralgia, uterine hemorrhage, rheumatism, and other conditions.It was thought to be a milder but less dangerous sedative thanopium, and it was also considered an appetite stimulant. Between1839 and 1900 more than a hundred articles appeared in scientificjournals on the therapeutic uses of marijuana. After theintroduction of injectable opiates in the 1850s and syntheticanalgesics and hypnotics in the early twentieth century, themedical use of cannabis declined. But even as late as 1937,extract of cannabis was still a legitimate medicine marketed bydrug companies. The Marijuana Tax Act of 1937 imposed aregistration tax and record keeping requirements that mademedical use of cannabis so cumbersome that it was dropped fromthe U.S. Pharmacopoeia and National Formulary. The Marijuana Tax Act was introduced under the influence of agrowing concern about the use of marijuana as an intoxicant,especially among blacks and Mexican-Americans in the South andSouthwest. The law passed after a strong campaign by the FederalBureau of Narcotics, despite a lack of empirical evidence on theharmfulness of marijuana. The legislative counsel for theAmerican Medical Association at the time objected to the law,saying that future investigations might show substantial medicaluses for cannabis. But the American Medical Association soonchanged its stance and for the next thirty years maintained aposition on marijuana very similar to that of the Federal Bureauof Narcotics. Recent years have seen some relaxation of legalrestrictions and increasing clarification of the medicalpotential of cannabis and cannabis derivatives, but considerableobstacles remain and considerable research still has to be done. Safety The greatest advantage of cannabis as a medicine is itsunusual safety. The ratio of lethal dose to effective dose isestimated on the basis of extrapolation from animal data to beabout 20,000 to one. Huge doses have been given to dogs withoutcausing death, and there is no reliable evidence of death causedby cannabis in a human being. Cannabis also has the advantage ofnot disturbing any physiological functions or damaging any bodyorgans when it is used in therapeutic doses. It produces littlephysical dependence or tolerance; there has never been anyevidence that medical use of cannabis has led to habitual use asan intoxicant. Whole cannabis preparations have the disadvantages ofinstability, varying strength, and insolubility in water, whichmakes it difficult for the drug to enter the bloodstream from thedigestive tract. Another problem is that marijuana contains somany ingredients with possible disadvantageous effects, includingtoo high a degree of intoxication. This multitude of ingredientsis also an opportunity, since it suggests the manufacture ofdifferent cannabinoids, synthetic or natural, with propertiesuseful for particular purposes; some of these have now becomeavailable." Depression and Pain Relief Cannabis and synthetic cannabis derivatives have been testedas treatments for depression, so far without good evidence ofeffectiveness .47 It might be possible to develop syntheticcannabis preparations with a higher euphoriant-to-sedative ratiothan the drugs that have been tested so far. There are many anecdotal reports of marijuana smokers usingthe drug to reduce pain: postsurgery pain, headache, migraine,menstrual cramps, and so on. The disadvantage is its inconsistenteffect; sometimes it actually heightens sensitivity to pain. Itis possible that cannabis acts by mechanisms different from thoseof other analgesics, but the literature does not indicate aspecific effect of cannabis on pain pathways or suggest that itis likely to be more effective than other analgesics. Again, somenew synthetic derivative might prove useful as an analgesic, butthis is not an immediate prospect. Alcohol Dependence Because of reports that some people use less alcohol when theysmoke marijuana, cannabis has been proposed as an adjunct toalcoholism treatment. But so far it has not been found useful .48Most alcoholics neither want to substitute marijuana nor find itparticularly useful. But there might be some hope for use ofmarijuana in combination with disulfiram (Antabuse), whichprotects alcoholics by producing uncomfortable symptoms when theydrink." Certainly a cannabis habit would be preferable to analcohol habit for anyone who could not avoid dependence on a drugbut was able to substitute one drug for another. Spasticity and Seizures About 20 percent of epileptics do not get much relief fromconventional anticonvulsant medications. Cannabis has beenexplored as an alternative, at least since a case was reported inwhich marijuana smoking, together with the standardanticonvulsants phenobarbital and diphenylhydantoin, wasapparently necessary to control seizures in a young epilepticman.50 Marijuana also reduces muscle spasm and tremors in somepeople who suffer from cerebral palsy or multiplesclerosis." But the effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol(hereafter called THC itself are inconsistent; it can actuallyheighten susceptibility to some types of seizures. The cannabisderivative that is most promising as an anticonvulsant iscannabidiol. In one controlled study, cannabidiol in addition toprescribed anticonvulsants produced improvement in seven patientswith grand mal seizures; three showed great improvement. Of eightpatients who received a placebo instead, only one improved. 52 Asthma Asthma is a breathing disorder that arises when bronchialmuscles go into spasm and the pathway to the lungs is blocked bymucus and swelling. A number of antiasthmatic drugs areavailable, but they all have drawbacks-limited effectiveness orside effects. Because marijuana dilates the bronchi and reversesbronchial spasm, cannabis derivatives have been tested asantiasthmatic drugs. Smoking marijuana would probably not be agood way to treat asthma because of chronic irritation of thebronchial tract by tars and other substances in marijuana smoke,so recent research has sought a better means of administration.THC in the form of an aerosol spray has been investigatedextensively." Other cannabinoids such as cannabinol andcannabidiol may be preferable to THC for this purpose. Aninteresting finding for future research is that cannabinoids mayaffect the bronchi by a different mechanism from that of thefamiliar antiasthmatic drugs. Glaucoma A promising new medical use for cannabis is in treatingglaucoma, the second leading cause of blindness in the UnitedStates. In this disease, fluid pressure within the eyeballincreases until it damages the optic nerve. About a millionAmericans suffer from the form of glaucoma (wide angle) treatablewith cannabis. Marijuana causes a dose-related, clinicallysignificant drop in intraocular pressure that lasts several hoursin both normal subjects and those with the abnormally high oculartension produced by glaucoma. Oral or intravenous THC has thesame effect, which seems to be specific to cannabis derivativesrather than simply a result of sedation. Cannabis does not curethe disease, but it can retard the progressive loss of sight whenconventional medication fails and surgery is too dangerous. It remains to be seen whether topical use of THC or asynthetic cannabinoid in the form of eyedrops will be preferableto smoking marijuana for this purpose. So far THC eyedrops havenot proved effective, and in 1981 the National Eye Instituteannounced that it would no longer approve human research usingthese eyedrops.55 Studies continue on certain synthetic cannabisderivatives and other natural cannabinoids. Smoking marijuana isa better way of titrating the dose than taking an oralcannabinoid, and most patients seem to prefer it. Unfortunately,many patients, especially elderly ones, dislike the psychoactiveeffects of marijuana. Cancer Treatment Cannabis derivatives have several minor or speculative uses inthe treatment of cancer, and one major use. As appetitestimulants, marijuana and THC may help to slow weight loss incancer patients." THC has also retarded the growth of tumorcells in some animal studies, but results are inconclusive, andanother cannabis derivative, cannabadiol, seems to increase tumorgrowth." Possibly cannabinoids in combination with otherdrugs will turn out to have some use in preventing tumor growth. But the most promising use of cannabis in cancer treatment isthe prevention of nausea and vomiting in patients undergoingchemotherapy. About half of patients treated with anticancerdrugs suffer from severe nausea and vomiting. In about 30 percentto 40 percent of these, the commonly used antiemetics do notwork." The nausea and vomiting are not only unpleasant but athreat to the effectiveness of the therapy. Retching can causetears of the esophagus and rib fractures, prevent adequatenutrition, and lead to fluid loss. The antiemetics most commonly used in chemotherapy arephenothiazines like prochlorperazine (Compazine). The suggestionthat cannabis might be useful arose in the early 1970s when someyoung patients receiving cancer chemotherapy found that marijuanasmoking, which was of course illegal, reduced their nausea andvomiting. In some studies, oral THC has proved effective wherethe standard drugs were not.59 In other studies the two types ofdrugs seemed to be equally effective.60 In one study nabilone, asynthetic cannabinoid, was found more effective than aphenothiazine.61 But nabilone tests have been discontinuedbecause of animal deaths and adverse reactions in human beings. It is generally agreed that THC is a good antiemetic, but asin the case of glaucoma, many patients reject it because theyfind the psychoactive effects unpleasant. There is somecontroversy about whether THC is best taken orally or smoked inthe form of marijuana. Marijuana is related to THC in much thesame way that coca is related to cocaine; it contains a varietyof chemicals instead of one and enters the body by a differentroute. Smoking generates quicker and more predictable results inboth glaucoma and cancer treatment, because it raises THCconcentration in the blood more easily to the needed level. Also,it may be hard for a nauseated patient in chemotherapy to takeoral medicine. But many patients dislike smoking or cannotinhale. Conclusion A committee of the Institute of Medicine of the NationalAcademy of Sciences remarked in a report in 1982: Cannabis shows promise in some of these areas, although the dose necessary to produce the desired effect is often close to one that produces an unacceptable frequency of toxic [undesirable] side effects. What is perhaps more encouraging ... is that cannabis seems to exert its beneficial effects through mechanisms that differ from those of other available drugs. This raises the possibility that some patients who would not be helped by conventional therapies could be treated with cannabis.... It may be possible to reduce side effects by synthesizing related molecules that could have a more favorable ratio of desired to undesired actions; this line of investigation should have a high priority. 62 The committee recommended further research,especially in the treatment of nausea and vomiting inchemotherapy, asthma, glaucoma, and seizures and spasticity. Under federal and most state statutes, marijuana is listed asa Schedule I drug: high potential for abuse, no currentlyaccepted medical use, and a lack of accepted safety for use undermedical supervision. It cannot ordinarily be prescribed and maybe used only under research conditions. But public pressure has begun to change the situation. Severalindividuals have successfully argued the rare defense of medicalnecessity in response to criminal charges of marijuanapossession; in one case glaucoma was involved and in anothermultiple sclerosis. Now the National Cancer Institute, the DrugEnforcement Agency, and the Food and Drug Administration haveagreed to a program whereby the National Cancer Institute ismaking THC available through the pharmacies of about five hundredteaching hospitals and cancer centers to physicians who want touse it for chemotherapy. The legislatures of twenty-three stateshave also authorized special research programs that supplycannabis for the management of nausea and vomiting inchemotherapy. In effect these programs provide means for theseriously ill to gain legal access to marijuana. Physiciansacting on their own can apply for permission to use marijuana,but the regulations are so complicated that physicians who wanthelp for one or two patients may advise them to get the marijuanaon the streets instead. State programs, in effect, assumeresponsibility for completing the paperwork required by thefederal government and relieve the physician of this burden. Thestates make use of confiscated marijuana or marijuana cigarettesor THC pills supplied by the federal government. The Food and Drug Administration does not approve of effortsto publicize therapies that have not gone through the standardlegal process of new drug testing. Advocates of medical marijuanause want to circumvent not only the Controlled Substances Act butalso the Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act of 1938 and its amendmentsthat establish procedures for testing and marketing new drugs.The FDA says that marijuana will never be an approved medicinebecause it contains so many chemicals and its composition is sovariable. The requirement of a -standardized dose alone mayprevent the marketing of marijuana in the ordinary way asmedicine. This obstacle does not stand in the way of THC in pillform. A special form of THC in a gelatin capsule with sesame seedoil has recently been transferred to Schedule II under theControlled Substances Act, and hearings are being held todetermine whether THC in other forms should also be placed inSchedule II. The potential of cannabis as a medicine is yet to be realized,partly because of its reputation as an intoxicant, ignorance onthe part of the medical establishment, and legal difficultiesinvolved in doing the research. Recreational use of cannabis hasaffected the opinions of physicians about its medical potentialin various ways. When marijuana was regarded as the drug ofblacks, Mexican-Americans, and bohemians, doctors were ready togo along with the Bureau of Narcotics, ignore its medical uses,and urge prohibition. For years the National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws (NORML) and other groups have beenpetitioning the government to change this classification.Although that has not happened, cannabis derivatives have becomemore available for medical purposes through various devices. Nowthat marijuana has become so popular among a broad section of thepopulation, we have been more willing to investigate itstherapeutic value. Recreational use now spurs medical interestinstead of medical hostility. The struggle over medical marijuana use illustrates some ofthe issues discussed earlier: self-medication versus governmentcontrol, pure chemicals versus natural drugs, the historicaldirection of drug policy and the present minor challenges to it,the need to find a better balance in making rules about drugs.The potential dangers of marijuana when taken for pleasure andits possible usefulness as a medicine are historically andpractically interrelated issues: historically, because thearguments used to justify public and official disapproval ofrecreational use have had a strong influence on opinions aboutits medical potential; practically, because the more evidenceaccumulates that marijuana is relatively safe even when used asan intoxicant, the clearer it becomes that the medicalrequirement of safety is satisfied. Most recent research istentative, and initial enthusiasm for drugs is often disappointedafter further investigation. But it is not as though cannabiswere an entirely new agent with unknown properties. Studies doneduring the past ten years have confirmed a centuries-old promise.With the relaxation of restrictions on research and the furtherchemical manipulation of cannabis derivatives, this promise willeventually be realized. The weight of past and contemporaryevidence will probably prove cannabis to be valuable in severalways as a medicine. Footnotes and References 1. Mickey C. Smith and David Knapp, Pharmacy, Drugs, andMedical Care (Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1972), p. 161. 2. Horacio Fabrega and Peter K. Manning, "HealthMaintenance Among Peruvian Peasants," Human Organization 31(1973): 243-56. 3. Andrew Weil, "The Therapeutic Value of Coca inContemporary Medicine," Journal of Ethnopharmacology 3(1981): 367-76. 4. Carlos Gutierrez-Noriega, "El Cocaismo y laAlimentacion en el Peru," Anales de la Facultad de Medicina31 (1948): 1-90; J. C. Negrete, "Psychological Deficit inChewers of Coca Leaf," Bulletin on Narcotics 19, no. 4(1967): 11-13; H. B. M. Murphy, 0. Rios, and J. C. Negrete,"The Effects of Abstinence and Retraining on the Chewer ofCoca Leaf," Bulletin on Narcotics 21, no. 2 (1969): 41-47;Alfred A. Buck et al., "Coca chewing and Health: AnEpidemiological Study Among Residents of a PeruvianVillage," American Journal of Epidemiology 88 (1968):159-77. 5. Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalar, Cocaine: A Drug andIts Social Evolution (New York: Basic Books, 1976), pp. 120-29;Andrew T. Weil, "Coca and Brain Damage," April 1978(unpublished). 6. Weil, "Therapeutic Value of Coca," p. 374. 7. Angelo Mariani, Coca and Its Therapeutic Applications (NewYork: Jaros, 1890). 8. Sigmund Freud, "On Coca," in Robert Byck, ed.,The Cocaine Papers (New York: Stonehill, 1974), pp. 49-73. 9. Parke Davis and Company, "Coca Erythroxylon and ItsDerivatives," in Byck, Cocaine Papers, p. 144. 10. W. Golden Mortimer, History of Coca (New York: Vail,1901), pp. 491-509. 1 1. Sigmund Freud, "Craving For andFear Of Cocaine," in Byck, Cocaine Papers, pp. 171-76. 12. Grinspoon and Bakalar, Cocaine, pp. 161-63; Nicholas L.Schenk, "Local Anesthesia in Otolaryngology: AReevaluation," Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology84 (1979):65-72. 13. Felix Barre, "Cocaine as an Abortive Agent in ClusterHeadache," Headache 22 (1982): 69-73. 14. R. G. Twycross, "Value of Cocaine inOpiate-containing Elixirs," British Medical Journal 2(1977): 1348. 15. W. R. Bett, "Benzedrine Sulfate in Clinical Medicine:A Survey of the Literature," Postgraduate Medical Journal 22(1946): 205-18. 16. See Lester Grinspoon and Peter Hedblom, The Speed Culture:Amphetamine Use and Abuse in America (Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press, 1975), pp. 19-20. 17. D. Adlersberg and M. E. Mayer, "Results of ProlongedMedical Treatment of Obesity with Diet Alone, Diet and ThyroidPreparations, and Diet and Amphetamine," Journal of ClinicalEndocrinology 9 (1949): 275-84. 18. C. D. Leake, The Amphetamines: Their Actions and Uses(Springfield, Ill.: Thomas, 1958), pp. 67-69. 19. E. H. Hare, J. Dominian, and L. Sharpe, "Phenelzineand Dexamphetamine in Depressive Illness: A ComparativeTrial," British Medical Journal (1962): 9-12; J. E. Overallet al., "Drug Therapy in Depressions: Controlled Evaluationof Imipramine, Isocarboxazine, Dextroamphetamine-Amobarbital, andPlacebo," Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 3 (1962):16-21. 20. Eric J. Drimmer, Michael J. Gitlin, and Harry E.Gwirtsman, "Desipramine and Methylpheniclate CombinationTreatment for Depression: Case Report," American Journal ofPsychiatry 140 (1983): 241-42; R. N. Wharton, et al., "APotential Clinical Use for Methy1phenidate with TricyclicAntidepressants," American Journal of Psychiatry 127 (1971):161925. 21. M. W. Kaufmann et al., "The Use of Methylphenidate inDepressed Patients After Cardiac Surgery," Journal ofClinical Psychiatry 45 (1984): 82-84; Wayne Katon and MurrayRaskind, "Treatment of Depression in the Medically IIIElderly with Methylphenidate," American Journal ofPsychiatry 137 (1980): 963-65. 22. W. H. Forest et al., "Dextroamphetamine with Morphinefor the Treatment of Postoperative Pain," New EnglandJournal of Medicine 296 (1977): 712-15. 23. Thomas R. Insel et al., "Amphetamine inObsessive-Compulsive Disorder," Psychopharmacology 80(1983): 231-35. 24. Charles Bradley, "The Behavior of Children ReceivingBenzedrine," American Journal of Psychiatry 94 (1937):577-85. 25. C. K. Conners et al., "Dextroamphetamine Sulfate inChildren with Learning Dis- orders: Effects on Perception, Learning, andAchievement," Archives of General Psychiatry 21 (1969): 182-90; Gabrielle Weiss et al., "Studies onthe Hyperactive Child: V. The Effects of Dextroamphetamine andChlorpromazine on Behavior and Intellectual Functioning,"Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 9 (1968): 148-53. 26. Peggy T. Ackerman et al., "Methylphenidate Effects onCognitive Style and Reaction Time in Four Groups ofChildren," Psychiatry Research 7 (1982): 199-213; Roscoe A.Dykman, Peggy T. Ackerman, and David S. McCray, "Effects ofMethylpheniclate on Selective and Sustained Attention inHyperactive, Reading-Disabled, and PresumablyAttention-Disordered Boys," Journal of Nervous and MentalDisease 168 (1980): 745-52. 27. J. L. Rapaport et al., "Dextroamphetamine: Cognitiveand Behavioral Effects in Normal Prepubescent Boys," Science199 (1978): 560-63. 28. C. K. Conners, "Controlled Trial of Methylpheniclatein Preschool Children with Minimal Brain Dysfunction,"International Journal of Mental Health 4 (1975): 61-74; RachelGittelman, "Indications for the Use of Stimulant Treatmentin Learning Disorders," Journal of the American Academy ofChild Psychiatry 19 (1980): 623-36. 29. Linda Charles and Richard Schain, "A Four-YearFollow-Up Study of the Effects of Methylpheniclate on theBehavior and Academic Achievement of Hyperactive Children,"Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 9 (1981): 495-505. 30. Charles Bradley, "Benzedrine and Dexedrine in theTreatment of Children's Behavior Disorders," Pediatrics 5(1950): 24-36. 31. R. H. Mattson and J. R. Calverly, "DextroamphetamineSulfate-Induced Dyskinesias," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association 2O4(1968): 400-2; P. G. Ney, "Psychosisin a Child Associated with Amphetamine Administration,"Canadian Medical Association Journal 97 (1967): 1026-29. 32. Jeffrey A. Mattes and Rachel Gittelman, "Growth ofHyperactive Children on Maintenance Regimen ofMethylphenidate," Archives of General Psychiatry 40 (1983):317-21. 33. Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalar, Psychedelic DrugsReconsidered (New York: Basic Books, 1979), pp. 163-66, 168-71. 34. Norman 1. Dishotsky et al., "LSD and GeneticDamage," Science 172 (1971): 43140; Sally Y. Long,"Does LSD Induce Chromosomal Damage and Malformations? AReview of the Literature," Teratology 6 (1972): 75-90. 35. Constance A. Newland, My Self and I (New York: NewAmerican Library, 1962), pp. 20-47. 36. Albert A. Kurland, "The Therapeutic Potential of LSDin Medicine," in R. DeBold and R. Leaf, eds., LSD, Man, andSociety (Middletown, Corm.: Wesleyan University Press, 1967), pp.20-35. 37. Abram Hoffer, "A Program for the Treatment ofAlcoholism: LSD, Malvaria, and Nicotinic Acid," in Harold A.Abramson, ed., The Use of LSD in Psychotherapy and Alcoholism(New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1967), pp. 353-402. 38. Reginald G. Smart et at., "A Controlled Study ofLysergicle in the Treatment of Alcoholism," QuarterlyJournal of Studies on Alcohol 27 (1966): 469-82; Frances E. Cheeket al., "Observations Regarding the Use of LSD-25 in theTreatment of Alcoholism," Journal of Psychopharmacology 1,no. 1 (1966): 56-74. 39. Bernard J. Albaugh and Philip 0. Anderson, "Peyote inthe Treatment of Alcoholism Among American Indians,"American Journal of Psychiatry 131 (1974): 1247-51. 40. Walter N. Pahnke, "The Psychedelic MysticalExperience in the Human Encounter with Death," HarvardTheological Review 62 (1969): 1-21. 41. Stanislav Grof et al., "LSD-Assisted Psychotherapy inPatients with Terminal Cancer," InternationalPharmacopsychiatry 8 (1973): 129-41. 42. Walter Houston Clark and G. Ray Funkhouser,"Physicians and Researchers Disagree on PsychedelicDrugs," Psychology Today 3, no. 11: 48-50, 70-73; SidneyCohen, "Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: Side Effects andComplications," Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 130(1960): 30-40; Nicholas Malleson, "Acute Adverse Reactionsto LSD in Clinical and Experimental Use in the UnitedKingdom," British Journal of Psychiatry 188 (1971): 229-30. 43. Personal communication, 1979. 44. Claudio Naranjo, The Healing Journey (New York:Ballantine, 1975). 45. George Greer, "MDMA: A New Psychotropic Compound andIts Effects in Humans," 1983 (unpublished). 46. R. Mechoulam and E. A. Carlini, "Toward Drugs Derivedfrom Cannabis," Naturwissenschaften 65 (1978): 174-79. 47. J. Kotin, R. M. Post, and F. K. Goodwin,"Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Depressed Patients,"Archives of General Psychiatry 28 (1973): 345-48. 48. C. M. Rosenberg, J. R. Gerrein, and C. Schnell,"Cannabis in the Treatment of Alcoholism," Journal ofStudies on Alcohol 39 (1978): 155-58. 49. C. M. Rosenberg, "The Use of Marihuana in theTreatment of Alcoholism," in S. Cohen and R. C. Stillman,eds. The Therapeutic Potential of Marihuana (New York andLondon:Plenum, 1976). 50. Paul F. Consroe, George C. Wood, and Harvey Buchsbaum,"Anticonvulsant Natureof Marihuana Smoking," Journal ofthe American Medical Association 234 (1975): 306-7. 51. D. J. Petro, "Marihuana as a Therapeutic Agent forMuscle Spasm or Spasticity," Psychosomatics 21 (1980):81-85. 52. J. M. Cunha et al., "Chronic Administration ofCannabidiol to Healthy Volunteers and Epileptic Patients,"Pharmacology 21 (1980): 175-85. 53. D. P. Tashkin et at., "Effects of Smoked Marijuana inExperimentally Induced Asthma," American Review ofRespiratory Diseases 112 (1975): 377-86; D. B. Tashkin et at.,"Bronchial Effects of AerosolizedDelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Healthy and AsthmaticSubjects," American Review of Respiratory Diseases 115(1977): 57-65. 54. R. S. Hepler, I. M. Frank, and R. Petrus, "OcularEffects of Marihuana Smoking," in M. C. Braude and S. Szara,eds., Pharmacology of Marihuana (New York: Raven Press, 1976). 55. Roger A. Roffman, Marihuana as Medicine (Seattle: Madrona,1982), P. 99. 56. W. Regelson et al., "Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol asan Effective Antidepressant and Appetite-Stimulating Agent inAdvanced Cancer Patients," in Braude and Szara, eds.,Pharmacology of Marihuana, pp. 763-76. 57. A. C. White et al., "Effects ofDelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Lewis Lung Adenocarcinoma Cellsin Tissue Culture," Journal of the National Cancer Institute56 (1976): 65558. 58. Roffman, Marijuana as Medicine, pp. 82-83. 59. V. S. Lucas and J. Laszlo,"Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol for Refractory VomitingInduced by Cancer Chemotherapy," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association 243 (1980): 1241-43; S. E. Sallan, N. E.Zinberg, and E. Frei, "Antiemetic Effect ofDelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Patients Receiving CancerChemotherapy," New England Journal of Medicine 293 (1975):795-97. 60. S. Frytak et al., "Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinolas an Antiemetic for Patients Receiving Cancer Chemotherapy: AComparison with Prochlorperazine and a Placebo," Annals ofInternal Medicine 91 (1979): 825-30. 61. T. S. Herman et al., "Superiority of Nabilone OverProchlorperazine as an Antiemetic in Patients Receiving CancerChemotherapy," New England Journal of Medicine 300 (1979):1295-97. 62. Institute of Medicine, Marijuana and Health (Washington,D.C.: National Academy Press, 1982), p. 139. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-21IA087-000627-B015-85http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/brief1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051302 text/html 44842HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:12:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:54 GMTContent-length: 44624 Ralph Seeley's successful lawsuit for his own medicalmarijuana. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Plaintiff's Reply Brief Ralph Seeley's successful lawsuit for his own medicalmarijuana. SUPERIOR COURT OF THE STATE OF WASHINGTON COUNTY OF PIERCE RALPH SEELEY, latest Plaintiff, vs. STATE OF WASHINGTON, Defendant. ________________________________ No. 94-2-11862-1 PLAINTIFF'S REPLY BRIEF SUPPORTING SUMMARY JUDGMENT IN FAVOR OF PLAINTIFF HEARING DATE: OCTOBER 6, 1995 I. INTRODUCTION The characterization of this plaintiff as bringing "thelatest in a series of fruitless attempts to legalize marijuanaand bypass the legislature's exercise of its broaddiscretion" (defendant's brief, page 7 line 24) is anegregious insult which trivializes the experiences of this lawyerwhich led to this lawsuit. DECLARATION OF RALPH SEELEY I am Ralph Seeley, a lawyer and the pro se plaintiff in theabove-captioned case. I am competent to testify, and I amtestifying from my own knowledge. In the course of mychemotherapy, despite being under the care of full-time nurses atone of the finest cancer-treatment facilities in the country, Ifound myself violently nauseated, retching uncontrollably, losingcontrol of my bowels, lying on the floor, covered with my ownvomit and excrement. These same violent, uncontrollable symptoms would come on withless than a minute's warning days after returning home. The onlyrelief I could obtain was from inhaled marijuana. Tabletsprescribed (including THC as Marinol or Dronobanol) were vomitedup undissolved. (During the years of my treatments, the cost ofthe tablets went from 87 cents to more than $5 each.) I undertook this lawsuit with grave misgivings as toallocating so much of my limited time and energy (my cancer isconsidered terminal) to a cause most likely to benefit onlyothers in the future. After a great deal of soul searching, Ielected to proceed because I believe it is every lawyer's duty toattempt to remedy wrongs in our society, and not to simply be'hired guns' to advocate for those who can afford to hire ourservices. I brought the lawsuit not as 'the latest in a series offruitless attempts to legalize marijuana and bypass thelegislature's exercise of its broad discretion...' as stated byopposing counsel, but because it my educated opinion that thelegislature's system to regulate drugs has been corrupted byzealots who contend that my suffering is justified to promotesome mythical 'greater good' of society. Further, my researchshowed clearly that marijuana as medicine has not been consideredproperly, both because of the misunderstandings and hysteriasurrounding the subject, and because drug certification in thiscountry is driven by the profit motives of pharmaceuticalcompanies, for which marijuana offers no resource to tap -- youcan't patent a plant. I certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the Stateof Washington that the above is true. Signed and dated in ________________, Washington this ___ dayof __________, 1995. ________________________ Ralph Seeley By resorting to such 'cheap shots' as accusing this lawyer of'the latest in a series of fruitless attempts. . .', opposingcounsel has improperly inserted an ad hominem attack instead ofaddressing the issues at hand. Her conclusory statementsregarding the nature of this lawsuit and its genesis, and themotives of the plaintiff, should be given the consideration theydeserve -- none. II. FACTS Numerous mis-statements of facts as well asmischaracterizations of facts appear in the defendant's brief: The 'limited anecdotal evidence Plaintiff offers to supporthis claim. . .' Defendant's brief, page 6 line 24. Primarily, theplaintiff relies on the findings and conclusions of the DEA's ownAdministrative Law Judge, Francis L. Young, whose 68-page opinionfollowed hundreds of hours of testimony in three cities andconsideration of copious written evidence. A copy is attached asExhibit A. (Not provided to opposing counsel to conserve paper,per discussion with opposing counsel, since counsel already hascopies.) The judge concluded that the provisions of [theControlled Substances] Act permit and require the transfer ofmarijuana from Schedule I to Schedule II. * * * There are those who. . .argue that the transfer of marijuanato Schedule II will 'send a signal' that marijuana is 'OK'generally for recreational use. This argument is specious. It presents no valid reason forrefraining from taking an action required by law in light of theevidence. If marijuana should be placed in Schedule II inobedience to the law, then that is where marijuana should beplaced, regardless of misinterpretation of the placement by some.. .The fear of sending such a signal cannot be permitted tooverride the legitimate need, amply demonstrated in this record,of countless sufferers for the relief marijuana can provide whenprescribed by a physician in a legitimate case. The evidence in this record clearly shows that marijuana hasbeen accepted as capable of relieving the distress of greatnumbers of very ill people, and doing so with safety undermedical supervision. It would be unreasonable arbitrary, andcapricious for the DEA to continue to stand between thosesufferers and the benefits of this substance in light of theevidence of this record. Opinion and Recommended Ruling, Findings of Fact, Conclusionsof Law and Decision of Administrative Law Judge, pages 67-68,Docket No. 86-22, Dept. of Justice, Drug EnforcementAdministration ('Judge Youngis Opinion')(emphasis added). For opposing counsel to state that this multi-year effort byJudge Young, cited and quoted in plaintiff's opening brief,constitutes 'the limited anecdotal evidence Plaintiff offers tosupport his claim' (defendant's brief, page 6 line 24) is clearindication of the disdain for legitimate lawmaking held byopposing counsel -- unless the outcome conforms with that which'everybody knows' is correct. The opinion is worth reading in its entirety. It reveals theendless circularity and self-fulfilling 'logic' of theprohibitionists, and establishes many facts which are intuitivelyobvious. Included in that category is the issue of the entirepharmaceutical-approval process being designed to accommodatecompanies interested in marketing new drugs, referred to in theplaintiff's declaration, above. Uncontroverted evidence further establishes that in thiscountry today 'new drugs' are developed by pharmaceuticalcompanies possessing resources sufficient to bear the enormousexpense of testing a new drug, obtaining FDA approval. . .andmarketing it successfully. No company undertakes the investmentrequired unless it has a patent on the drug, so it can recoup itsdevelopment costs and make a profit. . .Since the substance beingconsidered in this case is a natural plant rather than asynthetic new drug, it is unreasonable to make FDA-type criteriadeterminative of the issue in this case. . . Judge Young's Oponion, page 33-34. The opinion is not 'limitedanecdotal evidence,' but is a compendium of research andreasoning which, taken as a whole, offers compelling andwell-supported evidence for the plaintiff. The defendants make statements such as 'Scientificallyreliable evidence shows that the currently available therapiesare more effective and do not carry with them the same risks.'(Defendant's brief page 7 line 21.) Such statements areconclusory, false, and in any event, irrelevant, since there isno requirement to show that marijuana is risk-free or moreeffective to all persons. This sort of statement is reiterated by numerous 'experts'throughout the defendant's brief, and in sworn statementsattached. All of them assert that 'new' drugs are better andsafer. None cite any tests comparing the drugs with marijuana,for one of the primary reasons this plaintiff brought thislawsuit: The defendant's logic, and that of its experts, is flawedbecause no comparison with marijuana can be done, because thegovernment will not permit possession of marijuana forexperiments. See Affidavit of Doblin, Exhibit F to plaintiff'soriginal brief. In the only scientific test cited by either party whichactually utilized marijuana (Levitt, University of Manitoba,1984, defendant's brief at page 16 line 1, deposition of Conrad,Exhibit C, page 18-19), involved 20 patients undergoingchemotherapy. Fifteen to 17 had nausea, vomiting or both. Theywere given, at random, tobacco cigarettes, marijuana cigarettes,or THC tablets. Out of the 20 patients, nine had no preference,seven preferred THC, and four preferred marijuana cigarettes. SeeConrad Deposition, pages 18-19, attached as Exhibit C. As Judge Young phrased it: there is no question but that thisrecord shows a great many physicians, and others, to have'accepted' marijuana as having a medical use in treatment ofcancer patients' emesis. True, all physicians have not 'accepted'it. But to require universal, 100% acceptance would beunreasonable. Acceptance by 'a respectable minority' ofphysicians is all that can reasonably be required. The record here establishes conclusively that at least 'arespectable minority' of physicians has 'accepted' marijuana ashaving a 'medical use in treatment in the United States.' Thatothers may not makes no difference. Judge Young's Opinion, page 29. What the defendant has done isto round up some physicians and others who weigh in on the 'anti'side. It is perfectly predictable that such persons may belocated and their sworn statements taken. That the defendant hasdone so is of no value to the Court in evaluating the merits ofthe plaintiff's case. The question before this court does not involve some cosmicoverview of marijuana vis-a-vis every palliative drug in theuniverse. Rather, the plaintiff has posed the question: Why doesour government permit the legal amelioration of suffering amongpeople who can absorb THC through their digestive systems(through prescription of Marinol tablets), while subjecting theplaintiff to exposure to arrest for possessing the same drug in aform he can ingest through his lungs? The example of heroin cited by the defendant (brief at page 7line 7) makes the plaintiff's point. In the bottom half of page 7the defendant makes the point that 'several successivegenerations of effective anti-emetics now [are] currentlyavailable to cancer chemotherapy patients.' Those 'severalgenerations' were developed and placed on the market since theplaintiff was diagnosed with cancer in 1986. As the defendantpointed out, it took 18 years for the medical community todiscover that heroin was more addictive than morphine. Likeheroin and other drugs (Thalidomide and Halcyon come to mind),the new generations of anti-emetics may yet prove to be moredangerous than helpful. Marijuana, on the other hand, has beenused therapeutically for 5,000 years, and there is no death yetrecorded as caused by an overdose. The broad statements such as that quoted above concerningother drugs with 'decreased risk' should be ignored by this courtas not supported by evidence, and not relevant to the outcome ofthis case; the defendant has cited no scientific evidencewhatsoever that THC does not remain an effective, prescribed drugfor the relief of nausea in chemotherapy. The statement by defendant that 'Dr. Grinspoon's testimony isundeniably biased by his position that all drugs should beavailable for recreational use' is false and should be ignored asthe red herring that it is. The defendant's attorney undoubtedly bases such a falseaccusation on Dr. Grinspoon's embracing of the 'harm reduction'model of drug laws used successfully in The Netherlands, wheredrug abuse is treated as a medical, not a legal, problem. Harddrugs remain unlawful in that country, but are available throughmedical channels to the addicted. Thus, they have a smallfraction of the drug addicts compared to those in the UnitedStates, and an even smaller fraction of the secondary (crime)problems associated with drug addiction, since there is no blackmarket driving drug costs up and creating huge profit motives forthe unscrupulous. That Dr. Grinspoon embraces such a model incontrast to our own policies (build more prisons, fill them up),is no reason to question his knowledge or research-supportedopinion on the medical issues at hand. (For some overall insightinto the circular logic and straightforward falsehoods employedby our federal officials in the 'war on drugs,' see the attachedpamphlets, exhibits B and E, and note the hundreds of citationsto authority.) In fact, Dr. Grinspoonis book, The Speed Culture: AmphetamineUse and Abuse in America, Harvard University Press, 1975, wasamong the first to sound the warning that 'popping little whitepills' (in the words of the country-western song 'Six Days On TheRoad') was far more harmful than anyone was giving it credit forat that time. In the aftermath of the publishing of that book,the potential for harm of that class of drugs became more widelyknown, and the drugs became more carefully controlled. Dr. Grinspoon is a physician and scientist with impressivememberships in professional associations, and publication both inbooks for lay persons and in scientific literature, including theprestigious, juried New England Journal of Medicine. (HisCurriculum Vitae is attached to those portions of his depositionsubmitted by the defendants.) His views are 'refuted' by thedefendants with an anonymous author who writes for U.S. News andWorld Report, who in turn cites a former politician (defendant'sbrief, page 14), who in turn recites the tired ritual statement'Children who smoke pot are 85 times more likely to use cocaine.'This myth is not supported by fact. See 'Myth #11' of ExposingMarijuana Myths, attached as Exhibit B, and the scientific andauthoritative publications cited. The defendant's attorney confuses correlation with causation.It is absolutely true, upon statistical analysis, that, forexample, persons with larger feet are more adept at mathematicsthan those with small feet. It is equally true that the densityof fire hydrants accurately predicts the incidence of diabetes.The former is true because infants can't do math at all, and havesmall feet. The latter is true because the density of firehydrants predicts the density of population, thus the statisticalappearance of any disease that occurs randomly throughout thepopulation. According to the logic presented in the defendant'sbrief, we should stretch person's feet to increase their abilityat mathematics; outlaw fire hydrants to eliminate diabetes; andcontinue to outlaw the relief of suffering among desperately illpeople to eliminate cocaine use. What most obviously is true is that 100 percent of the personsusing cocaine are using cocaine -- a Schedule II drug. Using thedrug without a prescription carries exactly the same penalties asusing a Schedule I drug. So what 'signal' is being sent bychanging marijuana from Schedule I to Schedule II? Whether 85 percent of pot-smoking children eventually usecocaine is completely irrelevant to this case. In any event, thisseems to be a re-hash of the argument that to allow marijuana useby prescription will 'send a signal' to young people, who willthen use other illegal drugs. This was addressed as 'specious' byJudge Young. See Opinion of Young excerpt, supra. The 'facts' presented on this subject are an attempt tosidetrack the Court, and should be ignored by the Court for whatthey are -- false statements of fact supporting illogicalanalysis, and in any event, not relevant to the controversy athand. The argument that 'there are no safe standards' because 'Themarijuana plant contains over 400 different chemicals and is notchemically consistent' is another contention that is irrelevantand not supported by evidence. (See defendantis brief, page 17.) As established by the Affidavit of McKinney, Exhibit D,attached, the technology exists to produce pharmacologically pureTHC from the natural marijuana (hemp) plant, which can be smokedand absorbed through the lungs in its pure form. Thus, if this '400 chemicalsi argument were a legitimatereason to force the plaintiff to continue choosing betweensuffering and breaking the law, there is a simple method ofovercoming the problem. However, this entire line of argument isclearly a smokescreen (sorry) for attempting to legitimize what'everybody knows.' Put another way, however many chemicals may becreated by burning the leaves of the hemp plant, there is stillno evidence that in 5,000 years of use, it has ever caused adeath. The same cannot be said of aspirin, which killsapproximately 180 persons per year, and caffeine, which killsapproximately 1,000. See Compare Legal Drugs With Illegal Drugs,Washington Hemp Education Network, page 10-11 and note 58. It is noteworthy that the pamphlets attached as Exhibits B andE contain 66 and 107 citations to legitimate authorities,respectively. This is more of the 'limited anecdotal evidence'which the defendant counters with unsupported opinions. The '400 unknown chemicals' argument is without merit. Thefacts establish that burning the leaves or buds of the hemp plantand inhaling the smoke relieves grievous suffering, withvirtually no risk. That is established by the legitimate inquiryand report by the Drug Enforcement Administration's chiefAdministrative Law Judge, who considered that and other argumentsbefore issuing his report. (To eliminate pronoun confusion, thelate Judge Francis Young was a man.) The plaintiff brought thissuit because the process following that report was corrupted, tothe detriment of the sick and helpless. The defendant nowattempts to regurgitate as 'fact' those opinions which havealready been shown not to be factual, not to be relevant, andwhich would not change the outcome of a legitimate inquiry suchas the plaintiff hopes is the result of this suit, even if theywere true. III. ARGUMENT The arguments presented by the defendant are excruciatinglycircular and self-validating. Expert after expert states thatscientific studies do not support the plaintiff's position. Butthe only scientific study actually utilizing vegetable-statemarijuana showed that some of the patients preferred it.Deposition of Conrad, Exhibit C page 19. Meanwhile, no furtherstudies are permitted, because the government won't allow them,because the drug is illegal. It is illegal because no scientificevidence supports its use. (See Affidavit of Doblin, attached toplaintiffis opening brief as Exhibit F.) And the circle startsagain. A. THE DEFENDANT HAS MIS-STATED THE BURDEN ON THE PLAINTIFF,WHO MAY PREVAIL UNDER SEVERAL THEORIES OR ANALYSES. The defendants mis-characterize this lawsuit as a challenge to'the legislature's classification system for controlledsubstances on its face.' Defendant's brief, page 5,6. The entireanalysis is based on that assumption. Included in the defendant'sanalysis is the statement that, because this is a 'facial'challenge, the plaintiff must overcome the presumption ofconstitutionality of a statute 'beyond a reasonable doubt.' The plaintiff is not challenging the statute asunconstitutional 'on its face.' The plaintiff concedes that thelegislature had every right to enact the Uniform ControlledSubstances Act, RCW .50, in 1971, and to place marijuana inSchedule I based on the information available at that time, justas Congress had every right to enact similar federal statutes. However, in both the federal and state statutes, officials arecharged with reviewing drugs to place them in differentcategories as new facts are brought to light. This process wasfollowed to the extent that Judge Young spent several years ofeffort examining evidence and issuing a report andrecommendation, attached as Exhibit A. What followed was ashameful corruption of the system by law enforcement officials,not medical persons. In essence, the head of the DEA stated, 'I don't care what theevidence shows or what Judge Young recommends based on theevidence, marijuana is staying in Schedule I because I say so.'This was appealed to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, whichpointed out the flawed logic -- a drug that is illegal can nevermeet the criteria of 'currently accepted medical use.' The headof the DEA then re-worded his opinion, still refusing tore-schedule the drug, and his new language withstood the narrow,technical test applied by the circuit court. This plaintiff brings this lawsuit before a Washington judge,based on the Washington constitution, because our constitutioncontains more powerful protections of individual rights. It isthis plaintiff's hope that under Washington law the broad,self-serving statements concerning the 'greater good' of society,unsupported by evidence, will not overcome this individual'sright to relieve his suffering without breaking the law. / / / 1. The 'equal protection' analysis borrowed from the federalgovernment should not apply, but the plaintiff should prevaileven if the court employs it. In the plaintiff's opening brief, Justice Utteris dissentingopinion in State v. Smith, 117 Wn.2d 263, 282, 814 P.2d 652(1991), was adopted by reference. The analysis set forth calls for a completely differentapproach to our Privileges and Immunities clause, Const. Art. 1ss 12, than the 'levels of scrutiny' borrowed from the federalanalysis of the Equal Protection clause of the 14th Amendment tothe U.S. Constitution. Below, plaintiff navigates through thatanalysis. The defendant contends that the Court should utilize the'levels of scrutiny' analysis, and that the court should adoptthe lowest level of scrutiny. First, if the Court is to indulge in this analysis, thehighest level of scrutiny should be used, since the right of adoctor to relieve the suffering of his patient, and the right ofa patient to have the relief of suffering available without beingsubjected to arrest, are fundamental rights. This can be found invarious cases stated as a right to medical privacy, or a libertyinterest protected by due process. See: In re Ingram, 102 Wn.2d827 (1984) (incompetent person's right to medicalself-determination); O'Hartigan v. Dept. of Personnel, 118 Wn.2d111 (1991) (level of scrutiny re: privacy); In re Colyer, 99Wn.2d 114 (1983) (privacy in medical decisions); State v. Koome,84 Wn.2d 901 (1975) (doctor and patient's medical privacy); In reHamlin, 102 Wn.2d 810 (1984)(right to choose termination ofmedical treatment -- here we are asserting a right to choose aparticular medical treatment less harmful than the treatmentspermitted). These are in addition to the citations in theplaintiffis opening brief. Whatever level of scrutiny the Court chooses to apply (ifany), the plaintiff should prevail, because the countervailinginterest of the state is illusory. Which is to say, even the'rational relationship' test used at the lowest level of scrutinyprovides no rationale for the plaintiff to be forced to lie onthe floor covered with his own excrement and vomit, oralternatively to break the law. The only benefit to the State that can be discerned indefendant's argument is that (1) the State has a duty to 'ensurethe public of the adequacy, efficacy and safety of substancesused in the treatment of illnesses,' defendant's brief at page 5line 1; to 'protect ill and vulnerable members of the public fromunsafe and/or ineffective medical treatments,' Id. line 16, andby implication, to prevent abuse of the drug on a larger scale,Id. Page 19. The state has provided only conclusory, illogical andnon-factual statements to support the contention that maintainingmarijuana in Schedule I supports any of those goals. In fact, the clear evidence is to the contrary. Surely, nobodydenies that thousands of patients in the shoes if the plaintiffare smoking marijuana for the relief of their symptoms. Becausethe drug is in Schedule I, we must all obtain the drug on theblack market, where its purity is unknown and unregulated. Byplacing the drug in Schedule II, we would be able to obtainpharmaceutically pure medication -- the stated goal of this sortof regulation. To hold that the Equal Protection/Levels-of-Scrutiny analysisborrowed from the federal government and applied to ourPrivileges and Immunities clause calls for the continuedprohibition of this valuable herb as medicine is to stretch legalfictions to the level of the absurd. 2. Under the 'privileges and immunities' analysis properlyapplied to our state's constitutional clause, the plaintiffshould prevail. As Justice Utter pointed out in State v. Smith, supra,(Exhibit G to plaintiff's opening brief), the analysis whichshould be applied under Wash. Const. Art. I ss 12 is by applyingfour questions: (1) was the challenged state action properlyperformed under lawful authority; (2) does the action implicate a'privilege' or 'immunity'; (3) does the action allegedlydiscriminate against an individual or a class; and if so, (4) isthe discrimination permissible? Id., 117 Wn.2d at 288(parenthetical numbers added). There is no requirement toestablish a 'class,'i which squares with the plain language ofthe Constitution: No law shall be passed granting to any citizen. . .privilegesor immunities which upon the same terms shall not equally belongto all citizens. . . Const. Art. 1 ss 12. As cited by Justice Utter: The clause. . .may be invoked by an individual who demandsequality of treatment with other individuals as well as by onewho demands equal privileges or immunities for a class to whichhe or she belongs. State v. Smith, supra (citations omitted). Here, the plaintiff is simply pointing out that other persons,who can absorb THC through their digestive systems, are given theprivilege of ending their suffering and immunity from arrest forpossession of THC, while the plaintiff, whose suffering can beended through absorbing THC through his lungs, is arbitrarilydenied the privilege of ending his suffering and the immunityfrom arrest through prescription. The first three questions posed in the analysis, then, areanswered 'yes.' The fourth question remains - 'Is the discriminationpermissible?' According to the only serious, long-term study by a neutralofficial, Judge Francis Young, it is not; he stated that it wouldbe unreasonable, arbitrary and capricious to withhold the drugfrom persons such as the plaintiff. Further, the only comparativescientific study (Levitt, supra) determined that for somepatients, smoked marijuana was the treatment preferred. No otherexperimental data is available because the government prohibitsthe experiments. See Affidavit of Doblin, Exhibit F ofplaintiff's original brief. The plaintiff and thousands of persons in his shoes are notignorant, illiterate or stupid. We read medical literature, legaldocuments (such as the Young opinion), and we experiment to endour suffering. We use marijuana because it works, as Judge Youngfound, and because other drugs do not. The evidence' supporting the value to the state of the ongoingdiscrimination against the plaintiff is circular, self-serving,and makes a mockery of both procedural and substantive law.Further, it makes criminals of society's most helpless people,and their families. There is no justification for thediscrimination, and in the name of compassion, reason, and to endthe massive mockery of the law by medical users across thecountry, this court should find that the ongoing classificationof marijuana as a Schedule I drug is a violation of theplaintiff's rights under Article I ss 12 of the Constitution ofthe State of Washington. B. THE DEFENDANT'S CONTENTION THAT THE WASHINGTON SUPREMECOURT HAS ALREADY REJECTED PLAINTIFF'S CLAIM IS REFUTED BY THEOUTDATED CITATIONS RELIED UPON. As stated above, the primary evidence relied upon by theplaintiff is Judge Young's opinion, issued in 1988. In Section Bof the defendantis brief, defendant cites a 1981 case, contendingthat the state's supreme court has already ruled on this issue..Clearly, the Washington Supreme Court has not analyzed this issuein light of the massive effort put forth by Judge Young, and his68-page report recommending that marijuana be re-scheduled. Further, in State v. Smith, 93 Wn.2d 329, 610 P.2d 869 (1980),the court held that statutory punishment for possession ofmarijuana did not rise to the level of cruel and unusualpunishment. Justice Dolliver wrote a 14-page dissent, in whichtwo other justices concurred. Thus, only two more Justices wouldbe required to find marijuana legal without analyzing its medicalvalue. Under these circumstances, to claim that our Supreme Court hasput this matter to rest is, in a word, ridiculous. C. THE FEDERAL PROCESS FOLLOWING THE ISSUANCE OF JUDGE YOUNG'SOPINION WAS CORRUPTED, AND WASHINGTON COURTS ARE UNDER NOOBLIGATION TO DENY THE PLAINTIFF THE PROTECTION OF WASHINGTON'SCONSTITUTION BASED ON FEDERAL BUREAUCRATIC TURF WARS. The plaintiff set out the outlines of 'the federal farce' inpages 14 through 18 of his opening brief. The plaintiff, as alawyer and officer of the court, does not label federal agencyand court actions as 'farce' lightly. But no other, lesspejorative word applies. The overarching question is: Why are we letting the policemake our medical decisions? The Drug Enforcement Administration is a law-enforcementagency. It is not charged with the advancement of science or thealleviation of suffering. Congress put in place a method for evaluating whether a drugshould be re-scheduled upon discovery of new evidence of more orless efficacy or harm than was known when the drug was originallyscheduled. Judge Young followed that procedure, and found thatthe law 'requires' marijuana to be re-scheduled to alleviate 'thelegitimate need, amply demonstrated in this record, of countlesssufferers for the relief marijuana can provide when prescribed bya physician.' Young Opinion, page 67-8. After that, the 'drug czar' or 'top cop' or whatever currentlyaccepted name is in vogue for the head drug-law enforcer simplyinvoked the bureaucratic power of ipse dixit to denyrescheduling. It is well-established law that Washington's constitutionprovides safeguards to personal liberty which are absent in thefederal constitution. Indeed, Article I ss 1, cited but notquoted by the defendant, states unequivocally that governments. ..are established to protect and maintain individual rights. Id. In addition to the cases cited in plaintiff's openingbrief, see State v. Bartholomew, 101 Wn.2d 631, 639 (1984)(dueprocess); and State v. Young, 123 Wn.2d 173 (1994)(right toprivacy). Thus, while federal courts may bow to the power of federal lawenforcement agencies and their head bureaucrats in determiningwhich citizens shall suffer for lack of medication and who shallnot, the judges in this state are not bound by those decisions. The dozens of opinions of federal courts and doctors to theeffect that marijuana is not the best medicine for many peoplemost of the time is irrelevant. This plaintiff found thatmarijuana relieved excruciating, demeaning, demoralizingsuffering in a manner that no prescribed medicine could begin toapproach. (Declaration of Seeley, Exhibit B to original brief,which the plaintiff urges the Court to re-read in its entirety.)This plaintiff's experience is not unique, as asserted by JudgeYoung's opinion citing to 'countless' sufferers. Young opinion at68. The invoking of federal procedure in Section C of thedefendant's brief is of no consequence to resolving this disputeunder the Washington constitution. D. THE CITATION TO THE 'RELEVANT MEDICAL COMMUNITY' REJECTINGMARIJUANA IS A RESULT, NOT A CAUSE, OF MARIJUANA'S ILLEGALSTATUS. The smear tactics against Lester Grinspoon, M.D., engaged inby the defendant in their brief at Section D, has been addressedabove, in the 'facts' section. As stated and reiterated supra, only one experiment has beenreported which actually used vegetable-state marijuana incomparison with other anti-emetics. A substantial minority of thepatients treated preferred it. See deposition of Conrad, ExhibitC, page 19. No other experiments have been done, because the federalgovernment prohibits them. See Affidavit of Doblin, Exhibit F toplaintiff's opening brief. So what we have is opinion based on rhetoric stacked on top ofother opinion based on rumor. This is not a battle of opinions.However many credentialled persons the defendant may round up tostate that 'marijuana is not proven. . .' is of no consequence.This plaintiff had an experience that cannot be disputed by'experts' who have not shared the experience. The years and reamsof paper expended by Judge Young to arrive at an overview havethe validity of having been performed by someone out to determinethe truth, not someone brought in to testify on one side of anissue. As the defendant points out (brief at page 7), it took 18years of use by the medical community before they figured outthat heroin was a more addictive painkiller than morphine.Marijuana has not had the benefit of 18 years of use by themodern medical community. How then do these 'experts' dare toclaim they can reach valid conclusions? As the defendant also points out, more studies need to bedone, a point virtually all agree upon. Placing marijuana inSchedule II would result in more studies -- virtually everypatient in the plaintiff's shoes would be the subject of thosestudies, by the mere gathering of statistical data. The defendant labels their group of 'experts' as the 'relevantmedical community.' Plaintiff asserts that the 'relevant medicalcommunity' is the group of persons who have undergone the samehorrendous chemotherapy nausea, vomiting and loss of bowelcontrol as the plaintiff. Gathering statistics from thatcommunity is difficult, since many of the people die, and othersare reluctant to admit to breaking the law. But according toJudge Young's opinion, they are 'countless.' The 'relevant community' argument is an attempt to transferthe legal issue to 'my expert is better than yours.' It has noplace in this litigation, and should be ignored by the Court. E. THE 'NO SAFE STANDARDS' IS BOTH FALSE AND A SPECIOUSARGUMENT AGAINST 'SELF-TITRATION.' The plaintiff is regularly sent home from the hospital withenough narcotics (oxycodone, Dilaudid (hydromorphone), etc.) tokill several people. He is expected to take the tablets asdirected. To do otherwise would be unsafe. The plaintiff couldeasily ingest a lethal dose of the drug, as is true of manyprescription drugs. There is no lethal dose of vegetable-statemarijuana. See Exhibit E page 8 and supporting endnotes. Instead of 'self-titration,' which the plaintiff indulges inby smoking a few puffs of marijuana and waiting a few minutes tosee if it is enough (see Declaration of Seeley, Exhibit B tooriginal brief), the defendant asks that the Court enforce thecurrent law requiring that THC be administered in pre-measureddoses, which results in much worse side effects, and much longerdebilitation from those side effects. Again, in the only serious fact-finding effort made on thesubject, Judge Young specifically held that marijuana has beenaccepted as capable of relieving the distress of great numbers ofvery ill people, and doing so with safety under medicalsupervision. Young Opinion at 68. What is true, and was raised supra, isthat currently, the purity of black-market marijuana can bequestionable, which would cease to be a problem if the drug wereavailable by prescription. F. THE 'NO NEW SCIENTIFICALLY RELIABLE EVIDENCE' ARGUMENT ISMORE OF THE SAME CIRCULAR, SELF-SERVING, OUTDATED NONSENSE. Defendant's argument in Section F is a rehash of argumentsmade and refuted above. Note that all cases pre-date JudgeYoung's opinion. And once again, Why is there no new scientific evidence?Because the federal government prohibits experiments. Affidavitof Doblin, Exhibit F to original brief. G. MARIJUANA HAS A 'HIGH POTENTIAL FOR ABUSE:' SO WHAT? The plaintiff frankly believes the 'abuse' of marijuana isoverstated and misunderstood throughout the judicial and lawenforcement communities. But even conceding that it has a 'highpotential for abuse,' that is of no relevance. Opium and cocainealso have high potentials for abuse, and they are Schedule IIdrugs. Again, Judge Young noted that Marijuana can be harmful.Marijuana is abused. But the same is true of dozens of drugs orsubstances which are listed in Schedule II so that they can beemployed in treatment by physicians in proper cases, despitetheir abuse potential. Young Opinion at 67. This is simply not avalid reason to make the plaintiff suffer as he was forced to dowithout breaking the law. I. DEFENDANT'S ARGUMENTS UNDER SECTIONS I, J AND K OFDEFENDANT'S BRIEF ARE ADDRESSED ABOVE, AND IN PLAINTIFF'S OPENINGBRIEF. The defendants re-hash old arguments, and fail utterly todefend against plaintiff's contention that he is protected byArticle I ss 32, the 'frequent recurrence to fundamentalprinciples' clause. 1. Of course the state can control 'drugs of abuse,' but sowhat? The argument set forth in Section J of defendant's briefimplies that the plaintiff believes the state should not'control' marijuana. Nothing could be further from the truth.History teaches us that prohibition results in loss of control,while regulation (and sane laws) result in control. We need onlylook to the experiment with national alcohol prohibition. The state is not now 'controlling' marijuana use. It isprohibiting marijuana use. The plaintiff is asking the Court tochange that, so the state will control the use of marijuana formedical purposes, the same as it does with cocaine, opium, andother potentially harmful but extremely helpful drugs. There isno question that the state has the power to regulate the use ofmarijuana, and that is what the state should do. Placingdesperately ill people in jail for the use of a valuablemedicine, however, is a crude and cruel method of regulation, andthe state should get out of that business forthwith. J. THE 'FREQUENT RECURRENCE TO FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES' CLAUSEDICTATES THE PLACING OF MARIJUANA IN SCHEDULE II. There is little case law interpreting Article I ss 32. Absentreasons to do otherwise, words of laws should be read to asserttheir standard, understood meanings. (This itself is afundamental principle A valid interpretation of the clause, andthe reason for it, lies in the common human experience of takinga number of small, seemingly reasonable steps, then findingoneself in an unreasonable situation. It becomes time to pause,take stock, perhaps return to the last intersection and try adifferent road. That is what is needed here, now. When marijuana was placed inSchedule I, it belonged in Schedule I. With Judge Young's carefulresearch and analysis, it should have been placed in Schedule IIin 1988. We now have compassionate judges granting quasi-judicialpermission to ill people to use this valuable drug to ease theirsuffering, which amounts to 'prescription by going to jail.' SeeDeclaration of Subin, Exhibit E of plaintiff's opening brief. Itis a fundamental principle that judges should not be placed inthat position by the continued enforcement of unreasonable lawslevied against desperately ill and helpless citizens. Theplaintiff asks this Court to review the 'fundamental principles'discussion in the opening brief at pages 36-39, and to find thatthe plaintiff's rights, and the rights of countless others,established under that clause, are violated by the continuedplacement of marijuana in Schedule I. IV. CONCLUSION Whether under the federal 'equal protection' analysis, underthe separate 'privileges and immunities' analysis, the 'frequentrecurrence to fundamental principles' analysis, or under allthree, the Court should grant the plaintiff's motion for summaryjudgment, and issue a declaration that the continued placement ofmarijuana under Schedule I of the Uniform Controlled SubstancesAct is a violation of the plaintiff's rights as protected by theConstitution of the State of Washington. SIGNED AND DATED this ___ day of ____________, 1995. By: _________________________ RALPH SEELEY, WSBA 22469 (pro se) PLAINTIFF'S REPLY BRIEF law offices of NEIL J. HOFF 252 Broadway Tacoma, Washington 98402 383-3434 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-22IA087-000627-B015-131http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mariem1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051324 text/html 3730HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:13:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:58 GMTContent-length: 3513 Marijuana as Antiemetic Medicine: A Survey of Oncologists'Exper Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marijuana as Antiemetic Medicine: A Survey of Oncologists' Experiences and Attitudes by Richard Doblin and Mark A. R. Kleiman Abstract: A random-sample anonymous survey of themembers of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) wasconducted in the spring of 1990 measuring the attitudes andexperiences of American oncologists concerning the antiemetic useof marijuana in cancer chemotherapy patients. The survey wasmailed to about one-third (N = 2430) of all U.S.-based ASCOmembers and yielded a response rate of 43% (1035). More than 44%of the respondents report recommending the (illegal) use ofmarijuana for the control of emesis to at least one cancerchemotherapy patient. Almost half (48%) would prescribe marijuanato some of their patients if it were legal. As a group,respondents considered (smoked) marijuana to be somewhat moreeffective than the legally available (oral) synthetic THC(Marinol) and roughly as safe. Of the respondents who expressedan opinion, a majority (54%) thought marijuana should beavailable by prescription. These results bear on the question of whether marijuana has a"currently accepted medical use," an issue in anongoing administrative and legal dispute concerning whethermarijuana in smoked form should be available by prescriptionalong with synthetic THC in oral form. This survey demonstratesthat oncologists' experience with the medical use of marijuana ismore extensive, and their opinions of it more favorable, than theregulatory authorities appear to have believed. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-23IA087-000627-B015-158http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/psyamj.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051335 text/html 15898HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:13:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:43 GMTContent-length: 15680 Psychiatric Aspects of Marihuana Intoxication Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information PSYCHIATRIC ASPECTS OF MARIHUANA INTOXICATION Samuel Allentuck, MD, and Karl Bowman, MD Introduction by David Solomon: (The Marihuana Papers) Because it flatly contradicted many of the marihuana myths,the following paper caused something of a stir both in the pressand in medical circles when it was read at the ninety-eighthannual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, held inBoston in May 1942. The findings of Dr. Allentuck and Dr. Bowman- both practicing psychiatrists - were based upon exactingstudies which they conducted for the Mayor's Committee onMarihuana. Dr. Allentuck, whose medical degree is reinforced by adoctorate in biochemistry, was the clinical director of theCommittee. "The Psychiatric Aspects of MarihuanaIntoxication" was originally published by the AmericanJournal of Psychiatry in September 1942. It has since taken itsplace as one of the key reference works in the medical literatureon marihuana. Marihuana has been known as a passport to euphoria sinceancient times. It has fascinated men of imagination, anddescriptions of its effects upon the mind and body have beengiven in popular and scientific literature countless times. Theliterature has been adequately considered by Walton (1) and byBromberg (2), and will therefore not be reviewed at the presenttime. The observations to be presented here are based on researchconducted in New York City under the auspices of the Mayor'sCommittee on Marihuana. Studies were made of the effect ofmarihuana on a series of 77 subjects, including some who hadpreviously used marihuana for varying periods- of time. The workwas done at Welfare Hospital with the assistance of Drs. FrankAnker and Louis Gitzelter. A monograph based on this andcollaborative work is now in the course of preparation, and dealswith the pharmacological, clinical, therapeutic, social,psychological, and psychiatric aspects of marihuana. This paperconsists mainly of a description of the psychiatricmanifestations caused by the drug. The active principle in the plant is an oil, occurring inmaximum concentration in the flowering tops. The drug is ingestedor inhaled after being prepared for use in various ways indifferent parts of the world. In this hemisphere it is usuallysmoked, but may be eaten in the form of candy, or drunk invarious liquid preparations. The strength and quality of theeffect of marihuana vary with the geographical source of theplant. It is strongest in the African derivative, less strong inits Central American form, and weakest as found in the temperatezones of this country. Marihuana is unique in the reactions it produces in the users,although its physiological effects have been likened to those ofthe atropine group of drugs, and its psychic effects to those ofalcohol. The following is a clinical picture of the sequence ofevents resulting from the ingestion of marihuana. The sequence ofevents is the same whether the drug is ingested or inhaled, butthe latter produces its effects more rapidly. Within one-half to one hour after the ingestion of marihuanathe conjunctiva reddens, the pupils dilate and react sluggishlyto light; photophobia, lacrimation, tremulousness of the eyelids,and nystagmus upon lateral gaze become evident. Ophthalmoscopicexamination reveals nothing unusual in the nerve head, vessels orretinal background. The vision for distance, proximity, and colorchanges but slightly. The tongue becomes tremulous and dry, andthe mouth and throat patched, suggesting a diminution in salivarysecretion. Cardiovascular changes consist of an increase in theradial pulse rate and a rise in the blood pressure which closelyfollows the pulse increase. The extremities become tremulous, andthere are involuntary twitching, hyperreflexia, increasedsensitivity to touch, pressure, and pain stimuli. Pyramidal tractsigns are not elicited. There is equilibratory andnonequilibratory ataxia, as revealed by marked swaying andabnormal finger-to-finger test performance. Not all of thesephenomena occur in every sub ject, but when any of them does, itlasts for about twelve hours. Elaborate laboratory studies of theeffects of marihuana intoxication for shorter and longer periods,on users and non-users, reveal no significant systematicalterations. Mental phenomena arise two to three hours after ingestion, oralmost immediately after inhalation of the drug. The subjectadmits being "high." This state is characterized by asensation of "floating in air," "falling onwaves," lightness or dizziness in the head, ringing in theears, and heaviness in the limbs. Euphoria is first manifestedobjectively in volubility and increased psychomotor activity, andlater subjectively in a delicious and confused lassitude.Distance and time intervals subpectively appear elastic. In threeto six hours after ingestion of marihuana, hunger, manifestedmainly in a craving for sweets, and a feeling of fatigue andsleepiness become prominent. The individual may sleep from one tosix hours and on awakening is "down", that is, he nolonger feels "high." The clinical phenomena may lingerfor another few hours. The mental status usually reveals a hyperactive, apprehensive,loquacious, somewhat suspicious individual. His stream of talkmay be circumstantial; his mood may be elevated, but he does notharbor frank abnormal, mental content such as delusions,hallucinations, phobias, or autistic thinking. Attention,concentration and comprehension are only slightly disturbed, asis evidenced by the fact that the results in his educationalachievement tests are only slightly lowered. Marihuana may precipitate a psychosis in an unstable,disorganized personality, when it is taken in amounts greaterthan he can tolerate. Under such circumstances, the previouslymentioned physical and psychic manifestations becomequantitatively greater and new events arise. The respirationbecomes labored; pallor and perspiration become evident;tachycardia and irregularity of pulse occur. The subjectcomplains of urinary urgency, diarrhea and nausea; and may retchor actually vomit. His apprehension may be interrupted bylaughing and weeping, by volubility or mutism. Markedirritability, negativism, and cerea flexibilitas-like phenomenamay be elicited. The subject may assume grotesque, statuesquepositions. He may experience visual pseudohallucinations in theform of flashes of light and apparitions. Micropsia and macropsiamay occur. More intense intoxication may elicit auditoryhallucinations similar to those met with in the alcoholicpsychoses, such as alcoholic hallucinosis or delirium tremens. Limitations of time will not permit detailed description ofthe nine psychoses precipitated in our series of 77 subjects.However, it should be noted that a characteristic marihuana psychosis does not exist. Marihuana will not produce a psychosis denovo in a well-integrated, stable person. In unstable users thepersonality factor and the mood preceding the ingestion ofmarihuana will color any psychosis that may result. In no two ofthe cases developing psychoses in our series were the patternssimilar. Marihuana psychosis is protean in its manifestations andmay be mistaken for schizophrenic, affective, paranoid organic,psychoneurotic or psychopathic reaction types. Should a psychosisbe precipitated in an unstable personality it may last only a fewhours or it may continue for a few weeks. It may be controlled bywithdrawal of the drug and the administration of barbituratesAfter a few hours of sleep following the psychotic episodetreated with barbiturates, the patient may awaken with completememory for his experience and with his insight unimpaired. The prolonged effects of the drug are strongly subjective, andconsist of an increase in fatigability and vague generalizedaches and pains. The aftermath of marihuana intoxicationresembles an alcoholic "hangover." However, in contrastto alcoholics, marihuana users do not continue their indulgencebeyond the point of euphoria, and soon learn to avoid becomingill by remaining at a pleasurable distance from their maximumcapacity for the drug. It may be mentioned that marihuana is nomore aphrodisiac than is alcohol. Unlike damiana, yohimbin,testosterone propionate, etc. which produce genital engorgementdirectly, marihuana, like alcohol, acts only indirectly throughthe cerebral cortex in this respect. Marihuana differs from the opium derivatives in that it doesnot give rise to a biological or physiological dependence.Discontinuance of the drug after its prolonged use does notresult in withdrawal symptoms. The psychic habituation tomarihuana is not as strong as to tobacco or alcohol. Use ofmarihuana over a long period of time may conduce to ingestion ofprogressively larger amounts merely through accessibility andfamiliarity. This increment however does not give rise to a moreintense pleasurable experience. Thus a person experiencingpleasure with two marihuana cigarettes does not achieve anygreater pleasure with six cigarettes, though he may indulge inthem. A physiologically active constituent has been isolated fromthe crude marihuana by Dr. Roger Adams and his associates,working in the Noyes Chemical Laboratory of the University ofIllinois, in Urbana, as was reported by Dr. Adams in his HarveyLecture in February 1942. This substance or its syntheticequivalent elicits somatic and psychic phenomena identical tothose obtained with the crude drug. Only brief mention need bemade of these substances since they are ex plained in detail inDr. Adams' report. Thus, natural tetrahydrocannabinol is obtainedby the isomerization of cannabidiol, through the action ofp-toluene sulphonic acid. Synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol isl-hydroxy-3-n-amyl-6,6,9-trimethyl-7,8,9, 1 0-tetrahydro-6-dibenzopyran. Another synthetic equivalent called synhexyl is I-hydroxy-3-n-hexyl-6,6,9- trimethyl-7,8,9,10tetrahydra-6-dibenzopyran. The natural product is most potent,the synthetic equivalent least potent, and the synhexyl ranksbetween them. In the course of our investigation we studied the therapeuticapplication of marihuana derivatives and allied synthetics toopiate drug addiction, functional and organic depressions, andpsychoneurotic disorders in which dysphoria and anorexia existed.The rationale for such therapeutic use was that, while exertingno permanent deleterious effects, marihuana or its derivatives orsynthetics give rise to pleasurable sensations, calmness andrelaxation, and increase the appetite. A series of cases were selected from among drug addictsundergoing treatment. Subjective and objective criteria wereemployed. Comparative results were charted for the gradualwithdrawal, total withdrawal, and marihuana derivativesubstitution, as methods of treatment. A modification of thetechnic of Kolb and Himmelsbach was employed in studying theabstinence syndrome. Forty-nine subjects were studied. Theresults in general, although still inconclusive, suggest that themarihuana substitution method of treatment is superior. Thus, thewithdrawal symptoms were ameliorated or eliminated sooner, thepatient was in a better frame of mind, his spirits were elevated,his physical condition was more rapidly rehabilitated, and heexpressed a wish to resume his occupation sooner. In conclusion it is worthy of note that marihuana is probablytaken by its users for the purpose of producing sensationscomparable to those produced by alcohol. It causes a lowering ofinhibitions comparable to that elicited by alcohol in a bloodconcentration of 2-3 mg. per cent. The user may speak and actmore freely, is inclined to daydreaming, and experiences afeeling of calm and pleasurable relaxation. Marihuana, by virtue of its property of lowering inhibitions,accentuates all traits of personality, both those harmful andthose beneficial. It does not impel its user to take spontaneousaction, but may make his response to stimuli more emphatic thanit normally would be. Increasingly larger doses of marihuana arenot necessary in order that the long-term user may capture theoriginal degree of pleasure. Marihuana, like alcohol, does not alter the basic personality,but by relaxing inhibitions may permit antisocial tendenciesformerly suppressed to come to the fore. Marihuana does not ofitself give rise to antisocial behavior. There is no evidence to suggest that the continued use ofmarihuana is a stepping-stone to the use of opiates. Prolongeduse of the drug does not lead to physical, mental, or moraldegeneration, nor have we observed any permanent deleteriouseffects from its continued use. Quite the contrary, marihuana andits derivatives and allied synthetics have potentially valuabletherapeutic applications which merit future investigation. BIBLIOGRAPHY 1. Walton, R. P. Marihuana. J. B. Lippincott Company 2. Bromberg, Walter. "Marihuana: A psychiatric study" J.A.M.A., 113:4, July 1, 1939. 3. Kolb, Lawrence and Himmelsbach, C. K. "Clinicalstudies of drug addiction, III." Am. J. Psychiat., 94:759,Jan. 1938. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-24IA087-000627-B015-191http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/mjtherpy.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051350 text/html 19045HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:13:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:49 GMTContent-length: 18827 Therapeutic Application of Marihuana, by Dr. Robert Walton Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information THERAPEUTIC APPLICATION OF MARIHUANA Dr. Robert Walton Comments by David Solomon: In 1937 Dr. Walton, Professor of Pharmacology at theUniversity of Mississippi, prepared the following scholarly andcomprehensive essay on the medicinal uses of hemp preparationsfor his book Marihuana. Sensing that the irrational attitudesengendered by the marijuana panic then in high gear - mightinhibit legitimate scientific inquiry, he wrote: The 1937 Federal legislative acts should be wholly effectivein making these preparations completely unavailable for anyfurther abuse. More stringent regulations making the drugunavailable for medical and scientific purposes would be unwise,since other uses may be developed for the drug which willcompletely overshadow its disadvantages. The drug has certainremarkable properties and if its chemical structure weredetermined and synthetic variations developed, some of thesemight prove to be particularly valuable, both as therapeuticagents and as experimental tools. Dr. Walton's fears were well grounded: immediately after theMarihuana Tax Act of 1937t was passed, the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics issued and proceeded to implement 60odd pages of"more stringent regulations." These harsh, complexadministrative edicts rendered it virtually impossible - exceptin limited instances, characterized by red tape and harassment -to grow, import, buy, sell, use, prescribe, or experiment withhemp products. The therapeutic application of cannabis is more a matter ofhistory than of present-day practice. Synthetic analgesics andhypnotics have almost entirely displaced these preparations fromtheir original field of application. The newer synthetics aremore effective and reliable and, in addition, have been moreintensely exploited by commercial interests. Cannabispreparations have come to occupy so minor a place among modernmedicinals that it has been suggested that they be abandonedaltogether, this latter point of view being based on theassumption that they represent a menace from the standpoint ofthe hashish habit. Such an action would certainly be too drasticin view of the circumstances. For one thing the therapeutic useof cannabis and the hashish habit are almost entirely unrelated.The drug has been readily available in this country for almost acentury without developing more than a very occasional, isolatedinstance of hashish abuse. The marihuana habit came into thiscountry by other channels, although it is true that onceestablished as a practice, some few individuals have made use ofthe "drug store" preparations. The 1937 Federallegislative acts should be wholly effective in making thesepreparations completely unavailable for any further abuse of thissort. More stringent regulations making the drug unavailable formedical and scientific purposes would be unwise, since other usesmay be developed for the drug which will completely overshadowits disadvantages. The drug has certain remarkable properties andif its chemical structure were determined and syntheticvariations developed, some of these might prove to beparticularly valuable, both as therapeutic agents and asexperimental tools. Essentially the same general opinion has been expressedrecently by the committee on legislative activities of theAmerican Medical Association. They concluded that there ispositively no evidence to indicate the abuse of cannabis as amedicinal agent or to show that its medicinal use is leading tothe development of cannabis addiction. Cannabis at the presenttime is slightly used for medicinal purposes, but it would seemworthwhile to maintain its status as a medicinal agent for suchpurposes as it now has. There is a possibility that a re-study ofthe drug by modern means may show other advantages to be derivedfrom its medicinal use. Although hemp preparations may have been used by the ancientsto produce anesthesia, these drugs were not introduced generallyinto medicine until about 1840. At this time O'Shaughnessy,Aubert-Roche, and Moreau de Tours observed its use in India andEgypt and proceeded to experiment with its therapeuticpossibilities. After using it in different sorts of conditions,they were each enthusiastic in representing it as a valuabletherapeutic agent. Their activities resulted in a very widespreadand general use of the drug in both Europe and America. Duringthe period 1840-1900 there were something over 100 articlespublished which recommended cannabis for one disorder or another. This popularity of the hemp drugs can be attributed partly tothe fact that they were introduced before the synthetic hypnoticsand analgesics. Chloral hydrate was not introduced until 1869 andwas followed in the next 30 years by paraldehyde, sulfonal, andthe barbitals. Antipyrine and acetanilide, the first of theirparticular group of analgesics, were introduced about 1884. Forgeneral sedative and analgesic purposes, the only drugs commonlyused at this time were the morphine derivatives and theirdisadvantages were very well known. In fact, the most attractivefeature of the hemp narcotics was probably the fact that they didnot exhibit certain of the notorious disadvantages of theopiates. The hemp narcotics do not constipate at all, they moreoften increase rather than decrease appetite, they do notparticularly depress the respiratory center even in large doses,they rarely or never cause pruritis or cutaneous eruptions and,most important, the liability of developing addiction is verymuch less than with the opiates. These features were responsible for the rapid rise inpopularity of the drug. Several features can be recognized ascontributing to the gradual decline of popularity. Cannabis doesnot usually produce analgesic or relax spastic conditions without producing cortical effects and, in fact, these corticaleffects usually predominate. The actual degree of analgesiaproduced is much less than with the opiates. Most important, theeffects are irregular due to marked variations in individualsusceptibility and probably also to variable absorption of thegummy resin. The reported therapeutic successes and failures of these drugsare briefly summarized below. Among the miscellaneous conditions for which it has been usedand recommended may be mentioned cough, fatigue, rheumatism,rheumatic neuralgia, asthma, and delirium tremens. Spastic Conditions Part of the early enthusiasm for cannabis was based on itspresumed value as an antagonist of spastic conditions. It wasused and highly recommended in the treatment of tetanus,hydrophobia, puerperal convulsions, chorea, and strychninepoisoning. In the case of strychnine poisoning, at least, its value isslight. The author, with the help of Horace Dozier, tested theinfluence of cannabis insofar as it affected the minimalconvulsive dose of strychnine in dogs. Even large doses ofcannabis did not alter the strychnine effect enough to indicateany significant antagonism. In tetanus and hydrophobia,spasticity is more cerebral in origin and the cannabis antagonismmay have been more effective in such cases. Analgesic Uses In combatting pain of various causes, cannabis preparationsmight be expected to be reasonably effective. See declared thatit "gives relief from pain and increases the appetite in allcases, no matter on what causes the pain and loss of appetite maydepend." Hare says, ". . . during the time that this remarkabledrug is relieving pain, a very curious physical conditionsometimes manifests itself; namely, that the diminution of painseems to be due to its fading away in the distance, so that thepain becomes less and less." Mercer says that it does not arrest pain but has a"special power over spasmodic pain." Wood says that"as an analgesic, it is very much inferior to opium but maybe tried when the latter is for any reason contra-indicated. Infull doses, in neuralgic pains, it certainly often givesrelief." Aulde says that "as a remedy for the relief ofsupraorbital neuralgia no article perhaps affords betterprospects than cannabis." Headache and Migraine Farlow considered cannabis useful in "nervousheadache." MacKenzie says that if continued for some time itis the most valuable remedy he has met with in the treatment ofpersistent headache. Marshall does not consider that cannabis isgenerally useful but says however that it appears to be useful inheadache of a dull and continuous character. Regarding migraine, Stevens say that Cannabis indica is"sometimes very useful.... Two drops of the fluid extractmay be given every half hour until the pain abates or untilslight dizziness or mental confusion appears. Even larger dosesmay be used if necessary." Osler and McCrea have said that for migraine, Cannabis indicais probably the most satisfactory remedy. However, in the latestedition of this text it is only suggested that "a prolongedcourse of Cannabis-indica may be tried." Solis-Cohen andGithens consider that cannabis is of great service in certaincases of migraine not dependent upon or aggravated by eyestrain.Fantus recently recommended its use in migraine, prescribingdoses of 1 cc. of the fluid extract in iso-alcoholic elixir; N.F. McConnell, Bastedo, Hare, Lewis, and Bragman have alsofavorably mentioned its use in migraine. Beckmann on the other hand says that whereas the drug was onceconsidered a specific for migraine it has more recently falleninto "a probably deserved disrepute." Sedative and Hypnotic Action One of the earlier experimenters with hashish declared that"in its hypnotic and soothing effects on the nervous system,its resemblance to morphia is very great." Fronmuller made about 1,000 observations on patients in whichthe soporific effects were compared with other drugs,particularly opium. He considered that the effect on the nervoussystem was much less dangerous than with opium. In most instanceshis patients are stated to have fallen asleep in about an hourwithout any particular side effects. Bastedo remarks that it may promote sleep in the presence ofpain. Poulsson and Dixon say that "sleep has often been seento ensue without any, or with only slight excitement." Miller, Berthier, McConnell, Shoemaker, Clendinning, Hiller,and Florshinger have also described its usefulness-in procuringsleep. Fantus and Cornbleet use it as a general sedative alongwith sodium bromide in the treatment of pruritis. Lees was veryenthusiastic about the anodyne and soporific action of an aqueousextract, which he considered did not produce any of theexcitement effects. In current practice, the sedative effects are probably mostused in veterinary work. Milks and Eichhorn say that cannabis is a distinct depressant to the brain and cord. Inman, this may be preceded by a brief period of stimulation butthis action is rarely seen in the horse. It is a distinct depressant and hypnotic and probably ranks ahead of opium for thispurpose in equine practice. After full doses the animals feeldrowsy, sleepy, have a disinclination to move and may finallypass into a stage of narcosis, which may last from 12 to 24hours, and then recover. One half ounce of the solid extract is cited as beingsufficient to anesthetize a horse. This drug is relatively safeif considered simply on the basis of its effects on thecirculation and respiratory center. It would seem however that avery real source of danger exists in the possible development ofbronchopneumonia during the long period of semi-anesthesia. Mental Conditions Moreau de Tours was the first to advocate using the hashisheuphoria as a means of combatting mental conditions of adepressive character. He reported a number of case histories ofmanics and melancholies which were improved after such therapy.His conclusions were immediately criticized by Rech. There havebeen a few other observations agreeing in general with Moreau deTours and there have been some who reported adversely on suchtreatment. Straub recently suggested that small doses of aproperly standardized preparation may possibly prove useful indepressive melancholias. Edes found it benefited patients who complained of unpleasant,tiring dreams, and Birch used it in the treatment of chronicchloral and chronic opium poisoning. Uterine Dysfunction Some have been particularly enthusiastic regarding the valueof cannabis in dysmenorrhea and menorrhagia. Batho says, ".. . considerable experience of its employment in menorrhagia,more especially in India, has convinced me that it is, in thatcountry at all events, one of the most reliable means at ourdisposal." Referring to the use of Indian hemp inmenorrhagia, Brown says, ". . . there is no medicine whichhas given such good results; for this reason it ought to take thefirst place as a remedy in menorrhagia." Effects During Labor Willis recommended its use in "tedious labour where thepatient is restless." Christison used the drug duringchildbirth and advocated its use as an oxytocic. He believed itstimulated uterine movements more quickly than ergot. Kobylanshi,Grigor and Savignac also reported on its effects duringchildbirth. These observations may be taken generally as evidencethat cannabis does not depress uterine movements. The drug is solacking in peripheral actions that any special stimulation ordepression would hardly be expected. The question as to the effects of cannabis during labor wasrecently discussed in the Journal of the American MedicalAssociation. The sensation of pain is distinctly lessened or entirelyabsent and the sense of touch is less acute than normally. Hencea woman in labor may have a more or less painless labor. If asufficient amount of the drug is taken, the patient may fall intoa tranquil sleep from which she will awaken refreshed. . . . Asfar as is known, a baby born of a mother intoxicated withcannabis will not be abnormal in any way. In South Africa the native women smoke cannabis to stupefythemselves during childbirth. A requisite for the successful useof this technic would seem to be a previous familiarity with theeffects of the drug. The African natives no doubt use the drug atother times and accordingly are not as likely to be distressed bythe occasionally terrifying phases of the episode. Also someexperience is needed in order to regulate the dose when used inthis way. In such obstetric use, the drug has one importantadvantage as contrasted with morphine, that is, the almostconnplete absence of any depressing effect on the respiratorymechanism. Diagnostic Usefulness There have been numerous suggestions that the hashish deliriummay be used in psychiatric analysis as a means of removing thebarriers to the subconscious. This was one of the purportedlyuseful features of the drug as declared in the recent legislativedeliberations. Although such an application is not unreasonable,the few trials which have been made were not particularlysuccessful. In contrast with cocaine and amytal, the patientusually becomes more absorbed and less communicative. Lindemannand Malamud observed this while studying effects inschizophrenics and psychoneurotic They reported that "newexperiences are created which allow new presentations or newfantasies and an increasing neglect of the outside world in favorof experiences which are in keeping with the patient'sdesires." They did note that with schizo phrenics there wasmuch less change in space and time perception than inpsychoneurotic and normal persons. There is a fictional account of the use of the drug to obtainconfessions from suspected criminals. In general, however, theusual effect of the drug is not such as to make it very usefulfor such purposes. Von Schrenck described some ratherinconclusive experimentation involving the use of hashish inhypnotism. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-25IA087-000627-B015-217http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/incident.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051400 text/html 12163HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:13:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:06:04 GMTContent-length: 11945 An Incident in Kansas -- Medical Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information AN INCIDENT IN KANSAS An interview with ELVY MUSIKKA and RICHARD DAVIS by R Givens c 1995 Note to the Reader: Elvy Musikka, interviewed in thestory below is one of only eight people in the United Stateslegally allowed to use marijuana as medicine. She obtained herstatus after being arrested for cultivating marijuana to treather glaucoma. Her trial judge ruled that she would be insaneunder the circumstances NOT to break the law and that she shoulddo whatever is required, legal or illegal, to maintain her sight.She receives a supply of marijuana cigarettes on a regular basisfrom the Federal Government. She is also a tireless and quitevocal activist for the cause of a sensible drug policy towardsick people. It is in this context that the following incidentoccurred. Richard Davis runs the Hemp Museum, a mobileeducational exhibit which demonstrates the history and uses ofhemp. On 21 June 1994 around 7:30pm, RICHARD DAVIS and ELVY MUSIKKA,a legal marijuana user, were heading west in the Hemp Museum onI-70 near Salina, Kansas when a Kansas Highway Patrol (KHP) carbegan following them. RICHARD DAVIS: He stayed on my tail or came up besidethe truck looking at the stickers for 15 or 20 minutes. When hestopped me, he said I wasn't driving so good, but he followed mefor a long time and a lot of traffic went by, so he wasn't tooconcerned until he decided to stop me. He came over all steamedup, accusing me, "Look at you. You're all fucked up. Youreyes are red......" He had an attitude right from the start.He had me stand behind the truck and went to talk to Elvy. ELVY MUSIKKA: Officer Patrick introduced himself andsaid, "I stopped you because your boyfriend has to bestoned. He's driving 60mph." It was a 65mph zone and Richardwas driving slower because the wind was blowing the truck around.A minute later Officer Patrick was telling me that Richard wasbeing arrested because "He told me that he smokedmarijuana." (laughs) As though I was fool enough to believeRichard would ever say something so stupid to a highwaypatrolman. (laughs) I knew right then we were dealing with liars. As soon as we stopped, I pulled out the Parade Magazine (12June 1994) with my picture on the cover, so Officer Patrick andthe rest of them knew from the very beginning that I receiveLEGAL MARIJUANA from the government. He asked what the maximum Ican carry is and I told him I can have a three-month supply,which is a lot, because I'm expected to smoke 300 joints a month.Then Officer Patrick wanted to check my pouch, so I showed him myprescription bottle. He smelled the weed and said it smelled verygood. He thought it was too good to be government pot. I guess hehad read enough to know that the government only gives out trash.He wondered about them being hand-rolled, but the governmentmarijuana is freeze dried and I have to wet it and re-roll itbecause it's too harsh. Officer Patrick never questioned that I was a legal smoker,but he was determined to arrest Richard no matter what. He wasupset because Richard chose to exercise his 1st Amendment Rightswith his bumper stickers and the hemp plant on top of the truck.Cops like Officer Patrick think they are above the law. This wasproven by the way they harassed us for the next five hours. RICHARD DAVIS: Within 20 minutes four squad cars werethere. Patrick started out threatening me with jail and they keptasking for consent to search the back of the truck. Every once ina while they would come over in a group and seriously discussgetting permission to search. They asked several times, but Irefused. They said they were going to take me to jail anyway.Officer Patrick was convinced that he was going to get in theback and nail me for 200 pounds of weed he seemed to think I hadin there. (laughs) They kept saying, "Let us take a look. Ifit's only a little bit for personal use, we don't care."They hinted that they would just take the weed and let us go, butthey weren't giving any guarantees. They finally decided to get adrug dog. If the dog got a positive response for marijuana, thatwould be their probable cause. ELVY MUSIKKA: (laughs hard) There I was dressed inHEMP, we are driving a HEMP museum, they already know I'm a LEGALMARIJUANA USER (laughs), and they needed a drug dog to determinethere was some HEMP there. (laughs) As soon as the dog arrived,it was time for my medicine, so I lit up and smoked a wholejoint. By then we had been detained four hours. RICHARD DAVIS: We told them over and over that we wouldnot approve a search. They knew full well that they were doing anILLEGAL SEARCH. Elvy even asked if they had a warrant signed by ajudge. Their answer was "No, but we can get one." Theynever did though. We were a couple of hours into this before Officer Patricksnapped and read me my rights. He said I had the right to remainsilent, so I shut up. Until then I was very cooperative and triedto educate them about hemp. All they did was threaten me withjail and constantly ask to search the truck. After they got the dog they decide they could search the backof the truck. They thought I had the keys even though they pattedme down right after they stopped us. One of the troopers took aone bladed swiss army type knife the Hemp Rope People gave me. Iguess he liked the knife until he found out I wasn't going tojail. We had to wait an extra hour while the officer brought theknife back. Anyway, the keys were in the ignition, so they got inwithout breaking the lock. Once they got in back, they went through Elvy's stuff andfound a half pound of good bud and some very good leaf a dealerGAVE her because the government shorted Elvy a month's supply onher prescription. When they found that they said, "we've gothim on sales!" ELVY MUSIKKA: They were in MY suitcase threateningRichard with "sales." My suitcase was totally locked.They destroyed the zipper and went through ALL of my personalbelongings. It was a violation of my privacy in every way. They were opening sealed containers and poking throughEVERYTHING. They had the audacity to open my government marijuanacan, which was sealed exactly the way I get it. I purposely keepit sealed so if anybody gets in there it has to be an ILLEGALSEARCH. I had a few government joints on top and some good bud andsome very good leaf for baking. I like cookies because of thehassle of smoking on the road. Anyway, according to the courtorder of Judge Markey Bolin, I am entitled to do WHATEVER ittakes LEGAL or ILLEGAL to preserve my sight. That's in theJudge's decision. They took the good marijuana and left me a few days supply ofgovernment trash. they even stole my government prescriptionmarijuana container. Officer Patrick and the rest of them may beinterested to know that they definitely put my vision at risk bystealing my medicine. I have a tolerance to the standard glaucomamedicines and if my doctor hadn't arranged an emergency shipment,I would have been in real trouble. The stuff the troopers leftonly lasted a few days. RICHARD DAVIS: Now, let's get this straight. Elvy hadthat bud because she was shorted a month's supply by thegovernment. THEY admitted as much when they Federal Expressed 300joints to a Motel 6. Those highway patrolmen weren't satisfiedwith harassing us for five hours in the middle of the night; theyhad to take a glaucoma patient's medicine before they were happy. I feel sorry for people like Officer Patrick because this Waron Drugs completely compromises their morality. It absolutelydestroys their integrity going around lying and abusing citizensrights. I would be amazed if all the pot they took ended up inthe DA's office. The property receipt they gave us was soillegible that it says absolutely nothing about what they took.You can't read a word. Maybe that's their idea of honesty. They know damn well that marijuana isn't dangerous. At no timedid these cops act as though they thought we were a threat. Theynever handcuffed me and they left me alone several times whilethey badgered Elvy. They thanked us over and over for being socourteous. After being detained for five hours and being robbedby a gang of thieves with badges, all they did was give me awarning citation for a cracked windshield that doesn't requireany action. They took over a half pound of marijuana, but they neverarrested ANYBODY for ANYTHING. How can they do that??? They broke a bunch of stuff in the Hemp Museum during theirsearch. They offered to put everything back, but they made itpretty clear that they would wreck everything they could if theyhad to clean up their own mess. So I stood out there in themiddle of the night trying to get everything back in the truck. ELVY MUSIKKA: Officer Patrick and the other highwaypatrolmen might be interested to know that they made me feel likeI was in some foreign police state where you don't have anyrights. Those troopers made me feel I was in a very differentcountry than the one where I took an oath to defend and upholdthe Constitution. I became a citizen by choice, not chance, and Iknow my rights. Seeing these Kansas highway patrolmen trample onthe Constitution made me feel very bad. They knew our rights, butthey didn't care if they violated them. Officer Patrick and therest of them knew right from the beginning that I have a legalright to have marijuana, but they didn't let that stop them. I'mconsidering a civil rights suit. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-26IA087-000627-B015-243http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/home.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051409 text/html 14303HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:14:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:06:22 GMTContent-length: 14085 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 Wayne Hall, Nadia Solowij and Jim Lemon, National Drug andAlcohol Research Centre Prepared for the National Task Force on Cannabis CONTENTS Acknowledgments Executive summary Acute effects Chronic effects High risk groups The health risks of alcohol, tobacco and cannabis use 1. Summary of report 2. Introduction 3. Evidential principles 4. Cannabis the drug 5. The acute effects of cannabis intoxication 6. The chronic effects of cannabis use onhealth 7. The psychological effects of chroniccannabis use 8. The therapeutic effects of cannabinoids 9. An overall appraisal of the health andpsychological effects of cannabis A full copy of the text version of this report can be obtainedhere. Acknowledgments The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of thefollowing people in the preparation of this manuscript: Dr Robert Ali, Chairman of the National Task Force onCannabis, for his encouragement and support at all stages of theproject, and the members of the Task Force for their feedback onearlier drafts of the document. Dr Mario Argandona (WHO Programme on Substance Abuse), Dr GregChesher, (National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre), PaulChristie, (Project Officer, National Task Force on Cannabis), DrBill Corrigal (Senior Scientist, Addiction Research Foundation,Toronto), Emeritus Professor Harold Kalant (Department ofPharmacology, University of Toronto), and Dr Jean-Marie Ruel(Bureau of Dangerous Drugs, Health and Welfare Canada) for theiruseful comments on the whole manuscript. The following persons are acknowledged for their expertcomments on specific sections of the manuscript: Dr Peter Fried(Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario) for his comments onreproductive effects; Dr Richard Mattick (National Drug andAlcohol Research Centre) for his comments on the dependencesyndrome; Dr Peter Nelson (Southern Cross University, New SouthWales) for his comments on psychological effects); Dr Mehdi Paes(Department of Psychiatry, University of Rabat, Morocco) andProfessor S.M. Channabasavanna (Director, National Institute ofMental Health and NeuroSciences, Bangalore, India) for theircomments on psychiatric disorders; and Professor Donald Tashkin(Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles Medical School) for his comments oncardiovascular and respiratory effects. Eva Congreve, the Archivist at the National Drug and AlcoholResearch Centre, performed above and beyond the call of duty inuncomplainingly and efficiently dealing with a plethora ofrequests for obscure publications in esoteric journals. Withouther assistance, this review would not have been half ascomprehensive as we hope it has been. Peter Congreve and KeithWarren collected articles and books which made the task ofreading and writing easier. Acknowledgment is given to the Centre's secretaries, LibbyBarron, Margaret Eagers and Gail Merlin, who undertook thethankless task of checking the referencing and proof reading themanuscript. Executive summary The following is a summary of the major adverse health andpsychological effects of acute and chronic cannabis use, groupedaccording to the degree of confidence in the view that therelationship between cannabis use and the adverse effect is acausal one. Acute effects anxiety, dysphoria, panic and paranoia, especially in naiveusers; cognitive impairment, especially of attention and memory, for theduration of intoxication; psychomotor impairment, and probably an increased risk ofaccident if an intoxicated person attempts to drive a motorvehicle, or operate machinery; an increased risk of experiencing psychotic symptoms among thosewho are vulnerable because of personal or family history ofpsychosis; an increased risk of low birth weight babies if cannabis is usedduring pregnancy. Chronic effects The major health and psychological effects of chronic heavycannabis use, especially daily use over many years, remainuncertain. On the available evidence, the major probable adverseeffects appear to be: respiratory diseases associated with smoking as the method ofadministration, such as chronic bronchitis, and the occurrence ofhistopathological changes that may be precursors to thedevelopment of malignancy. development of a cannabis dependence syndrome, characterised byan inability to abstain from or to control cannabis use; subtle forms of cognitive impairment, most particularly ofattention and memory, which persist while the user remainschronically intoxicated, and may or may not be reversible afterprolonged abstinence from cannabis. The following are the major possible adverse effects ofchronic, heavy cannabis use which remain to be confirmed byfurther research: an increased risk of developing cancers of the aerodigestivetract, i.e. oral cavity, pharynx, and oesophagus; an increased risk of leukemia among offspring exposed while inutero; a decline in occupational performance marked by underachievementin adults in occupations requiring high level cognitive skills,and impaired educational attainment in adolescents; birth defects occurring among children of women who used cannabisduring their pregnancies. High risk groups Adolescents Adolescents with a history of poor school performance may havetheir educational achievement further limited by the cognitiveimpairments produced by chronic intoxication with cannabis. Adolescents who initiate cannabis use in the early teens are athigher risk of progressing to heavy cannabis use and otherillicit drug use, and to the development of dependence oncannabis. Women of childbearing age Pregnant women who continue to smoke cannabis are probably atincreased risk of giving birth to low birth weight babies, andperhaps of shortening their period of gestation. Women of childbearing age who smoke cannabis at the time ofconception or while pregnant possibly increase the risk of theirchildren being born with birth defects. Persons with pre-existing diseases Persons with a number of pre-existing diseases who smokecannabis are probably at an increased risk of precipitating orexacerbating symptoms of their diseases. These include: individuals with cardiovascular diseases, such as coronary arterydisease, cerebrovascular disease and hypertension; individuals with respiratory diseases, such as asthma,bronchitis, and emphysema; individuals with schizophrenia, who are at increased risk ofprecipitating or of exacerbating schizophrenic symptoms; individuals who are dependent on alcohol and other drugs, who areprobably at an increased risk of developing dependence oncannabis. The health risks of alcohol, tobacco and cannabis use Acute effects Alcohol. The major risks of acute cannabis use are similar tothe acute risks of alcohol intoxication in a number of respects.First, both drugs produce psychomotor and cognitive impairment.The impairment produced by alcohol increases risks of variouskinds of accident. It remains to be determined whether cannabisintoxication produces similar increases in accidental injury anddeath, although on balance it probably does. Second, substantialdoses of alcohol taken during the first trimester of pregnancycan produce a foetal alcohol syndrome. There is suggestive butfar from conclusive evidence that cannabis used during pregnancymay have similar adverse effects. Third, there is a major healthrisk of acute alcohol use that is not shared with cannabis. Inlarge doses alcohol can cause death by asphyxiation, alcoholpoisoning, cardiomyopathy and cardiac infarct whereas there areno recorded cases of fatalities attributable to cannabis. Tobacco. The major acute health risks that cannabis share withtobacco are the irritant effects of smoke upon the respiratorysystem, and the stimulating effects of both THC and nicotine onthe cardiovascular system, both of which can be detrimental topersons with cardiovascular disease. Chronic effects Alcohol. Chronic cannabis use may share some of the risks ofheavy chronic alcohol use. First, heavy use of either drugincreases the risk of developing a dependence syndrome in whichusers experience difficulty in stopping or controlling their use.There is strong evidence for such a syndrome in the case ofalcohol and reasonable evidence in the case of cannabis. Second,there is reasonable clinical evidence that the chronic heavy useof alcohol can produce psychotic symptoms and psychoses in someindividuals. There is suggestive evidence that chronic heavycannabis use may produce a toxic psychosis, precipitate psychoticillnesses in predisposed individuals, and exacerbate psychoticsymptoms in individuals with schizophrenia. Third, there is goodevidence that chronic heavy alcohol use can indirectly causebrain injury - the Wernicke-Korsakov syndrome - with symptoms ofsevere memory defect and an impaired ability to plan andorganise. Chronic cannabis use does not produce cognitiveimpairment of comparable severity but there is suggestiveevidence that chronic cannabis use may produce subtle defects incognitive functioning, that may or may not be reversible afterabstinence. Fourth, there is reasonable evidence that chronicheavy alcohol use produces impaired occupational performance inadults and lowered educational achievements in adolescents. Thereis at most suggestive evidence that chronic heavy cannabis useproduces similar, albeit more subtle impairments in occupationaland educational performance of adults. Fifth, there is goodevidence that chronic, heavy alcohol use increases the risk ofpremature mortality from accidents, suicide and violence. Thereis no comparable evidence for chronic cannabis use, although itis likely that dependent cannabis users who frequently drivewhile intoxicated with cannabis increase their risk of accidentalinjury or death. Sixth, alcohol use has been accepted as acontributory cause of cancer of the oropharangeal organs in menand women. There is suggestive evidence that chronic cannabissmoking may also be a contributory cause of cancers of theaerodigestive tract (i.e. the mouth, tongue, throat, oesophagus,lungs). Tobacco. The major adverse health effects shared by chroniccannabis and tobacco smokers are chronic respiratory diseases,such as chronic bronchitis, and probably, cancers of theaerodigestive tract. The increased risk of cancer in therespiratory tract is a consequence of the shared route ofadministration by smoking. It is possible that chronic cannabissmoking also shares the cardiotoxic properties of tobaccosmoking, although this possibility remains to be investigated. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-27IA087-000627-B016-292http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051835 text/html 32260HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:18:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:34 GMTContent-length: 32042 Marinol Description and Data Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information MARINOL (dronabinol*) Capsules (Warning: May be habit forming) The USAN name for delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Dronabinol is a cannabinoid designated chemically as(6aR-trans)-6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-l-ol.Dronabinol has the following empirical and structural formulas: Dronabinol, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC), isnaturally-occurring and has been extracted from Cannabis salivaL. (marijuana). Dronabinol is also chemically synthesized and is alight-yellow resinous oil that is sticky at room temperature andhardens upon refrigeration. Dronabinol is insoluble in water and is formulated in sesameoil. It has a pKa of 10.6 and an octanol-water partitioncoefficient: 6,000:1 at pH 7. Capsules for oral administration: Marinol is supplied asround, soft gelatin capsules containing either 2.5 mg, 5 mg, or 10 mg dronabinol. Each Marinol capsule is formulated with thefollowing inactive ingredients: sesame oil, gelatin, glycerin, methylparaben, propylparaben,and titanium dioxide. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY Dronabinol is an orally active cannabinoid which, like othercannabinoids, has complex effects on the central nervous system(CNS), including central sympathomimetic activity. Cannabinoidreceptors have been discovered in neural tissues. These receptorsmay play a role in mediating the effects of dronabinol and othercannabinoids. Pharmacodynamics: Dronabinol-induced sympathomimetic activitymay result in tachycardia and/or conjunctival injection. Itseffects on blood pressure are inconsistent, but occasionalsubjects have experienced orthostatic hypotension and/or syncopeupon abrupt standing. Dronabinol also demonstrates reversible effects on appetite,mood, cognition, memory, and perception. These phenomena appearto be dose-related, increasing in frequency with higher dosages,and subject to great interpatient variability After oral administration, dronabinol has an onset of actionof approximately 0.5 to 1 hours and peak effect at 2 to 4 hours.Duration of action for psychoactive effects is 4 to 6 hours, butthe appetite stimulant effect of dronabinol may continue for 24hours or longer after administration. Tachyphylaxis and tolerance develop to some of thepharmacologic effects of dronabinol and other cannabinoids wthchronic use, suggesting an indirect effect on sympatheticneurons. In a study of the pharmacodynamics of chronic dronabinolexposure, healthy male volunteers (N = 12) received 210 mg/daydronabinol, administered orally in divided doses, for 16 days. Aninitial tachycardia induced by dronabinoi was replacedsuccessively by normal sinus rhythm and then bradycardia. Adecrease in supine blood pressure, made worse by standing, wasalso observed initially. These volunteers developed tolerance tothe cardiovascular and subjective adverse CNS effects ofdronabinol within 12 days of treatment initiation. Tachyphylaxis and tolerance do not, however, appear to developto the appetite stimulant effect of Marinol. In studies involvingpatients with Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), theappetite stimulant effect of Marinol has been sustained for up tofive months in clinical trials, at dosages ranging from 2.5mg/day to 20 mg/day. Pharmacokinetics: Absorption and Distribution: Marinol (dronabinol) is almostcompletely absorbed (90 to 95%) after single oral doses. Due tothe combined effects of first pass hepatic metabolism and highlipid solubility, only 10 to 20% of the administered dose reachesthe systemic circulation. Dronabinol has a large apparent volumeof distribution, approximately 10 L/kg, because of its lipidsolubility. The plasma protein binding of dronabinol and itsmetabolites is approximately 97%. The elimination phase of dronabinol can be described using atwo compartment model with an initial (alpha) half-life of about4 hours and a terminal (beta) half-life of 25 to 36 hours.Because of its large volume of distribution, dronabinol and itsmetabolites may be excreted at low levels for prolonged periodsof time. Metabolism: Dronabinol undergoes extensive first-pass hepaticmetabolism, primarily by icrosomal hydroxylation, yielding bothactive and inactive metabolites. Dronabinol and its principalactive metabolite, 11-OH-delta-9-THC, are present inapproximately equal concentrations in plasma. Concentrations ofboth parent drug and metaboiite peak at approximately 2 to 4hours after oral dosing and decline over several days. Values to clearance average about 0.2 L/kg-hr, but are highlyvariable due to the complexity of cannabinoid distribution. Elimination: Dronabinol and its biotransformation products areexcreted in both feces and urine. Biliary excretion is the majorroute of elimination with about half of a radiolabeled oral dosebeing recovered from the feces within 72 hours as contrasted with10 to 15% recovered from urine. Less than 5% of an oral dose isrecovered unchanged in the feces. Following single dose administration, low levels of dronabinolmetabolites have been detected for more than 5 weeks in the urineand feces. In a study of Marinol involving AIDS patients, urinarycannabinoid/creatinine concentration ratios were studied biweeklyover a six week period. The urinary cannabinoid/creatinine ratiowas closely correlated with dose. No increase in thecannabinoid/creatinine ratio was observed after the first twoweeks of treatment, indicating that steady-state cannabinoidlevels had been reached. This conclusion is consistent withpredictions based on the observed terminal half-life ofdronabinol. Special Populations: The pharmacokinetic profile of Marinolhas not been investigated in either pediatric or geriatricpatients. CLINICAL TRIALS Appetite Stimulation: The appetite stimulant effect of Marinol(dronabinol) in the treatment of AIDS-related anorexia associatedwith weight loss was studied in a randomized, double-blind,placebo-controlled study involving 139 patients. The initialdosage of Marinol in all patients was 5 mg/day, administered indoses of 2.5 mg one hour before lunch and one hour before supper.In pilot studies, early morning administration of Marinolappeared to have been associated with an increased frequency ofadverse experiences, as compared to dosing later in the day. Theeffect of Marinol on appetite, weight, mood, and nausea wasmeasured at scheduled intervals during the six-week treatmentperiod. Side effects (feeling high, dizziness, confusion,somnolence) occurred in 13 of 72 patients (18%) at this dosagelevel and the dosage was reduced to 2.5 mg/day, administered as asingle dose at supper or bedtime. As compared to placebo, Marinol treatment resulted in astatistically significant improvement in appetite as measured byvisual analog scale (see figure). Trends toward improved bodyweight and mood, and decreases in nausea were also seen. After completing the 6-week study, patients were allowed tocontinue treatment with Marinol in an open-label study, in whichthere was a sustained improvement in appetite. Antiemetic: Marinol (dronabinol) treatmentofchemotherapy-induced emesis was evaluated in 454 patients withcancer, who received a total of 750 courses of treatment ofvarious malignancies. The antiemetic efficacy of Marinol wasgreatest in patients receiving cytotoxic therapy with MOPP forHodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Marinol dosages rangedfrom 2.5 mg/day to 4O mg/day administered in equally divideddoses every four to six hours(four times daily). As indicated inthe following table, escalating the Marinol dose above 7 mg/m2increased the frequency of adverse experiences, with noadditional antiemetic benefit. Marinol Dose:Response Frequency and Adverse Experiences * (N = 750 treatment courses) Response Frequency (%) Adverse Events Frequency (%) Marinol Dose Complete Partial Poor None Nondysphoric Dysphoric <7 mg/m2 36 32 32 23 65 12 >7 mg/m2 33 31 6 13 58 28 *Nondysphoric events consisted of drowsiness, tachycardia,etc. Combination antiemetic therapy with Marinol and aphenothiazine (prochlorperazine) may result in synergistic oradditive antiemetic effects and attenuate the toxicitiesassociated with each of the agents. INDIVIDUALIZATION OF DOSAGES The pharmacologic effects of Marinol (dronabinol) aredose-related and subject to considerable interpatientvariability. Therefore, dosage individualization is critical inachieving the maximum benefit of Marinol treatment. Appetite Stimulation: In the clinical trials, the majority ofpatients were treated with 5 mg/day Marinol, although the dosagesranged from 2.5 to 20 mg/day. For an adult: 1. Begin with 2.5 mg before lunch and 2.5 mg before supper. IfCNS symptoms (feeling high, dizziness, confusion, somnolence) dooccur, they usually resolve in 1 to 3 days with continued dosage. 2. If CNS symptoms are severe or persistent, reduce the doseto 2.5 mg before supper. if symptoms continue to be a problem,taking the single dose in the evening or at bedtime may reducetheir severity. 3. When adverse effects are absent or minimal and furthertherapeutic affect is desired, increase the dose to 2.5 mg beforelunch and 5 mg before supper or 5 and 5 mg. Although mostpatients respond to 2.5 mg twice daily, 10 mg twice daily hasbeen tolerated in about half of the patients in appetitestimulation studies. The pharmacologic effects of Marinol are reversible upontreatment cessation. Antiemetic: Most patients respond to 5 mg three or four timesdaily. Dosage may be escalated during a chemotherapy cycle or atsubsequent cycles, based upon initial results. Therapy should beinitiated at the lowest recommended dosage and titrated toclinical response. Administration of Marinol with phenothiazines,such as prochlorperazine, has resulted in improved efficacy ascompared to either drug alone, without additional toxicity. Pediatrics: Marinol is not recommended for AIDS-relatedanorexia in pediatric patients because it has not been studied inthis population. The pediatric dosage for the treatment ofchemotherapy-induced emesis is the same as in adults. Caution isrecommended in prescribing Marinol for children because of thepsychoactive effects. Geriatrics: Caution is advised in prescribing Marinol inelderly patients because they are generally more sensitive to thepsychoactive effects of drugs. In antiemetic studies, nodifference in tolerance or efficacy was apparent in patients >55 years old. INDICATIONS AND USAGE Marinol (dronabinol) is indicated for the treatment of: anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with AIDS; and nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy in patients who have failed to respond adequately to conventional antiemetic treatments. CONTRAINDICATIONS Marinol (dronabinol) is contraindicated in any patient who hasa history of hypersensitivity to any cannabinoid or sesame oil. WARNINGS Marinol (dronabinol) is a medication with a potential forabuse. Physicians and pharmacists should use the same care inprescribing and accounting for Marinol as they would withmorphine or other drugs controlled under Schedule II (CII) of theControlled Substances Act. Because of the risk of diversion, it is recommended thatprescriptions be limited to the amount necessary for the periodbetween clinic visits. Patients receiving treatment with Marinol should bespecifically warned not to drive, operate machinery, or engage inany hazardous activity until it is established that they are ableto tolerate the drug and to perform such tasks safely. PRECAUTIONS General: The risk/benefit ratio of Marinol (dronabinol) useshould be carefully evaluated in patients with the followingmedical conditions because of individual variation in responseand tolerance to the effects of Marinol. Marinol should be used with caution in patients with cardiacdisorders because of occasional hypotension, possiblehypertension, syncope, or tachycardia (see CLINICALPNARMACOLOGY). Marinol should be used with caution in patients with a historyof substance abuse, including alcohol abuse or dependence,because they may be more prone to abuse Marinol as well. Multiplesubstance abuse is common and marijuana, which contains the sameactive compound, is a frequently abused substance. Marinol should be used with caution and careful psychiatricmonitoring in patients with mania, depression, or schizophreniabecause Marinol may exacerbate these illnesses. Marinol should be used with caution in patients receivingconcomitant therapy with sedatives, hypnotics or otherpsychoactive drugs because of the potential for additive orsynergistic CNS effects. Marinol should be used with caution in pregnant patients,nursing mothers, or pediatric patients because it has not beenstudied in these patient populations. Marinol should be used with caution for treatment of anorexiaand weight loss in elderly patients with AIDS because they may bemore sensitive to the psychoactive effects and because its use inthese patients has not been studied. Information for Patients: Patients receiving treatment withMarinol (dronabinol) should be alerted to the potential foradditive central nervous system depression if Marinol is usedconcomitantly with alcohol or other CNS depressants such asbenzodiazepines and barbiturates. Patients receiving treatment with Marinol should bespecifically warned not to drive, operate machinery, or engage inany hazardous activity until it is established that they are ableto tolerate the drug and to perform such tasks safely. Patients using Marinol should be advised of possible changesin mood and other adverse behavioral effects of the drug so as toavoid panic in the event of such manifestations. Patients shouldremain under the supervision of a responsible adult duringinitial use of Marinol and following dosage adjustments. Drug Interactions: In studies involving patients with AIDSand/or cancer, Marinol (dronabinol) has been co-administered witha variety of medications (e.g., cytotoxic agents, anti-infectiveagents, sedatives, or opioid analgesics) without resulting in anyclinically significant drug/drug interactions. Although nodrug/drug interactions were discovered during the clinical trialsof Marinol, cannabinoids may interact with other medicationsthrough both metabolic and pharmacodynamic mechanisms. Dronabinol is highly protein bound to plasma proteins, andtherefore, might displace other protein-bound drugs. Althoughthis displacement has not been confirmed in vivo, practitionersshould monitor patients for a change in dosage requirements whenadministering dronabinol to patients receiving other highlyprotein-bound drugs. Published reports of drug/drug interactionsinvolving cannabinoids are summarized in the following table. CONCOMITANT DRUG CLINICAL EFFECT(S) Amphetamines, cocaine, other sym- Additive hypertension,tachycardia, pathomimetic agents possibly cardiotoxicity Atropine, scopolamine, antihistamines, Additive orsuper-additive tachycardia, other anticholinergic agentsdrowsiness Amitriptyline, amoxapine, desipramine, Additive tachycardia,hypertension, other tricyclic antidepressants drowsiness Barbiturates, benzodiazepines, ethanol, Additive drowsinessand CNS lithium, opioids, buspirone, antihista- depression mines,muscle relaxants, other CNS depressants Disuffiram A reversible hypomanic reaction was reported in a28 y/o man who smoked marijuana; confirmed by dechallenge andrechallenge Fluoxetine A 21 y/o female with depression and bulimiareceiving 20 mg/day fluoxetine X 4 wks became hypomanic aftersmoking marijuana; symptoms resolved after 4 days Antipyrine, barbiturates Decreased clearance of these agents,presumably via competitive inhibition of metabolism Theophylline Increased theophylline metabolism reported withsmoking of marijuana; effect similar to that following smokingtobacco Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:Carcinogenicity studies have not been performed with dronabinol.Mutagenicity testing was negative in an Ames test. In a long-termstudy (77 days) in rats, oral administration of dronabinol atdoses of 30 to 150 mg/m2 , equivalent to 0.3 to 1.5 times maximumrecommended human dose (MRHD) of 90 mg/m2/day in cancer patientsor 2 to 10 times MRHD of 15 mg/m2/day in AIDS patients, reducedventral prostate, seminal vesicle and epididymal weights andcaused a decrease in seminal fluid volume. Decreases inspermatogenesis, number of developing germ cells, and number ofLeydig cells in the testis were also observed. However, spermcount, mating success and testosterone levels were not affected.The significance of these animal findings in humans is not known. Pregnancy: Pregnancy Category C. Reproduction studies withdronabinol have been performed in mice at 15 to 450 mg/m2equivalent to 0.2 to 5 times maximum recommended human dose(MRHD) of 90 mg/m2/day in cancer patients or 1 to 30 times MRHDof 15 mg/m2/day in AIDS patients, and in rats at 74 to 295 mg/m2(equivalent to 0.8 to 3 times m of 90 mg/m2 in cancer patients or5 to 20 times MRHD of 15 mg/m2/day in AIDS patients). Thesestudies have revealed no evidence of teratogenicity due todronabinol. At these dosages in mice and rats, dronabinoldecreased maternal weight gain and number of viable pups andincreased fetal mortality and early resorptions. Such effectswere dose dependent and less apparent at lower doses whichproduced less maternal toxicity. There are no adequate andwell-controlled studies in pregnant women. Dronabinol should beused only if the potential benefit justifies the potential riskto the fetus. Nursing Mothers: Use of Marinol is not recommended in nursingmothers since, in addition to the secretion of HIV virus inbreast milk, dronabinol is concentrated in and secreted in humanbreast milk and is absorbed by the nursing baby. ADVERSE REACTIONS Adverse experiences information summarized in the tables belowwas derived from well-controlled clinical trials conducted in theUS and US territories involving 474 patients exposed to Marinol(dronabinol). Studies of AIDS-related weight loss included 157patients receiving dronabinol at a dose of 2.5 mg twice daily and67 receiving placebo. Studies of different durations werecombined by considering the first occurrence of events during thefirst 28 days. Studies of nausea and vomiting related to cancerchemotherapy included 317 patients receiving dronabinol and 68receiving placebo. A cannabinoid dose-related "high" (easy laughing,elation and heightened awareness) has been reported by patientsreceiving Marinol in both the antiemetic (24%) and the lower doseappetite stimulant clinical trials (8%) (see CLINICAL TRIALS). The most frequently reported adverse experiences in patientswith AIDS during placebo-controlled clinical trials involved theCNS and were reported by 33% of patients receiving Marinol. About25% of patients reported a minor CNS adverse event during thefirst 2 weeks and about 4% reported such an event each week forthe next 6 weeks thereafter. PROBABLY CAUSALLY RELATED: Incidence greater than 1%. Ratesderived from clinical trials in AIDS-related anorexia (N = 157)and chemotherapy-related nausea (N = 317). Rates were generallyhigher in the antiemetic use (given in parentheses). Body as a whole: Asthenia. Cardiovascular: Palpitations, tachycardia, vasodilation/facialflush. Digestive: Abdominal pain*, nausea*, vomiting*. Nervous system: (Amnesia), anxiety/nervousness, (ataxia),confusion, depersonalization, dizziness*, euphoria*,(hallucination), paranoid reaction*, somnolence*, thinkingabnormal*. *Incidence of events 3% to 10% PROBABLY CAUSALLY RELATED: Incidence less than 1%. Event rates derived from clinical trials in AIDS-relatedanorexia (N=157) and chemotherapy-related nausea (N = 317). Cardiovascular: Conjunctivitis*, hypotension*. Digestive: Diarrhea*, fecal incontinence. Musculoskeletal: Myalgias. Nervous system: Depression, nightmares, speech difficulties,tinnitus. Skin and Appendages: Flushing*. Special senses: Vision difficulties. *Incidence of events 0. 3% to 1 %. CAUSAL RELATIONSHIP UNKNOWN: Incidence less than 1%. The clinical significance of the association of these eventswith Marinol treatment is unknown, but they are reported asalerting information for the clinician. Body as a whole: Chills, headache, malaise. _Digestive: Anorexia, hepatic enzyme elevation Respiratory: Cough, rhinitis, sinusitis. Skin and Appendages: Sweating. DRUG ABUSE AND DEPENDENCE Marinol (dronabinol) is one of the psychoactive compoundspresent in cannabis, and is abusable and controlled Schedule II(CII) under the Controlled Substances Act. Both psychological andphysiological dependence have been noted in healthy individualsreceiving dronabinol, but addiction is uncommon and has only beenseen after prolonged high dose administration. Chronic abuse of cannabis has been associated with decrementsin motivation, cognition, judgement, and perception. The etiologyof these impairments is unknown, but may be associated with thecomplex process of addiction rather than an isolated effect ofthe drug. No such decrements in psychological, social orneurological status have been associated with the administrationof Marinol for therapeutic purposes. In an open-label study in patients with AIDS who receivedMarinol for up to five months, no abuse, diversion or systematicchange in personality or social functioning were observed despitethe inclusion of a substantial number of patients with a pasthistory of drug abuse. An abstinence syndrome has been reported after the abruptdiscontinuation of dronabinol in volunteers receiving dosages of210 mg/day for 12 to 16 consecutive days. Within 12 hours afterdiscontinuation, these volunteers manifested symptoms such asirritability, insomnia, and restlessness. By approximately 24hours post-dronabinol discontinuation, withdrawal symptomsintensified to include "hot flashes", sweating,rhinorrhea, loose stools, hiccoughs and anorexia. These withdrawal symptoms gradually dissipated over the next48 hours. Electroencephalographic changes consistent with theeffects of drug withdrawal (hyperexcitation) were recorded inpatients after abrupt dechallenge. Patients also complained ofdisturbed sleep for several weeks after discontinuing therapywith high dosages of dronabinol. OVERDOSAGE Signs and symptoms following MILD Marinol (dronabinol)intoxication include drowsiness, euphoria, heightened sensoryawareness, altered time perception, reddened conjunctiva, drymouth and tachycardia; following MODERATE intoxication includememory impairment, depersonalization, mood alteration, urinaryretention, and reduced bowel motility; and following SEVEREintoxication include decreased motor coordination, lethargy,slurred speech, and postural hypotension. Apprehensive patientsmay experience panic reactions and seizures may occur in patientswith existing seizure disorders. The estimated lethal human dose of intravenous dronabinol is30 mg/kg (2100 mg/70 kg). Significant CNS symptoms in antiemeticstudies followed oral doses of 0.4 mg/kg (28 mg/70 kg) ofMarinol. Management: A potentially serious oral ingestion, if recent,should be managed with gut decontamination. In unconsciouspatients with a secure airway, instill activated charcoal (30 to100 g in adults, 1 to 2 g/kg in infants) via a nasogastric tube.A saline cathartic or sorbitol may be added to the first dose ofactivated charcoal. Patients experiencing depressive,hallucinatory or psychotic reactions should be placed in a quietarea and offered reassurance. Benzodiazepines (5 to 10 mgdiazepam po) may be used for treatment of extreme agitation.Hypotension usually responds to Trendelenburg position and IVfluids. Pressors are rarely required. DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Appetite stimulation: Initially, 2.5 mg Marinol (dronabinol)should be administered orally twice daily (b.i.d.), before lunchand supper. For patients unable to tolerate this 5 mg/day dosageof Marinol, the dosage can be reduced to 2.5 mg/day, administeredas a single dose in the evening or at bedtime. If clinicallyindicated and in the absence of significant adverse effects, thedosage may be gradually increased to a maximum of 20 mg/dayMarinol, administered in divided oral doses. Caution should beexercised in escalating the dosage of Marinol because of theincreased frequency of dose-related adverse experiences at higherdosages (see PRECAUTIONS). Antiemetic: Marinol is best administered at an initial dose of5 mg/m2, given 1 to 3 hours prior to the administration ofchemotherapy, then every 2 to 4 hours after chemotherapy isgiven, for a total of 4 to 6 doses/day. Should the 5 mg/m2 doseprove to be ineffective, and in the absence of significant sideeffects, the dose may be escalated by 2.5 mg/m2 increments to amaximum of 15 mg/m2 per dose. Caution should be exercised in doseescalation, however, as the incidence of disturbing psychiatricsymptoms increases significantly at maximum dose (seePRECAUTIONS). SAFETY AND HANDLING Marinol (dronabinol) should be packaged in a well-closedcontainer and stored in a cool environment between 8' and 15'C(46' and 59'F). Protect from freezing. No particular hazard tohealth care workers handling the capsules has been identified. Access to abusable drugs such as Marinol presents anoccupational hazard for addiction in the health care industry.Routine procedures for handling controlled substances developedto protect the public may not be adequate to protect health careworkers. Implementation of more effective accounting proceduresand measures to appropriately restrict access to drugs of thisclass may minimize the risk of self-administration by health careproviders. HOW SUPPLIED MARINOL CAPSULES (dronabinol solution In sesame oil in softgelatin capsules) 2.5 mg white capsules (identified RL). NDC 0054-2601-11: Bottles of 25 capsules. NDC 0054-2601-21: Bottles of 60 capsules. NDC 0054-2601-25: Bottles of 100 capsules. 5 mg dark brown capsules (identified RL). NDC 0054-2602-11: Bottles of 25 capsules. NDC 0054-2602-25: Bottles of 100 capsules. 10 mg orange capsules (Identified RL). NDC 0054-2603-11: Bottles of 25 capsules. MARINOL is a registered trademark of Unimed Pharmaceuticals,Inc. and is marketed by Roxane Laboratories, Inc. under licensefrom Unimed Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Manufactured by Banner Gelatin Products Corporation,Chatsworth CA 91311 DEA ORDER FORM REQUIRED Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing withoutprescription. Roxane Laboratories, Inc. Columbus, OH 43216 Revised December 1994 References: 1. Chlebowski RT, Grosvenor MB, Bernhard NH, et al: Am JGastroenterol 1989;84(10):1288-1293. 2. Ott M, Lembcke B, Fischer H, et al: Am J Clin Nutr1993;57:15-19. 3. Kotler DP, Tierney AR, Wang J, et al: Am J Clin Nutr1989;50:444-447. 4. Gorbach SL, Knox TA, Roubenoff R: Nutr Rev1993;51(8):226-234. 5. Data on file, Roxane Laboratories, Inc. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-28IA087-000627-B017-8http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol_page1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051843 text/html 2286HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:18:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:59:02 GMTContent-length: 2069 Marinol Brochure - Page 1 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol Brochure - Page 1 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-29IA087-000627-B017-50http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol_page2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051900 text/html 2231HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:18:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:59 GMTContent-length: 2014 Marinol Brochure - Page 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol Brochure - Page 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-30IA087-000627-B017-80http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol_page3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051923 text/html 2231HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:19:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:56 GMTContent-length: 2014 Marinol Brochure - Page 3 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol Brochure - Page 3 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-31IA087-000627-B017-112http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol_page4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051941 text/html 2231HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:19:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:53 GMTContent-length: 2014 Marinol Brochure - Page 4 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol Brochure - Page 4 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-32IA087-000627-B017-144http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol_page5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052003 text/html 2231HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:19:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:50 GMTContent-length: 2014 Marinol Brochure - Page 5 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol Brochure - Page 5 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-33IA087-000627-B017-177http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol_page6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052040 text/html 2231HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:20:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:47 GMTContent-length: 2014 Marinol Brochure - Page 6 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol Brochure - Page 6 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-34IA087-000627-B017-210http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol_page7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052053 text/html 2231HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:20:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:44 GMTContent-length: 2014 Marinol Brochure - Page 7 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol Brochure - Page 7 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-35IA087-000627-B017-235http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol_page8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052105 text/html 2578HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:20:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:41 GMTContent-length: 2361 Marinol Brochure - Page 8 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol Brochure - Page 8 Page1 -- Page 2 -- Page 3 -- Page 4 - Page5 - Page 6 -- Page 7 -- Page 8 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-36IA087-000627-B017-266http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/breck-in.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052116 text/html 4607HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:21:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:39 GMTContent-length: 4390 Breckenridge Medical Marijuana Ordinance Breckenridge Medical Marijuana Ordinance In April 1994, hemp activists in Breckenridge put aninitiative on their local ballot that directed the local lawenforcement to make it their lowest priority to arrest someonefor using marijuana for medicine. The initiative passed by about50 votes. (The initiative was modeled after San Francisco'sProposition P which passed by over 80% of the votes.) Shortlyafter the Breckenridge initiative passed, the Frisco city counciladopted a similar ordinance encouraging medical marijuanaresearch. So now there are two towns in Summit County that havemedical marijuana ordinances. Way to go, Summit Countyactivists!!! From: "MARY E. PATTERSON" email71672.1304@compuserve.com Here's the Breckenridge ordinance, which passed by a people'svote. The problems we had were in copying the Denver Medical MJOrdinance too closly. We should have researched more carefullythe chain of command in the town of Breck. It's not the mayor,but the town manager, who tells the police chief what to do. Mary :) Breckenridge Medical Marijuana Ordinance ORDERING THE MAYOR TO DIRECT THE POLICE CHIEF AND THEDISTRICT ATTORNEY TO MAKE THEIR LOWEST PRIORITY THE ARREST ORPROSECUTION OF THOSE INVOLVED IN THE POSSESSION OR CULTIVATION OFMARIJUANA FOR PERSONAL USE FOR MEDICAL PURPOSES, AND FOR THEDISTRICT ATTORNEY TO ALLOW A LETTER FROM A TREATING PHYSICIAN TOBE USED A PRIMA FACIA EVIDENCE THAT MARIJUANA CAN ALLEVIATE THEPAIN AND SUFFERING OF THAT PATIENT'S MEDICAL CONDITION, ANDINSTRUCTING THE TOWN'S REPRESENTATIVE TO LOBBY THE STATELEGISLATURE FOR A STATE MEDICAL MARIJUANA BILL. WHEREAS, the Colorado State Legislature held hearings andapproved the medicinal use of marijuana (HB 1042; ColoradoRevised Statute 25-5-901-907); and WHEREAS, "hemp medical preparations" are defined asall products made from hemp, cannabis, or marijuana that areintended for the treatment of disease, the relief of pain, or forany healing purpose; and WHEREAS, "medicinal purposes,"for the purpose of this ordinance, would include, but not belimited to, the treatment of AIDS, glaucoma, cancer, multiplesclerosis, arthritis, rheumatism, severe muscle spasm, epilepsy,asthma, as well as other serious illnesses or pain; and WHEREAS, hemp preparations have been used for thousands ofyears throughout the world, over 100 years in the United Statesalone, for medical purposes until prohibition in 1937 by theFederal government for political reasons; and WHEREAS, Federal agencies have refused to recognizemarijuana's important role in medical therapy, continue tomaintain a prohibition against marijuana's prescriptine medicaluse, and recently cancelled the nation's Federalmarijuana-as-medicine program; and WHEREAS, these federal policies unnecessarily expose thepeople of Summit County, including Breckenridge, to pain andsuffering and prevent physicians in Breckenridge from exercisingtheir professional judgment; now, therefore, be it RESOLVED, that the people of Breckenridge order the Mayor todirect the Police Chief and the District Attorney to make theirlowest priority the arrest or prosecution of those involved inthe possession or cultivation of hemp medical preparation formedicinal purposes; and, be it FURTHER RESOLVED, that the people of Breckenridge order theMayor to direct the District Attorney to allow a letter from atreating physician to be used as prima facia evidence that hempmedical preparations can alleviate the pain and suffering of thatpatient's medical condition;, and be it FURTHER RESOLVED, that the representative of the town ofBreckenridge lobby the Colorado Legislature for a state medicalmarijuana bill. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-37IA087-000627-B017-294http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/frisco.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052218 text/html 1771HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:22:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:38 GMTContent-length: 1554 Frisco Colorado Supports Medical Marijuana Frisco, Colorado Supports Medical Marijuana From a posting by NORML On July 5, 1994 after hearing 2 hours of testimony from asympathetic and supportive crowd, the Frisco Town Councilunanimously passed a resolution urging the state of Colorado to"reactivate the research program on the use and dispensingof marijuana for medical purposes." The resolution goes on to say, "Whereas, upon thelegislative report of findings establishing the effective use ofmarijuana as a therapeutic drug, the Town of Frisco stronglyencourages the State of Colorado and the federal government tolegalize the dispensing of marijuana for medical purposespursuant to federal and state guidelines." Frisco is the second town in Colorado to publicly address theban on medical access to marijuana. In April, residents ofBreckenridge voted 261-213 in favor of an ordinance ordering thepolice chief and district attorney to make the arrest andprosecution of those using or cultivating marijuana for medicalpurposes their lowest priority. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-38IA087-000627-B017-322http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/bainbrid.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052257 text/html 7030HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:22:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:43 GMTContent-length: 6813 Washington State Marijuana for Medical Use Resolution Marijuana for Medical Use Resolution (Full Text of Proposed Resolution) The following is the full text of the resolution that wasproposed to the City of Bainbridge Island, Washington. Marijuana for Medical Use Resolution The people of the City of Bainbridge Island (B.I.) do ordainas follows: SECTION 1 TITLE: The title of this resolution shall be: The City of BainbridgeIsland Medical Marijuana Resolution. SECTION 2 PURPOSE: The purposes of this resolution are: (1) To express thecompassion of the people of B.I. for the medically challenged inour community whose sufferings would be alleviated by the use ofmedical marijuana. (2) To express the strong support of thepeople of B.I. for the restoration of Cannabis/Marijuana medicalpreparations to the list of available medicines which can beprescribed by licensed physicians. (3) To direct the electedofficials of B.I. to take whatever actions may be within theirpower to support the availability of Cannabis/Marijuana formedical use. SECTION 3 DEFINITIONS: For the purposes of this resolution, Cannabis/Marijuanamedical preparations shall mean: all products made from cannabisor marijuana, in any form intended or used for human consumption,for the treatment of any disease; the relief of pain; or as anadjunct to any medical procedure for the treatment of Cancer,Glaucoma, or AIDS; or for any other medical or healing purposedefined within the bounds of the doctor/patient relationship. SECTION 4 FINDINGS: The people of B.I. make the following findings: SAFE AND EFFECTIVE MEDICINE. Scientific and medical studies by the National Academy of Science have shown Cannabis/Marijuana to be a safe and effective medicine with very low toxicity compared to most prescription drugs. It has been shown to be effective in the treatment of glaucoma; epilepsy; muscle spasticity; arthritis; the nausea, vomiting and appetite loss associated with chemotherapy's; anxiety and depression; and the symptoms of withdrawal from alcohol and narcotics. DOCTORS AND PATIENTS NEED THE CANNABIS/MARIJUANA OPTION. Studies show that one-third of all cancer patients discontinue potentially life- saving chemotherapy due to the severe and debilitating side effects. The same is true for many AIDS patients receiving AZT or other similar therapies. Most physicians surveyed said that they would prescribe Cannabis/Marijuana if legally available. Half of all cancer specialists surveyed said that they have already encouraged at least one of their patients to break the law and use Cannabis/Marijuana to ease the violent nausea and vomiting associated with their current treatments. UNITED NATIONS APPROVES PRESCRIPTION MARIJUANA. In May of 1991, the United Nations Narcotic Control Board voted overwhelmingly to reclassify Cannabis/Marijuana, placing it back on Schedule II, and making it available by prescription. The United States Representative to this Board voted in favor of rescheduling. FEDERAL COURT ORDERS PRESCRIPTION MARIJUANA. Despite a federal court order recognizing the "clearly established medical value" of Cannabis/Marijuana, and mandating that it be reclassified to Schedule II and available by prescription, the federal government continues to deny access to this safe and effective medicine. POLITICS BEFORE PATIENTS. By its own admission, the federal government continues to deny access to Cannabis/Marijuana for political rather than medical reasons. Using patients as pawns in the ever escalating war on drugs, current policies place message before medicine, convenience before compassion, and politics before patients. SECTION 5 IMPLEMENTATION: Within ninety (90) days of the date of the passing of this resolution, the Bainbridge Island City Council (B.I.C.C.) shall transmit the text of this resolution to the President of the United States, the Governor of the State of Washington, and the Federal and State Legislative Representatives of Bainbridge Island and urge them to take whatever actions that may be in their power to: Restore Cannabis/Marijuana preparations to the list of available medicines which can be prescribed by licensed physicians. Provide for by law and institute such mechanisms as may be necessary to insure a safe and affordable supply of Cannabis/Marijuana for medical use. The B.I.C.C. shall request the Police Department and the City Attorney to adhere to the spirit of this resolution in setting their priorities and to exercise whatever discretionary powers they may possess to minimize the negative impacts of current Cannabis/Marijuana restrictions, where medical use is apparent. The B.I.C.C. shall direct the Bremerton-Kitsap County Health District to monitor developments in the field of Cannabis/Marijuana medicine, including research projects, trial studies, or current governmental programs and to make available, upon request by any doctor or patient, accurate and timely information regarding the efficacy of Cannabis/Marijuana for various medical conditions. SECTION 6 SEVERABILITY: If any of these provisions are held to be invalid, allremaining portions of this resolution shall remain in full forceand effect. SECTION 7 EFFECTIVE DATE: This resolution shall take effect as provided by law. From: Tom Rohan(trohan@eskimo.com) Date: Fri, 2 Sep 1994 10:10:41 GMT CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-39IA087-000627-B017-360http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/alameda.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052314 text/html 1175HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:23:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:51 GMTContent-length: 959 Alameda County Supports Medical Marijuana Alameda County Supports Medical Marijuana From a posting by NORML On July 12, 1994, the Alameda County, CA Board of Supervisorspassed a resolution urging the California state legislature topass -- and the Governor to sign -- Senate Bill 1364 which wouldreclassify marijuana from a Schedule I to a Schedule IIsubstance, thereby making it available for use by prescription. Alameda County joins almost a dozen other locales inCalifornia as going on record as favoring legal medical access tomarijuana. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-40IA087-000627-B017-388http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/santcruz.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052332 text/html 12101HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:23:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:32 GMTContent-length: 11883 Santa Cruz County Measure A: Marijuana For Medical UseInitiative Santa Cruz County Measure A Marijuana For Medical Use Initiative This measure was passed by over 75% of the vote. (Full Text of Proposed Initiative) The people of the County of Santa Cruz do ordain as follows: SECTION 1. TITLE: The title of this ordinance shall be: The Santa Cruz CountyMedical Marijuana Ordinance. SECTION 2. PURPOSE: The purposes of this ordinance are: To express the compassion of the people of Santa Cruz County for the medically challenged in our community whose sufferings would be alleviated by the use of medical marijuana. To express the strong support of the people of Santa Cruz County for the restoration of Cannabis / Marijuana medical preparations to the list of available medicines which can be prescribed by licensed physicians. To direct the elected officials of Santa Cruz County to take whatever actions may be within their power to support the availability of Cannabis / Marijuana for medical use. SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS: For the purposes of this ordinance, Cannabis / Marijuanamedical preparations shall mean: all products made from cannabisor marijuana, in any form intended or used for human consumption,for the treatment of any disease; the relief of pain; or as anadjunct to any medical procedure for the treatment of Cancer,Glaucoma, or AIDS; or for any other medical or healing purposedefined within the bounds of the doctor/patient relationship. SECTION 4. FINDINGS: The people of the County of Santa Cruz make the followingfindings: Safe And Effective Medicine. Scientific and medical studies by the National Academy of Science have shown Cannabis / Marijuana to be a safe and effective medicine with very low toxicity compared to most prescription drugs. It has been shown to be effective in the treatment of glaucoma; epilepsy; muscle spasticity; arthritis; the nausea, vomiting and appetite loss associated with chemotherapies; anxiety and depression; and the symptoms of withdrawal from alcohol and narcotics. Doctors And Patients Need The Cannabis / Marijuana Option. Studies show that one-third of all cancer patients discontinue potentially life-saving chemotherapy due to the severe and debilitating side effects. The same is true for many AIDS patients receiving AZT or other similar therapies. Most physicians surveyed said that they would prescribe Cannabis / Marijuana if legally available. Half of all cancer specialists surveyed said that they have already encouraged at least one of their patients to break the law and use Cannabis / Marijuana to ease the violent nausea and vomiting associated with their current treatments. United Nations Approves Prescription Marijuana. In May of 1991, the United Nations Narcotic Control Board voted overwhelmingly to reclassify Cannabis / Marijuana, placing it back on Schedule 2, and making it available by prescription. The United States Representative to this board voted in favor of rescheduling. Federal Court Orders Prescription Marijuana. Despite a Federal Court Order recognizing the "clearly established medical value" of Cannabis / Marijuana, and mandating that it be reclassified to Schedule 2 and available by prescription, the federal government continues to deny access to this safe and effective medicine. Politics Before Patients. By its own admission, the federal government continues to deny access to Cannabis / Marijuana for political rather than medical reasons. Using patients as pawns in the ever-escalating War on Drugs, current policies place message before medicine, convenience before compassion, and politics before patients. SECTION 5. IMPLEMENTATION. Within 90 (ninety) days of the certification of the November 3, 1992 General Election, the Santa Cruz County Board of Supervisors shall transmit the text of this ordinance to the President of the United States, the Governor of the State of California, and the Federal and State Legislative Rep- representatives of Santa Cruz County and urge them to take whatever actions that may be in their power to: Restore Cannabis / Marijuana medical preparations to the list of available medicines which can be prescribed by licensed physicians. Provide for by law and institute such mechanisms as may be necessary to insure a safe and affordable supply of Cannabis / Marijuana for medical use. The Board of Supervisors shall request the Sheriff and the District Attorney to adhere to the spirit of this ordinance in setting their priorities and to exercise whatever discretionary powers they may possess to minimize the negative impacts of current Cannabis / Marijuana restrictions, where medical use is apparent. The Board of Supervisors shall direct the Santa Cruz County Health Services Agency to monitor developments in the field of Cannabis / Marijuana medicine, including research projects, trial studies, or current governmental programs and to make available, upon request by any doctor or patient, accurate and timely information regarding the efficacy of Cannabis / Marijuana for various medical conditions. SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY. If any of these provisions are held to be invalid, all remaining portions of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. SECTION 7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall take effect as provided by law. Impartial Analysis By County Counsel Santa Cruz CountyMeasure A Marijuana For Medical Use Initiative If approved by a majority of those voting on this measure, itwill become a County ordinance. The measure appears on the ballotas a result of initiative petitions which gathered more than thenumber of signatures required by state law for placement on theballot. If enacted, the measure will not change existing laws on theavailability of marijuana for medical purposes, or on theillegality of marijuana possession. Rather, the measure wouldconstitute a policy statement favoring the increased availabilityof marijuana for medical purposes. If enacted, the measure would require the Santa Cruz County Boardof Supervisors to take certain actions to communicate the policyto State and Federal elected officials. The Board of Supervisorswould also be required to request the Sheriff and DistrictAttorney of Santa Cruz County to adhere to the spirit of theordinance in setting their priorities, and to minimize thenegative impacts of legal restrictions on marijuana for medicaluse to the extent they have discretion to do so. Because nochange in the criminal law on this subject results from itsenactment, however, the second directive to the Sheriff andDistrict Attorney is of uncertain effect. The Board of Supervisors would also be required to direct theCounty Health Services Agency to monitor research developmentsand make information avail- able concerning medical use ofmarijuana. Such activities by the Health Services Agency would bea County cost in an undetermined amount. A "yes" vote authorizes enactment of the measure intothe Santa Cruz County Code and approves making the Findings setout in the measure. A "no" vote rejects enactment ofthe measure as a part of the Santa Cruz County Code. DWIGHT L. HERR County Counsel By/ Jane M. Scott (Assistant County Counsel) ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR OF MEASURE A "My commitment as a physician is to ease suffering andto do no harm. Both are often possible with cannabis medicines.The government's policy of denying patients this treatment isindefensible. It's a matter of compassion and common sense. Voteyes on Measure A." -Arnold Leff, MD- The emotional and financial impacts of catastrophic illness canbe devastating. For the thousands of seriously ill and disabledAmericans who have a medical necessity for cannabis/marijuana,the devastation is compounded by a government that ignores thebest medical evidence and condemns them to a criminal blackmarket in their daily struggle for wellness. Measure A calls on the federal government to allow licensedphysicians to prescribe marijuana for patients with life andsense threatening illnesses. The Controlled Substances Act allows for cannabis to be restoredto the list of available medicines if "a significantminority of physicians have accepted it as safe under medicalsupervision." In 1988, after the most extensive review of the record everundertaken, US Administrative Law Judge Francis Young stated that"marijuana in its natural form is one of the safesttherapeutically active substances known to man. By any rationalanalysis cannabis can be used safely under a supervised routineof medical care." Dr. Leff and Judge Young are not alone. Seventy percent of cancerspecialists, 35 state legislatures (including California), theUnited Nations Narcotics Control Board, the California MedicalAssociation, and 80% of San Francisco voters agree - cannabisshould be available to the seriously ill and disabled to easetheir pain and suffering. Measure A will ease suffering and do no harm. Simply stated,Measure A is good medicine. Vote Yes for Compassion. Vote Yes forCommon Sense. Vote Yes on Measure A. NO ARGUMENTS AGAINST THIS MEASURE WERE SUBMITTED CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-41IA087-000627-B018-22http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/sonoma.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052348 text/html 3094HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:23:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:27 GMTContent-length: 2877 Sonoma County, CA Approves Medical Marijuana Medical Marijuana Approved in Sonoma County Miracle On Administration Drive By: Lazar Yersersky On Tuesday, October l2, 1994 before a standing-room-only crowd at theCounty Supervisors' hearing, Sonoma County at last passed aresolution approving the use of marijuana for medical purposes.Presented by Ernie Carpenter, supervisors Tim Smith and Mike Calevoted for. Nick Esposti was the sole vote against. Theresolution, written mainly by Carol Miller, who, in spite ofbringing up a gang of kids with Michael, living on a remotemountain without a car for at least a year, not to mentionfighting Lymes disease all the while, never flagged in hermission of freeing marijuana for medical use. Dr Tod Mikuriya,author of the authoritative "Medical Marijuana Papers,"spoke first. Caregiver "Brownie" Mary Rathburntestified to a standing ovation for her work and her indomitablespirit. Dennis Peron, who ram- rodded the SF ballot victory,spoke, and Bruce Sloan gave them what-for as only he can do, withhis testimony before the supervisors and with his nifty sign to"Repeal Hemp Prohibition and Restore Health" outside.Then the parade of patients began: Patti, Beth, and Barb withAIDS. I use first names only because these very ill people arecriminals as things stand--or at least stood before today. Pattidrove herself to the hearing even though she was almost too sickto talk. Beth, a cancer patient, spoke. Chuck, an asthmatic,literally given the breath of life by a few daily tokes ofmarijuana, was there. And a phys ed teacher half crippled with aback injury suffered when a drunk ran into his car, explainedthat only marijuana stopped his debilitating muscle spasms,allowing him to stretch and heal his back when syntheticpharmaceuticals, with their often toxic side effects, could not.Sara was there suffering from giardia that wasted her away untilmarijuana cured the awful nausea and allowed her to eat. Linette,who was busted for two plants in Fairfax, was there. Now we mustunite in support of Sen. Henry Mello's Medical Legalization Billon the state level. And federal bills S. 784 and H.R. l709, whichwill roll back restrictive regulations on nutritional productsand medical herbs (including cannabis) need our support. We mustnow endeavor to get the ear of Bill Clinton or maybe Hillary.Congratulations to S.C.R.A.P. and to everyone who worked so hardand so long to get to this point. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-42IA087-000627-B018-46http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/mjhoax.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052404 text/html 9015HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:23:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:05 GMTContent-length: 8798 Marijuana Smoking as Medicine: A Cruel Hoax Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information MARIJUANA SMOKING AS MEDICINE: A CRUEL HOAX by Gabriel G. Nahas, M.D. Nicholas A. Pace, M.D. New York University Medical Center Note to Readers:. Dr. Nahas is, to saythe least, a zealot on this issue. To say the least, there havebeen some issues with the accuracy of his statements aboutmarijuana. We invite the reader to compare the statements made byDr. Nahas with the results of the other research studies on thisweb site. The anecdotal claims concerning the uniquetherapeutic properties of marijuana smoking in alleviating thenausea and vomiting induced by the chemotherapy of cancer or ofAIDS do not withstand scientific scrutiny. In the first place, modern therapeuticsdistinguish between a crude drug and its pharmacological activepure ingredient, in this instance between marijuana and THC.While crude marijuana preparations made of plant material andcontaining THC display similar pharmacological properties as THC,their overall effect is quite different. Indeed, marijuanacontains in addition to THC 60 other cannabinoids which modifyabsorption, availability and transformation of THC in the body,and which are also biologically active. Besides cannabinoids, 360other compounds have been identified in the plant material suchas terpenes, flavinoids, furan derivatives and alkaloids. Thesmoke if a marijuana cigarette contains in its gas phase thenoxious vapors of carbon monoxide, acetaldehyde, acrolein,toluene, nitrosamine and vinylchloride, and in its particulatephase phenol, creosol, methyl and napthalene. Marijuana smokealso contains twice as many cancer producing substances(benzanthracene and benzopyrene) as a tobacco cigarette of thesame weight. The respective amount of all of these differentchemicals will vary with each marijuana cigarette and itsresulting smoke, therefore prescriptions of marijuana cannotcomply with the Pure Food and Drug Act, which requires that allmedicines be labeled with the exact amount of chemicals theycontain. In addition, crude drug marijuana preparation can alsobe contaminated with salmonella bacteria which gives diarrhea andwith a fungus, aspergillus, which may cause severebronchopneumonia (It has been suggested that the marijuanacigarettes prescribed to patients be sterilized.). Damaging effects in man caused by prolongedexposure to marijuana smoking have been reported in two recentInternational Symposia; they include emphysema-like symptoms,cancer of the lung, mouth and tongue, prolonged impairment ofmemory and of psychomotor performance resulting in train or caraccidents, a six-fold increase in the incidence of schizophrenia,leukemia in children born from marijuana smoking mothers anddamage to the growing fetus. However, if smoked marijuana had uniquetherapeutic properties, these forgoing undesired effects could beoverlooked. Prominent cancer specialists such as Dr. R. J. Grallaof Sloane-Kettering Memorial Cancer Center, Dr. D. S. Ettinger ofJohns Hopkins Medical School, Dr. George Hyman of ColumbiaUniversity College of Physicians and Surgeons, and Dr. JohnLaszlo, Vice President for Research of the American CancerSociety have concluded that the crude drug marijuana taken byinhalation has only limited effectiveness in the treatment ofvomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy and documented negativeeffects on pulmonary, cardiovascular and immunity systems. TheAmerican Cancer Society stated in 1989 that the results ofclinical investigations were insufficient to warrant thedecontrol of marijuana smoking for medical use. the AmericanMedical Association and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)expressed a similar opinion. The therapeutic applications of smokedmarijuana have been traced down to the psychoactive ingredient itcontains: THC. This compound taken by mouth will relieve thevomiting resulting from cancer chemotherapy in a limited numberof patients. But THC also produces acute undesirable psychic andcardiovascular symptoms, and its depressant effect on immunity isnot a good indication for patients with cancer or AIDS whoalready have impaired immunity. To treat nausea associated withchemotherapy, modern drugs with much greater bioavailability,specificity, and effectiveness, and less side effects than THC,such as metoclopramide and ondansetron, have already been used onmillions of patients. And these drugs have become the preferredchoice of the majority of physicians who wish to treat theirpatients in the safest and most effective fashion. However, THC,because of its therapeutic properties, has been reclassified fromSchedule I to Schedule II, which permits its prescription byphysicians. Marinol is one of the presently availablepreparations. But most other countries, signatories of the SingleConvention of the United Nations on Controlled Substances, didnot concur with the U.S. Reclassification and kept THC inSchedule I, among drugs which have no unique therapeuticusefulness and high abuse potential. While the reclassification of THC to ScheduleII might be understandable, this would not be the case forsmoking the crude drug marijuana, which would as a result becomemore available and more readily diverted for non-medical use. There is no medical justification for the useof marijuana smoking in the treatment of nausea and vomitingassociated with cancer or AIDS chemotherapy. Other claimsformulated in the prescientific area of medicine concerning thetherapeutic properties of marijuana smoking for epilepsy,multiple sclerosis, paraplegia, chronic pain, pruritis, menstrualcramps, and labor pain are purely hearsay and may even be harmfulto the patient. Such claims have been nonetheless recentlyrevived by the same Harvard professor who has also stated that'used no more than two or three times a week, cocaine creates noserious problem.' His latest book, "Marijuana, the ForbiddenMedicine," is a loose compendium of unverifiable anecdotes. The unilateral reclassification by the UnitedStates of marijuana from Schedule I to II would perpetuate acruel hoax by sending the wrong message to uninformed patientsand health professionals who rely on safe and effective medicine.There is no medical justification for the use of marijuanasmoking in the treatment of nausea and vomiting associated withcancer or AIDS chemotherapy." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-43IA087-000627-B018-88http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/grinjama.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052428 text/html 15247HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:24:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:52 GMTContent-length: 15029 Commentary: Marihuana as Medicine Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marihuana as Medicine: APlea for Reconsideration by Lester Grinspoon, MD James B. Bakalar, JD Journal of the American medical Association, June, 1995 BETWEEN 1840 and 1900, European and American medical journalspublished more than 100 articles on the therapeutic use of thedrug known then as Cannabis indica (or Indian hemp) and now asmarihuana. It was recommended as an appetite stimulant, musclerelaxant, analgesic, hypnotic, and anticonvulsant. As late as1913 Sir William Osler recommended it as the most satisfactoryremedy for migraine. Today the 5000-year medical history of cannabis has beenalmost forgotten. Its use declined in the early 20th centurybecause the potency of preparations was variable, responses tooral ingestion were erratic, and alternatives became available --injectable opiates and, later, synthetic drugs such as aspirinand barbiturates. In the United States, the final blow was struckby the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. Designed to prevent nonmedicaluse, this law made cannabis so difficult to obtain for medicalpurposes that it was removed from the pharmacopeia. It is nowconfined to Schedule I under the Controlled Substances Act as adrug that has a high potential for abuse, lacks an acceptedmedical use, and is unsafe for use under medical supervision. In 1972 the National Organization for the Reform of MarijuanaLaws petitioned the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs,later renamed the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), totransfer marihuana to Schedule II so that it could be legallyprescribed. As the proceedings continued, other parties joined,including the Physicians Association for AIDS [acquiredimmunodeficiency syndrome] Care. It was only in 1986, after manyyears of legal maneuvering, that the DEA acceded to the demandfor the public hearings required by law. During the hearings,which lasted 2 years, many patients and physicians testified, andthousands of pages of documentation were introduced. In 1988 theDEA's own administrative law judge, Francis L. Young, declaredthat marihuana in its natural form fulfilled the legalrequirement of currently accepted medical use in treatment in theUnited States. He added that it was "one of the safesttherapeutically active substances known to man." His orderthat the marihuana plant be transferred to Schedule II wasoverruled, not by any medical authority, but by the DEA itself,which issued a final rejection of all pleas for reclassificationin Mach 1992. Meanwhile, a few patients have been able to obtain marihuanalegally for therapeutic purposes. Since 1978, legislationpermitting patients with certain disorders to use marihuana witha physician's approval has been enacted in 36 states. Althoughfederal regulations and procedures made the laws difficult toimplement, 10 states eventually established formal marihuanaresearch programs to seek Food and Drug Administration (FDA)approval for Investigational New Drug (IND) applications. Theseprograms were later abandoned, mainly because the bureaucraticburden on physicians and patients became intolerable. Growing demand also forced the FDA to Institute an IndividualTreatment IND (commonly referred to as a Compassionate IND) forthe use of physicians whose patients needed marihuana because noother drug would produce the same therapeutic effect. Theapplication process was made enormously complicated, and mostphysicians did not want to become involved, especially since manybelieved there was some stigma attached to prescribing cannabis.Between 1976 and 1988 the government reluctantly awarded about ahalf dozen Compassionate INDs for the use of marihuana. In 1989the FDA was deluged with new applications from people with AIDS,and the number granted rose to 34 within a year. In June 1991,the Public Health Service announced that the program would besuspended because it undercut the administration's opposition tothe use of illegal drugs. After that no new Compassionate INDswere granted, and the program was discontinued in March 1992.Eight patients are still receiving marihuana under the originalprogram; for everyone else it is officially a forbidden medicine. And yet physicians and patients in increasing numbers continueto relearn through personal experience the lessons of the 19thcentury. Many people know that marihuana is now being usedillegally for the nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy.Some know that it lowers intraocular pressure in glaucoma.Patients have found it useful as an anticonvulsant, as a musclerelaxant in spastic disorders, and as an appetite stimulant inthe wasting syndrome of human immunodeficiency virus infection.It is also being used to relieve phantom limb pain, menstrualcramps, and other types of chronic pain, including (as Oslermight have predicted) migraine.2 Polls and voter referenda haverepeatedly indicated that the vast majority of Americans thinkmarihuana should be medically available. One of marihuana's greatest advantages as a medicine is itsremarkable safety. It has little effect on major physiologicalfunctions. There is no known case of a lethal overdose; on thebasis of animal models, the ratio of lethal to effective dose isestimated as 40,000 to 1. By comparison, the ratio is between 3and 50 to 1 for secobarbital and between 4 and 10 to 1 forethanol. Marihuana is also far less addictive and far lesssubject to abuse than many drugs now used as muscle relaxants,hypnotics, and analgesics. The chief legitimate concern is theeffect of smoking on the lungs. Cannabis smoke carries even moretars and other particulate matter than tobacco smoke. But theamount smoked is much less, especially in medical use, and oncemarihuana is an openly recognized medicine, solutions may befound. Water pipes are a partial answer; ultimately a technologyfor the inhalation of cannabinoid vapors could be developed. EvenIf smoking continued, legal availability would make it easier totake precautions against aspergilli and other pathogens. Atpresent, the greatest danger in medical use of marihuana is itsillegality, which imposes much anxiety and expense on sufferingpeople, forces them to bargain with illicit drug dealers, andexposes them to the threat of criminal prosecution. The main active substance in cannabis, [delta-9]-tetrahydrocannabinol ([delta-9]-THC), has been available forlimited purposes as a Schedule II synthetic drug since 1985. Thismedicine, dronabinol (Marinol), taken orally in capsule form, issometimes said to obviate the need for medical marihuana.Patients and physicians who have tried both disagree. The dosageand duration of action of marihuana are easier to control, andother cannabinoids in the marihuana plant may modify the actionof [delta-9]-THC. The development of cannabinoids in pure formshould certainly be encouraged, but the time and resourcesrequired are great and at present unavailable. In thesecircumstances, further isolation, testing, and development ofindividual cannabinoids should not be considered a substitute formeeting the immediate needs of suffering people. Although it is often objected that the medical usefulness ofmarihuana has not been demonstrated by controlled studies,several informal experiments involving large numbers of subjectssuggest an advantage for marihuana over oral [delta-9]-THC andother medicines. For example, from 1978 through 1986 the stateresearch program in New Mexico provided marihuana or synthetic[delta-9]-THC to about 250 cancer patients receiving chemotherapyafter conventional medications failed to control their nausea andvomiting. A physician who worked with the program testified at aDEA hearing that for these patients marihuana was clearlysuperior to both chlorpromazine and synthetic [delta-9]-THC.3 Itis true that we do not have studies controlled according to thestandards required by the FDA -- chiefly because legal,bureaucratic, and financial obstacles are constantly put in theway. The situation is ironical, since so much research has beendone on marihuana, often in unsuccessful attempts to prove itsdangerous and addictive character, that we know more about itthan about most prescription drugs. Physicians should offer more encouragement to controlledresearch, but it too has limitations. Individual therapeuticresponses can be obscured by the statistical results of groupexperiments in which there is little effort to identify thespecific features of a patient that affect the drug response.Furthermore, much of our knowledge of synthetic medicines as wellas plant derivatives comes from anecdotal evidence. For example,as early as 1976 several small, methodologically imperfect, andrelatively obscure studies had shown that taking an aspirin a daycould prevent a second heart attack. In 1988 a large-scaleexperiment demonstrated dramatic effects. This story issuggestive, because marihuana, like aspirin, is a substance knownto be unusually safe and to have enormous potential healthbenefits. Cannabis can also bring about immediate relief of sufferingmeasurable in a study with only one subject. In the experimentalmethod known as the single patient randomized trial, active andplacebo treatments are administered randomly in alternation orsuccession to a patient. The method is often useful when largescale controlled studies are impossible or inappropriate becausethe disorder is rare, the patient is atypical, or the response tothe treatment is idiosyncratic. Many patients, eitherdeliberately or because of unreliable supplies, have informallycarried out somewhat similar experiments by alternating periodsof cannabis use with periods of no use in the treatment ofvarious disorders.2(pp.133-135) The American Medical Association was one of the feworganizations that raised a voice in opposition to the MarihuanaTax Act of 1937, yet today most physicians seem to take littleactive interest in the subject, and their silence is often citedby those who are determined that marihuana shall remain aforbidden medicine. Meanwhile, many physicians pretend to ignorethe fact that their patients with cancer, AIDS, or multiplesclerosis are smoking marihuana for relief; some quietlyencourage them. In a 1990 survey, 44% of oncologists said theyhad suggested that a patient smoke marihuana for relief of thenausea induced by chemotherapy.4 If marihuana were actuallyunsafe for use even under medical supervision, as its Schedule Istatus explicitly affirms, this recommendation would beunthinkable. It is time for physicians to acknowledge more openlythat the present classification is scientifically, legally, andmorally wrong. Physicians have both a right and a duty to be skeptical abouttherapeutic claims for any substance, but only after puttingaside fears and doubts connected with the stigma of illicitnonmedical drug use. Advocates of medical use of marihuana aresometimes charged with using medicine as a wedge to open a wayfor "recreational" use. The accusation is false asapplied to its target, but expresses in a distorted form a truthabout some opponents of medical marihuana; they will not admitthat it can be a safe and effective medicine largely because theyare stubbornly committed to exaggerating its dangers when usedfor nonmedical purposes. We are not asking readers for immediate agreement with ouraffirmation that marihuana is medically useful, but we hope theywill do more to encourage open and legal exploration of itspotential. The ostensible indifference of physicians should nolonger be used as a justification for keeping this medicine inthe shadows. In the Matter of Marijuana Rescheduling Petition, Docket 86- 22, Opinion, Recommended Ruling, Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision of Administrative Law Judge, September 6, 1988. Washington, DC: Drug Enforcement Agency; 1988. Grinspoon L., Bakalar J. Marihuana, the Forbidden Medicine. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press; 1993. In the Matter of Marijuana Rescheduling Petition, Docket 86- 22, Affidavit of Daniel Daneac, M.D. Washington, DC: Drug Enforcement Agency; 1987. Doblin R., Kleiman M.A.R. Marihuana as anti-emetic medicine: a survey of oncologists' attitudes and experiences. J Clin Oncol, 1991;9:1275-1290. From the Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, and the Massachusetts Mental Health Center, Boston. Reprint requests to Harvard Medical School, 74 Fenwood Rd, Boston, MA 02115 (Dr Grinspoon). JAMA, June 21, 1995 -- Vol. 273, No. 23, pp. 1875-1876 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-44IA087-000627-B018-106http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/todd_ap.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052505 text/html 5551HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:24:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:24 GMTContent-length: 5334 Marijuana Compassion Clubs Marijuana Compassion Clubs by Tim Whitmire Associated Press, August 10, 1995 PROVIDENCE, R.I. (AP) -- As Todd McCormick sits in an Ohiojail, charged with possessing 31 pounds of marijuana, he eagerlyawaits the day when he can resume giving away the drug. McCormick and his girlfriend were arrested while driving fromSan Diego to Providence to start a "compassion club"for seriously ill people who use marijuana to dull their pain. "When I get home this time, I'm going nuts,"McCormick, 25, said in a telephone interview from the CorrectionCenter of Northwest Ohio in Stryker. "I'll have fields in myfront yard. ... I'm going ballistic, no holds barred. If theywant to come get me, put me in jail, so be it." McCormick estimates there are between 30 and 50 compassionclubs across the country. The 3,200-member San Francisco CannabisBuyer's Club is believed to be the largest such group. The clubs are organized by people who grow marijuana and thenvisit support groups for patients with AIDS and other diseases.They offer the drug for free or very cheaply. McCormick, who runs the 20-member San Diego Compassionate UseClub, said members must provide photo identification and adoctor's letter describing their condition. They also must sign astatement indicating they know they are breaking the law. The Drug Enforcement Administration says it is aware ofcompassion clubs but has not targeted them for enforcement. The Food and Drug Administration has granted marijuanaprescriptions to 15 people suffering from cancer, AIDS, spinalcord injuries, multiple sclerosis and glaucoma. Seven have sincedied. The Bush administration put a stop to medical testing andmedical use of marijuana in 1992, saying it could harm patientswho had safer alternatives. The Clinton administration upheld theban last year. "Sound scientific studies supporting these claims arelacking despite anecdotal claims that smoked marijuana isbeneficial," Assistant Health Secretary Philip Lee said inannouncing the decision to members of Congress who supportmedical marijuana use. But McCormick says there are studies which claim marijuanacan ease the pain of cancer and AIDS treatments, alleviate musclespasms for people with spinal cord injuries and relieve the eyepressure that blinds glaucoma sufferers. He has used marijuana to ease the pain of Histiocytosis X, acancerous overgrowth of the cells that normally protect peoplefrom infection. The disease attacks bone marrow, the blood, liverand spleen. McCormick had the first five vertebrae of his spinefused when he was 2 and underwent eight more operations over thenext seven years. McCormick, who was in constant pain, first discoveredmarijuana while riding in a car with his mother as she smoked it."I went from not wanting to do anything to `Can I go out andplay?'" he said. He said marijuana reduced the nausea and loss of appetitecaused by radiation treatments and chemotherapy. He continued touse it after his cancer went into remission because it eased thepain from his fused vertebrae and the side effects of radiationtreatments, which stunted the growth of his left hip, leaving hisleft leg two inches shorter than the right. "(Marijuana) sets your mind at ease which sets your bodyat ease which allows your body to heal," McCormick said."If I don't have cannabis it's too uncomfortable to stretch.It dulls the pain enough that I can sit and concentrate onmovement." McCormick and Natalie Byrd were pulled over July 18 by anOhio state trooper because the curtains on their van were drawn,blocking the rear view. Three days later, Drug Enforcement Agentsraided McCormick's San Diego club, seizing marijuana, growingtools and signatures supporting a California ballot initiative tolegalize marijuana. McCormick and Byrd, who were both still jailed today, couldget up to 30 years in prison if convicted of drug possession.Whether McCormick planned to use the marijuana for medicinalpurposes makes no difference in the case, prosecutor William Bishsaid. A group called the Todd McCormick Alliance is campaigning onthe Internet computer network and through marijuana legalizationgroups to raise money for McCormick's $150,000 bail and legalexpenses. They hope the case will draw attention to their fightfor legalized marijuana. McCormick said the risk of arrest is worth giving other sickpeople the opportunity for relief. "I'm trying to remove thecriminal element," he said. "You shouldn't have to goon the street." CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-45IA087-000627-B018-136http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ms_mj_ref.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052541 text/html 4025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:25:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:35 GMTContent-length: 3808 References on Multiple Sclerosis and Marijuana References on Multiple Sclerosis and Marijuana AU - Petro DJ AU - Ellenberger C Jr TI - Treatment of human spasticity with delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol. AB - Spasticity is a common neurologic condition in patientswith multiple sclerosis, stroke, cerebral palsy or an injuredspinal cord. Animal studies suggest that THC has an inhibitoryeffect on polysynaptic reflexes. Some spastic patients claimimprovement after inhaling cannabis. We tested muscle tone,reflexes, strength and performed EMGs before and afterdouble-blinded oral administration of either 10 or 5 mg THC orplacebo. The blinded examiner correctly identified the trials inwhich the patients received THC in seven of nine cases. For thegroup, 10 mg THC significantly reduced spasticity by clinicalmeasurement (P less than 0.01). Quadriceps EMG interferencepattern was reduced in those four patients with primarilyextensor spasticity. THC was administered to eight other patientswith spasticity and other CNS lesions. Responses varied, butbenefit was seen in three of three patients with "tonicspasms." No benefit was noted in patients with cerebellardisease. SO - J Clin Pharmacol 1981 Aug-Sep;21(8-9 Suppl):413S-416S DP - 1981 Aug-Sep TA - J Clin Pharmacol PG - 413S-416S IP - 8-9 Suppl VI - 21 IS - 0091-2700 UI - 82053565 AU - Ungerleider JT AU - Andyrsiak T AU - Fairbanks L AU - Ellison GW AU - Myers LW TI - Delta-9-THC in the treatment of spasticity associatedwith multiple sclerosis. AB - Marijuana is reported to decrease spasticity in patientswith multiple sclerosis. This is a double blind, placebocontrolled, crossover clinical trial of delta-9-THC in 13subjects with clinical multiple sclerosis and spasticity.Subjects received escalating doses of THC in the range of 2.5-15mg., five days of THC and five days of placebo in randomizedorder, divided by a two-day washout period. Subjective ratings of spasticity and side effects werecompleted and semiquantitative neurological examinations wereperformed. At doses greater than 7.5 mg there was significantimprovement in patient ratings of spasticity compared to placebo.These positive findings in a treatment failure population suggesta role for THC in the treatment of spasticity in multiplesclerosis. AD - Department of Psychiatry AD - U.C.L.A. School of Medicine 90024. SO - Adv Alcohol Subst Abuse 1987;7(1):39-50 DP - 1987 TA - Adv Alcohol Subst Abuse PG - 39-50 IP - 1 VI - 7 IS - 0270-3106 UI - 88160795 3 AU - Clifford DB TI - Tetrahydrocannabinol for tremor in multiple sclerosis. AB - Based on one patient's enthusiastic report, eightpatients with multiple sclerosis, seriously disabled with tremorand ataxia, were given oral tetrahydrocannabinol. Twodemonstrated improved motor coordination. SO - Ann Neurol 1983 Jun;13(6):669-71 DP - 1983 Jun TA - Ann Neurol PG - 669-71 IP - 6 VI - 13 UI - 83281524 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-46IA087-000627-B018-166http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/usa_today1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052612 text/html 6553HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:25:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:20 GMTContent-length: 6336 USA Today Endorses Medical Marijuana 7-18-96 Editorial from USA Today Re: Medical Marijuana July 18, 1996 Our View Anti-drug focus keeps marijuana from the ill Many who suffer from various diseases could benefit frommarijuana. But they're denied relief. In the war on drugs, thousands of Americans are sufferingfrom friendly fire. They are, for the most part, patients with cancer, multiplesclerosis and AIDS who are doomed to needless pain and weightlosssyndrome because lawmakers won't approve the medicinal use ofmarijuana. Marijuana is one of the least toxic medical compounds in theworld. It poses far fewer pulmonary risks than tobacco and isless addictive than alcohol. It is even less deadly than aspirin,which causes at least 1,000 deaths a year. Despite its benign qualities, marijuana is versatile andeffective. It has been used to treat pain, depression and spasms.It has been used to help prevent glaucoma-related blindness andappears effective in battling weight loss in AIDS patients. Italso has been widely used to mitigate nausea caused bychemotherapy. Indeed, a study by researchers at the KennedySchool of Government found that 44% of the surveyed oncologistshad recommended marijuana to at least one patient for nausea. Polls find public support for marijuana's medicinal userunning from 65% to 78%. And 22 states have acted to endorsemedicinal marijuana, often either by authorizing state-sponsoredresearch or simply allowing physicians to prescribe it despitefederal prohibitions that keep such laws from going into effect.California's Legislature has twice passed laws enabling such use.Both were vetoed by Gov. Pete Wilson, forcing a third attempt inthe form of an initiative on the November ballot. Opponents say the medical value of marijuana is anecdotal.But those anecdotes number in the thousands and date backthousands of years. Penicillin was approved for use with far lessexperience and data - six patients, to be exact. Obviously, studies are needed to better assess marijuana'sefficacy. Several, including one done in New York state, haveshown marijuana to be an effective alternative to otheranti-nausea treatments. And the Food and Drug Administration hasendorsed additional research. But why make today's suffering patients wait, particularlythose with diseases that make the potential side effects looktrivial? Medicinal marijuana use doesn't betray the nation's war ondrugs. Illegal use or trafficking can still be prosecuted.Moreover, there's no reason to fear that the new leniency willincrease drug use. The same concern has been expressed aboutneedle exchange programs, used to prevent the spread of AIDSamong heroin addicts. But numerous reviews, including one by theNational Academy of Sciences, show no resulting increase inheroin use. It is entirely possible to fight the drug war without harminginnocent civilians in the process. But lawmakers must be carefulto choose the right battles. Therapeutic marijuana use isn't oneof them. Opposing View Marijuana isn't medicine According to experts, marijuana has no scientific value andactually may be harmful. By Eric A. Voth The saga of "medicinal" marijuana continues tounfold. Two new chapters are coming forth which should be ofmajor concern: California will vote Nov. 5 on a ballot initiative whichdramatically liberalizes the availability of crude, smokedmarijuana for individuals. Arizona will consider an initiative which would make all ofwhat the law calls Schedule I drugs available as medicines. Thismeans heroin, LSD, methamphetamine, ecstasy, marijuana, etc.,could be prescribed to patients who allege benefits. Marijuana is not a safe and effective medicine. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia hasclearly defined that marijuana is not a medicine. The National Institutes of Health have reviewed the issue anddetermined that crude marijuana adds nothing to the treatment ofsick patients, actually adds risk to patients and has noscientifically proven benefits over existing medicines. Neither the American Cancer Society nor the American MedicalAssociation supports smoking marijuana as medicine. Voters should realize that the move to legitimize marijuanaor other illegal drugs as medicines is driven by organizationsseeking to generally legalize drugs. The smoke screens they lay down are very similar to thedeceit and misrepresentation by the tobacco industry which havedrawn so much criticism from the public. To support marijuana orother illegal drugs as medicines is like suggesting that tobaccoshould be allowed as a medicine for anxiety or weight loss. Marijuana as a medicine is part of the grand scheme of"harm reduction" advocates who will also propose suchthings as decriminalization of drugs and needle exchanges. Theseare flawed policies which do not seek to actually reduce druguse. Needle exchanges, for instance, do not clearly demonstratereductions in disease, do not reduce drug use and do not dealwith product liability and exposure issues surrounding thehanding out of thousands of needles to addicts. It is tragic that the proponents of medicinal marijuana andharm-reduction policies are taking advantage of cancer and AIDSsufferers to further their social agendas. Let's provide sick patients with good medicine rather thanstepping back to the days of potions and herbal remedies. Eric A. Voth, a physician and drug-treatment specialist,is chairman of the International Drug Strategy Institute. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-47IA087-000627-B018-196http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/cannabid.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052635 text/html 9217HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:26:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:00 GMTContent-length: 9000 Cannabidiol: The Wonder Drug of the 21st Century? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Cannabidiol: The Wonder Drug of the 21stCentury? The traditional use of Cannabis as ananalgesic, anti-asthmatic, and anti-rheumatic drug is wellestablished. This British study also suggests that cultivation ofCannabis plants rich in Cannabidiol (CBD) and other phenolicsubstances would be useful not only as fiber producing plants butalso for medicinal purposes in the treatment of certaininflammatory disorders. CBD was found to be more effective thanaspirin as an anti-inflammatory agent. "Analgesic andAnti-inflammatory Activity of Constituents of Cannabis SativaL.," E.A. Formukong, A.T. Evans, and F.J. Evans,Inflammation, Vol. 4, 1988, pp. 361-371. Cannabidiol, CBD, a non-psychoactivecannabinoid of Marijuana, was given to 5 patients with dystoniadisorders. Improvement occurred in all 5 patients by 20-50%."Open Label Evaluation of Cannabidiol in Dystonic MovementDisorders," Consroe, et al, International Journal ofNeuroscience, 1986, Vol. 30, pp.277-282. Three patients with Huntington's Disease whohad been previously unresponsive to therapy with neuroleptics,were given Cannabidiol, (CBD), a non-psychoactive cannabinoid ofMarijuana. After the second week improvement in choreic movementoccurred by 20-40%. Except for transient, mild hypo-tension noside effects were recorded."Effects of Cannabidiol inHuntington's Disease," Sandyk, Consroe, Stern, and Snider,Neurology, 36 (Suppl. 1) April, 1986, p.342. In this Brazilian study of 8 Epileptic patientsreceiving Cannabidiol, (CBD), 4 were free of convulsions, 3 hadpartial improvement, and 1 was unchanged. No serious side effectswere found. This is quite important, as complex partial seizureswith secondary generalization are difficult to treat withcurrently used drugs. The potential use of CBD as ananti-epileptic drug and its possible potentiating effect on otherdrugs are discussed. "Chronic Administration of Cannabidiolto Healthy Volunteers and Epileptic Patients," Pharmacology,21: 1980, J.M. Cunha, et al, pp.175-185. Subjects receiving 160 mg. Cannabidiol reportedhaving slept significantly more than those receiving placebo;seven out of eight epileptics receiving Cannabidiol hadimprovement of their disease state. (Brazil) "Hypnotic andAntiepileptic Effects of Cannabidiol," Carlini, E.A., andCunha, J.A., Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 1981: 21: pp.417S-427S. Three patients with TS who experiencedincomplete responses to conventional anti-TS drugs but noted asignificant amelioration of symptoms when smoking marijuana. Theeffects of marijuana on TS may be related to its anxiety-reducingproperties, although a more specific antidyskinetic effect cannotbe excluded. Eliminating the psychoactive properties of marijuanawhile retaining the antidyskinetic effects (Cannabidiol) couldprove beneficial. "Marijuana and Tourette's Syndrome,"(letter), Sandyk and Awerbuch, Journal of ClinicalPsychopharmacology, Vol. 8, No. 6, Dec. 1988, pp.444-5. "Anti-dyskinetic effects ofcannabidiol," Conti, L.H., Johannesen, J., Musty, R.E.,Consroe, P., Proceedings of the International Congress onMarijuana. 1987: 21. Melbourne, Australia. This Brazilian study Investigates the possibleanti-psychotic activity of CBD by studying the effect of thiscannabinoid on animal models used in research with potentialanti-psychotic properties. CBD seems to compare favorably withhaloperidol as an anti-psychotic. "Effects of CBD in animalmodels predictive of anti-psychotic activity," Zuardi, A.W.,Rodrigues, J.A., Cunha, J.M., Psychopharmacology 1991: 104: pp.260-264. CBD blocks some of the effects of THC in micebut potentiates some other effects. (Brazil)"PharmacologicalInteraction between Cannabidiol and Tetrahydrocannabinol,"Karniol, I.G., Carlini, E.A., Psychopharmacologia 1973: 33: pp.53-70. CBD was effective in blocking most of theeffects of THC, increased pulse rate, disturbed time tasks, andpsychological reactions. CBD also decreased the anxietycomponents of THC. (Brazil) "Cannabidiol Interferes with theeffects of Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," Karniol, I.G.,Shirakawa, I., Kasinski, N., Pfeferman, A., Carlini, E.A.,European Journal of Pharmacology 1974: 28: pp. 172-177. One of the first studies that clearly showsthat hemp grown for fiber is very low in THC, the psychoactivecomponent that gets people high. The drug-type marijuana is veryhigh in THC. Cannabidiol (CBD) which is not psychoactive, is veryhigh in fiber-type hemp but low in drug-type marijuana. This isimportant as CBD is known to block the effects of THC. This makes the hemp doubly useless for drugeffects. "Chemistry of Marijuana," Coy Waller.Pharmacological Reviews, Vol. 23, No. 4, 1971. Wild 'marijuana' growing in Riley County Kansaswas found to be very low in THC content. (Below the Europeanthreshold for fiber hemp.) The leaves and flowering tops averagedfrom 0.01-0.49% THC with a mean of 0.14% THC. CBD which blocksthe psychoactive effects of THC was as high as 1.7%."Seasonal Fluctuations in Cannabinoid Content of KansasMarijuana," R.P. Latta, and B.J. Eaton. Economic Botany, 29:April-June, 1975, pp. 153-163. Researchers for the Canadian Departmentof Agriculture tested over 350 varieties of Cannabis in Ottawa,Ontario. They determined that there were two basic types ofCannabis based on genetic characteristics: a drug-type whichoriginates in hot climates such as India and is high in THC butlow in CBD and a fiber-type which originates in temperateclimates and is low in THC but high in CBD and is usedindustrially for fiber and food. This awareness of theseparateness of the two phenotypes has vast agronomic potential.It means fiber hemp can be grown without the drug effect of'marijuana.'"The Evolution of Cannabinoid Phenotypes inCannabis," Ernest Small, H.D. Beckstead, and Allan Chan,Economic Botany, 29: 1975, pp. 219-232. Ten mg. of THC is required to get apsychoactive effect from 'marijuana.' It would require 50-100cigarettes of the French hemp cultivated for paper to get apsychoactive high. "Paper-making type of hemp (Cannabissativa L.) cultivated in France: Constituents compared to thoseof marijuana," Fournier and Paris, (French) PlantesMedicinales et Phytotherapie, Vol. 13(2) April, 1979, pp.116-121. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-48IA087-000627-B018-229http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/analgesic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052650 text/html 20556HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:26:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:38 GMTContent-length: 20338 Analgesic and Anti-Inflammatory Activity of Constituentsof Cannabis Sativa Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information ANALGESIC ANDANTIINFLAMMATORY ACTIVITY OF CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVAL. INFLAMMATION, Vol 12, No. 4, 1988 E.A. Formukong, A.T. Evans, and F.J. Evans Department of Pharmacognosy, The School ofPharmacy University of London, 29-39 Brunswick Square London, WC11N 1AX,England Abstract---Two extracts of Cannabis sativaherb, one being cannabinoid--free (ethanol) and the othercontaining the cannabinoids (petroleum), were shown to inhibitPBQ- induced writhing in mouse when given orally and also toantagonize tetradecanoylphorbol acetate (TPA) -induced erythemaof mouse skin when applied topically. With the exception ofcannabinol (CBN) and delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-1-THC),the cannabinoids and olivetol (their biosynthetic precursor)demonstrated activity in the PBQ test exhibiting their maximaleffect at doses of about 100 mcg/kg. Delta-1-THC only becamemaximally effective in doses of 10 mg/kg. This higher dosecorresponded to that which induced catalepsy and is indicative ofa central action. CBN produce a 40% inhibition of PBQ-inducedwrithing. Cannabidiol (CBD) was the most effective of thecannabinoids at doses of 100 mcg/kg. Doses of cannabinoids thatwere effective in the analgesic test orally were used topicallyto antagonize TPA-induced erythema of skin. The fact thatdelta-1-THC and CBN were the least effective in this testsuggests a structural relationship between analgesic activity andantiinflammatory activity among the cannabinoids related to theirperipheral actions and separate from the central effects ofdelta-1-THC. INTRODUCTION Various preparations of Cannabis sativa havebeen employed for their medicinal effects, including antipyretic,antirheumatic, antiallergic, and analgesic purposes (1). Extractsof Cannabis have been shown to possess analgesic activity (2, 3),and delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-1-THC), the psychoactivecomponent of Cannabis has also been shown to possess thisactivity in various models (4-6). In addition, cannabinol (CBN)but not cannabidiol (CBD) was shown to exhibit analgesic activityin vivo (7). It is possible that the antiinflammatory andantiasthmatic properties of this herb are mediated througheffects on arachidonate metabolism. However, constituents ofCannabis are known to stimulate (8,9) and inhibit (10-12)prostaglandin (PG) release by influencing enzymes of this pathway(13, 14). A cannabinoid or an extract of Cannabis withlittle or no central effects could be of use therapeutically. Inthis paper, we have examined the antiinflammatory potential oftwo extracts of Cannabis, pure cannabinoids and olivetol (acannabinoid biosynthetic precursor) in two models ofinflammation, in an attempt to separate on a structural basis theperipheral from the central action of these phenolic drugs. MATERIALS AND METHODS The folowing were used: aspirin (Sigma ChemicalCo., Poole, Dorset.), tripotassium citrate (analytical grade),all cannabinoids except CBG (Sigma), and CBG (Makor Chemicals,Jerusalem, Israel). Preparation of Drugs: PBQ Test. Cannabinoidsand cannabis extracts were suspended in a 1% ethanolic solutioncontaining 2.5% w/v Tween. Aspirin was dissolved in a 40 mg/mlsolution of tripotassium citrate. Phenyl Benzoquinone Writhing (PBQ) andPreparation of PBQ Solution. A 0.04% solution of PBQ was preparedimmediately before use by dissolving PBQ in warm ethanol anddiluting with water at 40 degrees C ( 15) bringing the ethanolicconcentration to 5% (16). The bottle was stoppered, foil paperwrapped around it, and the solution maintained at 34 degrees C.Deterioration of the solution occurs if left exposed to light andair (17). Administration of Drugs. Male CDI male (CharlesRiver) weighing 18-20 g were starved overnight for theexperiment. Animals were placed in a thermostatically controlledenvironment maintained at 34 degrees C. Mice were orallyadministered test drug 20 min before the intraperitonealinjection of PBQ (4 mg/kg). Five minutes after injection, a handtally counter was used to record the number of stretchingmovements for each mouse in a 5-min period. Control animals wereonly administered the vehicle. Note less than five animals wereused per dose. Statistical Analysis. Results are expressed asmean percentage inhibition of control (+SEM) in the case of PBQtest. IC-50s were obtained from graphs relating probit percentageinhibition (ordinate) against log dose (abscissa). The IC-50 isthat dose of drug which would inhibit PBQ-induced writhing by50%. Tetradecanoyl phorbol-acetate-induced (TPA)Erythema of Mouse Ear. In order to exclude the possibility of acentral mechanism of action (see Discussion), compounds also weretested for their ability to inhibit TPA-induced erythema on mouseears in 100% of the animals was chosen as the challenging dosefor inhibition studies, measured 4 h after application (18). Test drugs were dissolved in ethanol and 5 ulapplied to the inner ear of the mouse 15 min before theapplication of 1 mcg TPA in 5 ul acetone. Only one dose of testdug was used for this experiment, 100 mcg/mcl ethanols, excepttrifluoperazine at 1 mg/5 ul. The other ear acted as a control. The results were expressed as percentageinhibition, taken to mean the complete suppression of erythema inthe test animals, as described in reference 19. RESULTS PBQ-Induced Writhing. CBD, CBG, olivetol,ethanolic extract, and petroleum spirit extract producedsignificant inhibition at doses up to 10 mg/kg (Figures 1-3). CBNwas only marginally active (Table 1.) Delta-1-THC was fully effective only atconcentrations above 10 mg/kg Figure 2). The ethanolic and petroleum extract, CBD,olivetol, CBG, and cannflavon were more potent than aspirin. Thepetroleum spirit extract was about four times more potent thanthe ethanolic extract, which was virtually equipotent with CBD.Cannflavon, isolated from the ethanolic extract was 14 times lesspotent than the ethanolic extract of the dried herb (Table 2). There was a decline in response following theadministration of doses greater than 0.1 mg/kg of somesubstances. This is most evident in the bell shaped dose-responsecurve of the petroleum spirit extract (Figure 1). The activity ofthe ethanolic extract and CBD was also found to decrease slightlyat higher dose levels. (Figures 1 and 2) TPA-Induced Erythema. In general, the abilityof compounds to inhibit TPA-induced erythema correlated well withtheir potency in the PBQ-writhing test. Thus, CBN and delta-1-THCwere the least active followed by CBG, CBD, and cannflavon.Again, the extracts were the most active (Table 3). Twenty-fourhours after application, the ethanolic extract still produced 16%inhibition of TPA-induced erythema of the animals. All othersubstances were without activity after 24 h. All substances were more active thantrifluoperazine, 1 mg/5ul, a known phorbol ester antagonist bothin vivo (19) and in vitro (20). DISCUSSION The PBQ-induced writhing response is believedto be produced by the liberation of endogenous substance(s),notably metabolites of the arachidonic cascade (21, 22). However,the PBQ test is not specific for weak analgesics such as thenonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, as it also detects centrallyactive analgesics (16, 17). Therefore, in the elucidation of theaction of the cannabinoids as inflammatory drugs, it wasnecessary to perform more than one test. In this case, peripheralrather than central action was confirmed in the mouse earerythema assay. TPA-induced erythema was inhibited by theextracts cannflavon, cannabinoids, and olivetol. The activity ofTPA has been shown to be dependent upon PG release in mouseepidermis (23) and mouse peritoneal macrophages (24) possibly viathe initial stimulation of protein kinase C (for a review seereference 25). It has also been shown that compounds that showmoderate to very potent antiinflammatory potential in standard invivo inflammation models will also inhibit TPA-induced edema ofthe mouse ear (26), and phorbol-ester-induced erythema (19). It is possible that the cannabinoids and theirextracts are inhibiting both PBQ-induced writhing and TPA-inducederythema by effects on arachidonate release and metabolism.Cannabinoids and olivetol have been shown to inhibit PGmobilization (11, 12) and synthesis (14). The noncannabinoidconstituents of Cannabis, for example, cannflavon, have beenshown to be mainly cyclooxygenase inhibitors (14). Cannabinoids,however, stimulate and inhibit phospholipase A2 (PLA2) activity(13), as well as inducing an inhibition of cyclooxygenase andlipoxygenase (14). The activity of Cannabis herb or resin iscomplex, in that activities can be demonstrated on at least threemajor enzymes of the arachidonate cascade. The mechanism by which delta-1-THC inhibitsPBQ-induced writhing may differ from that of the othersubstances. At concentrations greater than 10 mg/kg, delta-1-THCmay be inhibiting PBQ-induced writhing by acting on centralrather than peripheral functions. It is possible thatprostaglandins modulate certain inhibitory pathways in the brain,bringing about an increase in the pain threshold. This dose ofdelta-1-THC is capable of bringing about the cataleptic effect(27), which is a standard test for central involvement. Centralanalgesics have higher efficacies than peripheral ones, and thismay explain the effectiveness of delta-1-THC (Figure 2). Thecentral involvement of delta-1-THC is perhaps the primary reasonwhy delta-1-THC was recognized as an analgesic before othercannabinoids. Our results suggest that the response of theethanolic extract cannot be solely due to cannflavon. Otherstructurally related phenolic substances, known to be present inthis complex extract, may account for the higher activity seeneither due to cumulative or synergistic effects uponcyclooxygenase. The activity of the petroleum ether extract islikely to be largely due to the presence of CBD and CBN. GLCanalysis of the extract has shown that this extract contained14.13% CBD, 9.08% CBN, and 6.68% delta-1-THC (27). On the basisof our results, it is possible to separate the centrally activecannabinoid delta-1-THC from peripherally active compounds of theherbal extracts. An attempt has been made to differentiate themstructurally (Table 3). It can be seen that the olivetolicnucleus together with a free C-5 hydroxyl group are structuralrequirements for peripheral effects, involving bothcyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibition (14). Substancespossessing this structure possess antiinflammatory and analgesicactivities without central hallucinogenic effects. Delta-1-THCand CBN, which are cyclized derivatives exhibiting no C-5hydroxyl moiety, have little if any peripheral action. The traditional use of Cannabis as ananalgesic, antiasthmatic, and antirheumatic drug is wellestablished. Our results would suggest that cultivation ofCannabis plants rich in CBD and other phenolic substances wouldbe useful not only as fiber-producing plants but also formedicinal purposes in the treatment of certain inflammatorydisorders. Acknowledgments----We are grateful to theMedicinal Research Council and the Government of Cameroon forfinancial support. REFERENCES 1. Pars, H.G., R.J. Razdan, and J.F. Howes.1977. Potential therapeutic agents derived from the cannabinoidnucleus. Adv. Drug. Res. 11. 2. O.L. Davies, J. Raventos, and A.L. Walpole,1946. A method for evaluation of analgesic activity using rats.Br. J. Pharmacol. 1: 255-264. 3. Gill, E.W., W.D.M. Paton, and R.G. Pertwee,1970. Preliminary experiments on the chemistry and pharmacologyof Cannabis. Nature 228: 134-136. 4. Dewey, W.L., L.S. Harris, and J.S. Kennedy,1972. Some pharmacological and toxicological effects of1-trans-delta-8- and 1-trans-delta-9-THC in laboratory rodents.Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. 196: 133-145. 5. Chesher, G.B., C.J. Dahl, M. Everingham,D.M. Jackson, H. Marchant-Williams, and G.A. Starmer, 1973. Theeffect of cannabinoids on intestinal mobility and theirantinociceptive effect in mice. Br. J. Pharmacol. 49:588-594. 6. Buxbaum, D., E. Sanders-Bush, and D.H.Efron. 1969. Analgesic activity of tetrahydrocannabinol in therat and mouse. Fed. Proc. 28: 735. 7. Sanders, J., D.M. Jackson, and G.A. Starmer.1979. Interactions among the cannabinoids in the antagonism ofabdominal constriction response in the mouse. Psychopharmacology61: 281-285. 8. White, H.L., and R.L. Tansik. 1980. Effectsof delta-9-THC and cannabidiol on phospholipase and other enzymesregulating arachidonate metabolism. Prostaglandins Med. 4:409-411, 9. Burstein, S., and S.A. Hunter. 1978.Prostaglandins and Cannabis VI. Release of arachidonic acid fromHeLa cells by delta-1-THC and other cannabinoids. Biochem.Pharmacol. 27: 1275-1280. 10. Burstein, S. and A. Raz. 1972. Inhibitionof prostaglandin E2 biosynthesis by delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol.Prostaglandins 2: 369. 11. Burstein, S.E., Levine, and C. Varanelli.1973. Prostaglandins and Cannabis II. Inhibition of biosynthesisby the naturally occurring cannabinoids. Biochem. Pharmacol. 22:2905-2910. 12. Barrett, M.L., D.Gordon, and F.J.Evans. 1985. Isolation from Cannabis sativa L of cannflavin: Anovel inhibitor of prostaglandin production. Biochem. Pharmacol.34: 2019-2024. 13. Evans, A.T., E.A. Formukong, and F.J.Evans. 1987. Activation of phospholipase A2 by cannabinoids. Lackof correlation with CNS effects. FEBS Lett. 211: 119-122. 14. Evans, A.T., E.A. Formukong, and F.J.Evans. 1987. Actions of Cannabis constituents on enzymes ofprostaglandin synthesis: Antiinflammatory potential. Biochm.Pharmacol. 36: 2035-2037. 15. Parkes, M.W., and J.T. Pickens. 1965.Conditions influencing the inhibition of analgesic drugs of theresponse to intraperitoneal injections of phenylbenzoquine inmice. Br. J. Pharmacol. 25: 81-87. 16. Siegmund, E.A., R.A. Cadmus, and G. Lu.1957. A method for evaluating both nonnarcotic and narcoticanalgesics. Proc Soc. Exp. Biol. 95: 729-731. 17. Hendershot, L.C., and J. Forsaith. 1959.Antagonism of the frequency of phenylbenzoquinone inducedwrithing in the mouse by weak analgesics and nonanalgesics. J.Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 125: 237-240. 18. Kinghorn, A.D., and F.J. Evns. 1975. Abiological screen of selected species of the genus Euphorbia forskin irritant effects. Planta Med. 28: 325. 19. Williamson, E.M., and F.J. Evans.1981. Inhibition of erythema induced by proinflammatory esters of12-deoxyphorbol. Acta Pharmacol. Toxicol. 481: 47-52. 20. Williamson, E.M., J. Westwick, V.V.Kakkar, and F.J. Evans. 1981. Studies on the mechanism of actionof 12-DOPP, a potent platelet aggregating phorbol ester. Biochem.Pharmacol. 30: 2691-2696. 21. Collier, H.O.J., L.C. Dineen, C.A. Johnson,and C. Schneider. 1968. Abdominal constriction response and itssuppression by analgesic drugs in the mouse. Br. J. Pharmacol.Chemother. 32: 295-310. (22) 23. Marks, F., G. Furstenberger, and E.Kownatzki, 1981. Prostaglandin E-mediated mitogenic stimulatin ofmouse epidermis in vivo by divalent cation ionophore A23187 andby tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate. CancerRes. 41: 696-702. 24. Humes, J.L., S. Sadowski, M. Galavage, M.Goldenberg, E. Bubers, R.J. Bonney, and F.A. Kuehl, 1982.Evidence for two sources of arachidonic acid for oxidativemetabolism by mouse peritoneal macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 257:1291-1594. 25. Edwards, M.C., and F.J. Evans. 1987.Activity correlations in the phorbol ester series. Bot. J. Linn.Soc. 94: 231-246. 26. Calson, R.P., L. O'Neill-David, J. Chary,and A.J. Lewis. 1985. Modulation of mouse ear edema bycyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibitors and otherpharmacological agents. Agents Actions 17: 197-204. 27. Formukong, E.A., A.T. Evans, F.J. Evans.1987. Inhibition of the cataleptic effect ofdelta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol by noncataleptic constituents ofCannabis sativa L. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. (in press). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-49IA087-000627-B018-258http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/hunting1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052659 text/html 3663HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:26:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:37 GMTContent-length: 3446 Effects of Cannabidiol in Huntington's Disease Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information EFFECTS OF CANNABIDIOL IN HUNTINGTON'SDISEASE Neurology 36 (Suppl 1) April 1986 p. 342 Reuven Sandyk, Paul Consroe, Lawrence Z. Stern,and Stuart R. Snider, Tucson, AZ Cannabidiol (CBD) is a major nonpsychoactivecannabinoid of marijuana. Based on reports indicating possibleefficacy of CBD in dystonic movements (Neurology 1984; 34 [Suppl1]: 147 and 1985; 35 [Suppl 1]: 201), we tried CBD in threepatients with Huntington's disease (HD). The patients;, aged 30to 56, had HD of 7 to 12 years' duration. Their condition hasbeen slowly progressive and unresponsive to prior therapy withneuroleptics. Orally administered CBD was initiated at 300 mg/dand increased 1 week later to 600 mg/d for the next 3 weeks. Mildimprovement ( 5 to 15%) in the choreic movements was documentedusing the tongueprotrusion test (Neurology [Minneap} 1972; 22:929-33) and a chorea severity evaluation scale (Br J ClinPharmacol 1981; 11: 129-51) after the first week. Furtherimprovement (20 to 40%) was noticed after the second week of CBD,and this remained stable for the following 2 weeks. Except for transient, mild hypotension, no sideeffects were recorded, and laboratory tests were normal.Withdrawal of CBD after 48 hours resulted in return of choreicmovements to the pre-CBD state. (Supported in part by NINCDS grant #NS15441) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-50IA087-000627-B019-17http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/dystonic1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052727 text/html 3853HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:27:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:55 GMTContent-length: 3636 Beneficial and Adverse Effects of Cannabidiol in aParkinson Patient with Sinemet-Induced Dystonic Dyskinesia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Beneficial and Adverse Effects of Cannabidiolin a Parkinson Patient with Sinemet-Induced Dystonic Dyskinesia Stuart R. Snider and Paul Consroe,Tucson, AZ "Neurology" 35 April 1985(Suppl 1) p. 201 In idiopathic dystonia, the therapeutic effectof marijuana smoking is reported to be comparable with diazepam(C.D. Marsden, in Disorders of Movement, 1981: 81). Thenon-psychoactive cannabis derivative, cannabidiol (CBD), alsoimproves dystonia (Consroe and Snider, in Cannabinoids asTherapeutic Agents, in press). We report the effect of CBD ondystonia secondary to Sinemet in parkinsonism, a disorder thoughtto be a relative contraindication for cannabinoids (D. Moss etal, Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1981, 1984). The patient, a 42year-old man with an 8-year history of parkinsonism, developedpeak-dose dyskinesia about 4 years ago and action dystoniaaffecting all limbs more recently. Trohexyphenidyl andbromocriptine each produced only slight improvement. To stableoptimal dosages of the three drugs, CBD was added, starting with100 mg/d and increasing by 100 mg weekly. At 100 to 200 mg/d,there was a decrease in clinical fluctuations and in dyskinesiascores (by 30%) without a significant worsening of theparkinsonism. At 300 to 400 mg/d, there was no furtherimprovement in the dyskinesia, and adverse effects (dizziness,increased Parkinson symptoms) appeared. CBD withdrawal resultedin 3 days of severe generalized dystonia and several weeks ofincreased sensitivity to Sinemet, suggestive of a "drugholiday" effect. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-51IA087-000627-B019-42http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/mjtouret.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052743 text/html 13376HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:27:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:01 GMTContent-length: 13158 Marijuana and Tourette's Syndrome Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information MARIJUANA AND TOURETTE'S SYNDROME Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, Vol.8/No. 6, Dec 1988 Editors: Although a variety of pharmacological agentshave been reported to attenuate symptoms of Tourette's syndrome (TS),the pathophysiology of this disorder remains unknown. Apart from thepresence of disabling motor and vocal tics, TS patients often experiencebehavioral disturbances including obsessive compulsive thoughts, anxiety,depression, abnormal sleep disturbances. (1) Drug abuse to obtain relieffrom the chronic anxiety may be common among these patients. (2) (3) Werecently encountered three patients with TS who experienced incompleteresponses to conventional anti-TS drugs but noted a significantamelioration of symptoms when smoking marijuana. The first patient was a 15-year-old boy who, inaddition to motor tics, had obsessive compulsive andself-mutilatory behavior improved with administration of imipramine (37.5 mg/day)combined with the oral opiate receptor antagonist naltrexone (dose range 50to 100 mg/day). During recreational use of marijuana (1 to 2cigarettes/day), he noted general relaxation and marked lessening in his urge totic. According to the patient's mother, motor tics had decreased byabout 50% and there was also some reduction in the frequency of theself-mutilatory behavior. The patients had been smoking marijuana for 4weeks, and upon discontinuation, noted rebound exacerbation of symptoms within12 hours. The second patient, age 17, had had severemotor tics since the age of 7 years. He had frequent jerk-type movementsof his neck muscles associate with infrequent vocalizations duringstressful situations. His management had been difficult as he was unableto tolerate haloperidol or clonidine. Administration of naltrexone (150mg/day) reduced his anxiety level and the urge to tic; this was the onlydrug he could tolerate. On several occasions, he had smoked marijuana andnoted generalized relaxation accompanied by reduction in the severity of themotor tics and improvement in attention span. He volunteered that smokingone cigarette reduced the frequency of his motor tics by about 60% to70%, which was sustained over several hours. The third patient was a 39-year-old man who hadhad symptoms of TS since the age of 9 years. His symptoms includedfrequent jerking-type movements of his neck and upper extremitymuscles, facial grimacing, frequent blinking, and leg jerking.Vocalizations were not noted except during extreme anxiety. In addition he wastroubled by chronic insomnia and hypersexuality. He reported no benefit fromhaloperidol, clonidine, or benzodiazepines but experienced some reliefafter consuming large amounts of ethanol. He also admitted that marijuanasmoking (1/2 to 1 cigarette/day) produced relaxation withsubsequent reduction in the severity of the motor tics along with markedattenuation of his hypersexuality. From 1842 to the turn of this century, severalreports in the literature have indicated that marijuanasmoking was used extensively as an analgesic, sedative, and hypnotic agent. (4)Moreover, oral cannabis preparations were useful in the management ofdiverse neurological conditions including convulsions and chorea.(5) Much more recently it was reported anecdotally that patients withdystonia improved with their alleged cannabis smoking. (6) The cannabisconstituent cannabidiol was reported efficacious in reducing symptoms ofdystonia. (7,8) and Huntington's chorea. (9) In experimentalanimals, cannabidiol has been shown to exert anticonvulsant and antianxietyproperties and affect apomorphine-induced turning behavior in rats.(10) The latter report suggested that cannabidiol exertsantidyskinetic effects through modulation of striatal dopaminergic activity.Tetrahudrocannabinol (THC, the active compound of marijuana) may exert GABA-ergic aswell as antiserotonergic effects. (11) A recent report has demonstratedthat THC reduces opiate receptor binding sites and modulates opiodreceptors in a noncompetitive manner. (12) THC may also exert effects on thecholinergic system. (13) Considering evidence that marijuana may exerteffects on a large number of neurotransmitters, it is difficult tospeculate on its mode of action in attenuating symptoms of TS. It isreasonable to assume that the effects of marijuana in TS may be largelyrelated to its anxiety-reducing properties, although a more specificantidyskinetic effect cannot be excluded. Should marijuana compounds prove tohave specific actions in TS, chemical modifications which eliminate thepsychoactive properties while retaining the antiduskinetic effects (e.g.,cannabidiol) could promise a new class of drugs useful in the management ofTS. Further studies are clearly needed in both the clinical and basiclaboratory realms to further characterize the effects of cannabinoids in TS. Reuven Sandyk, MD, MSc Gavin Awerbuch, MD University of Arizona Tucson, Arizona References 1. Brunn RD. Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome: anoverview of clinical experience. J Am Acad Child Psychiatry 1984;23:125-33. 2. Mesulam MM. Cocaine and Tourette's syndrome.N Engl J Med 1986; 315: 398. 3. Sandyk R, Gillman MD. Gilles de la Tourettesyndrome following alcohol withdrawal. Br J Addict 1985; 80:213-4. 4. Consroe P, Snider SR. Therapeutic potentialof cannabinoids in neurological disorders. In: Mechoulam R, ed.Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1986: 21-49. 5. O'Shaughnessy R. On the preparation of theindian hemp or gunjah (cannabis indica): the effects on the animalsystem in health and their utility in the treatment of tetanus and otherconvulsive diseases. Trans Med Phys Soc Bombay 1842; 8: 421-61. 6. Marsden CD. Treatment of torsion dystonia.In: Barbeau A, ed. Disorders of movement, current status of moderntherapy, Vol. 8. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1981: 81-104. 7. Snider SF, Consroe P. Treatment of Meige'ssyndrome with cannabidiol. Neurology 1984; 34 (Suppl): 147. 8. Consroe P, Sandyk R, Snider SR. Open labelevaluation of cannabidiol in dystonic movement disorder. Int J Neurosci1986; 30: 277-80. 9. Sandyk R, Consroe P, Stern LZ, Snider SR.Effects of cannabidiol in Hungtington's disease. Neurology 1986; 36(suppl): 342. 10. Conti LH, Johannesen J, Musty RE, ConsroeP. Anti-dyskinetic effects of cannabidiol. Proceedings of theInternational Congress on Marijuana. Melbourne, Australia: Melbourne UniversityPress 1987: 21. 11. Revuelta AV, Cheney DL, Wood PL, Costa E.Gabergic mediation in the inhibition of hippocampal acetylcholineturnover rate elicited by delta-9-tetrahudrocannabidiol. J Clin Pharmacol1979; 18: 525-30. 12. Vaysse PJJ, Gardner EL, Zukin RS.Modulation of rat brain opiod receptors by cannabinoids. J Pharmacol Exp Ther1987; 241: 534-9. 13. Revuelta AV, Moroni F, Cheney DL, Costa E.Effect of cannabinoids on the turnover rate of acetylcholine in rathippocampus, striatum and cortex. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1978; 304:107-11. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-52IA087-000627-B019-69http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/therappos.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052756 text/html 10720HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:27:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:56 GMTContent-length: 10502 Therapeutic Possibilities in Cannabinoids Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information THERAPEUTIC POSSIBILITIES IN CANNABINOIDS THE LANCET, MARCH 22, 1975 P. 667-69 EDITORIAL To early man, Cannabis sativa L. was a sourceof food ( hemp seed and oil) and of fibre (ropes), though,according to mythology, the Emperor Shen Nung (4000 B.C.) knewthat it contained a potent drug. Hindus (20) and Arabs (21) usedit in a medley of diseases, and in Victorian times it had atherapeutic vogue in Europe. Tincture of cannabis, taken orally,was occasionally effective as a sedative in psychosomaticdisorders and even for the control of fits, asthma, migraine,choreiform conditions, and "psychosis." After a reviewby REYNOLDS (22) in 1890, British medicine heard little of thedrug---because of unreliability of available material, the onrushof chemotherapy by synthetic drugs, and not least theclassification of Cannabis, with opium, as a narcotic in need oflegal restriction. Herbal cannabis (marihuana or "pot"),or the resin collected from the flowering tops (hashish), variesgreatly (23) in its content of each active principle orcannabinoid, but the important ones are tetrahydrocannabinol(THC, numbered as delta-1 or delta-9, according to the school ofchemistry) and some analogues; cannabinol (CBN); cannabidiol(CBD)); and cannabigerol (CBG). Synthetic compounds are now beingassessed: an early attempt, demethylheptylpyran (DMHP), is ananticonvulsant of some potency in man. (24) THC is highlylipophilic, absorbed rapidly when inhaled and more slowly wheningested, and is quickly oxidised in stages through an activemetabolite to more polar but inactive products. These are clearedvery slowly from the body in urine and feces. At present cannabisand the cannbinoids are controlled drugs in the UK, scheduled inthe Misuse of Drugs Act of 1971; a personal licence (which can beobtained readily enough from the Home Office for legitimatepurposes) is required in order to gain exemption from theprovisions of this Act.* Among established pharmacological properties ofcannabinoids which may be capable of therapeutic application arethe sedative or tranquillising effect; analgesia; anticonvulsant,hypothermic, and hypotensive effects; stimulation of appetite;lowering of intraocular tension; relaxation of smooth muuscle;and cytotoxic or immunosuppresive actions. There has beenparticular interest in the effects on airways. A prolonged andsignificant reduction in airways resistance was noted by VACHONet al. (25) in experienced young males who inhaled 9 litres ofsmoke in air from herbal cannabis which contained 1% or 2.6% THC.Tachycardia and a rise in specific airways conductance followedat once, the airways effect peaking at 20 minutes and persistingfor some hours. TASHKIN et al. (24) confirmed this observationand estimated that the smoke from cannabis of 2% THC content wasmore effective than 1.25 mg of isoprenaline. The next step was toshow that THC in sesame oil was active taken orally in doses of10-20 mg. The effect took about 1 hour to peak and persisted for6 hours. TASHKIN et al (27) examined 10 subjects with reversibleairways obstruction of varying severity but whose disability wasquiescent. They were asked to smoke placebo herb, or 7 mg per kgcannabis of 2% THC content, or to ingest 15 mg of THC. Airwaysconductance rose immediately and the effect persisted much longerthan that of isoprenaline. The two teams have confirmed these results,(28,29) but there are two minor reservations which may be madeabout their work. Firstly, all the subjects tested had previouslysmoked marihuana and therefore expected some effect from it,which may have induced adrenal medullary activity; cannabis-naiveindividuals may not respond in this way. Secondly, a highlysensitive whole-body plethysmograph was used which detects modestchanges in dynamic lung values. With these reservations in mind,DAVIES et al (30) gave a crude extract of cannabis orally inethanol, added to fruit juice immediately before swallowing, to16 drug-naive patients with reversible airways obstruction. Theextract was analysed by gas / liquid chromatography so that thedose of THC was known---nil, 2.5 mg, and 10 mg, with 4 mgsalbutamol for comparison. FVC, FEV, PEFR, and MEFR were measuredin addition to self-rating mood scales, blood-pressure,pulse-rate, and so on. With THC there was a dose-related trendtowards bronchodilation, less than that after salbutamol and notsignificantly different from placebo. Further work with higherdosage is called for. A brief trial of the effect of inhalinglaerosol-THC failed because the drug is insoluble in water andpoorly soluble in 40% ethanol (which is just tolerable forinhalation); oil, in which it is soluble, harms the lung. The best medium may be some non-irritantsmokable carrier. Herbal cannabis is unsuitable because of theirritant (31) and cytotoxic (32) properties of the smoke. Cannabinoids inhibit the incorporation ofamino-acids into nucleotides. They are, therefore,immuno-suppressive and antimitotic; and they inhibit the growthof Lewis lung cancer in mice. In a pilot trial DAVIES et al. (33)gave 10 mg oral THC (in alcohol / fruit juice) once daily forperiods of a week to patients with inoperable bronchogeniccarcinoma treated by radiation and who were distressed. Asingle-blind crossover pattern was applied, with a week on drugor placebo followed by a week of rest. There were no verydramatic changes; the principal effects were drowsiness, improvedsleep, a more relaxed state of mind, reduced demand foranalgesics and hypnotics, and fewer problems of management. Thesecond was reported by REGELSON and his colleagues (34) at asymposium at Savannah, Georgia. They gave 0.1 mg per kg THC threetimes a day orally in oil to outpatients with inoperable cancerof several types. Dizziness and drowsiness were troublesome but,with improved appetite, weight-loss was checked or reversed, andstress was relieved. One of the drawbacks to treatment with THC isthe readiness with which tolerance develops. This may reduce itsefficacy, but THC, or more probably some derivative, may wellfind a place as an adjuvant to isoprenaline, since the action onbronchial smooth muscle differs from that of isoprenaline, or asan anodyne in the management of terminal carcinoma. REFERENCES 20. Chopra, G.S. Int.J. Addict. 1969, 4, 215. 21. Souief, M.I. Bull. Narcotics, 1971, 33,17 22. Reynolds, J.R. Lancet, 1890, i, 637. 23. Fairbarn, J.W., Hindmarsh, I., Simic, S.,Tylden, E. Nature, 1974, 249, 276. 24. Davis, J.P., Ramsay, H.H. Fedn Proc. 1949,8, 284. 25. Vachon, L., Fitzgerald, M.X., Solliday,N.H., Gould, I.A., Gaensler, E.A. New Engl J. Med. 1973, 288,985. 26. Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Frank, I.M.ibid. 1973 , 289, 336. 27. Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Frank, I.M.Am Rev. resp. Dis. 1974, 109, 420. 28. Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Frank, I.M.Pharmacology of Marihuana. Baltimore (in the press). 29. Vachon, L., Mikus, P., Morrissey, W.,Fitzgerald, M., Gaensler, E.ibid. (in the press). 30. Davies, B.H., Radcliffe, S., Seaton,A., Graham, J.D.P. Thorax (in the press). 31. Henderson, R.L., Tennant, F.S.,Quarry, R. Arch Otolar. 1972, 95, 248. 32. Leuchtenberger, C., Leuchtenberger,R., Ritter, N. Nature, 1973, 242,403. 33. Davies, B.H., Weatherstone, R.M.,Graham, J.D.P., Griffiths, R.D. Br. J. clin. Pharmac. 1974, 1,301. 34. Regelson, W., Butler, J.R., Schulz, J.,Kirk, T., Peek, L., Green M.L. Pharmacology of Marihuana.Baltimore (in the press). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-53IA087-000627-B019-100http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/cannabin1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052813 text/html 16415HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:28:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:59:18 GMTContent-length: 16197 Cannabinoids Block Release of Serotonin in MigrainePatients Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information CANNABINOIDS BLOCK RELEASE OF SEROTONIN FROMPLATELETS INDUCED BY PLASMA FROM MIGRAINE PATIENTS Int J Clin Pharm. Res V (4) 243-246 (1985) Volfe Z., Dvilansky A., Nathan I. Blood Research, Faculty of Health Sciences,Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.Box 151, Beer-Sheva 84101, Israel. Summary: The effects were assessed ofdelta-1-THC* (the psychoactive component of cannabis) and CBD andDMHP-CBD (the non-psychomimetic components of marijuanaderivatives) on 14C labelled serotonin release from normalplatelets, when incubated with patient's plasma obtained duringmigraine attack. A statistically significant inhibitory effect(p>0.005) of 14C serotonin release was found at 10-5M, 10-6M,10-7M delta-1-THC concentrations. Plasma of migraine patientsobtained in attack-free periods revealed no significantinhibitory effect on 14C serotonin release from normal plateletsusing the same delta-1-THC concentration. CBD and DMHP-CBD had nosignificant effect on 14C serotonin release from normal plateletswhen tested either at migraine-free period plasma or plasmaobtained during migraine attack. (*Nomenclature for THC is sometimesdifferent in other countries. delta-1-THC is the same asdelta-9-THC.) Introduction Several mechanisms are involved in therelationship of platelets to migraine attacks. The first relatesto the platelet itself and is associated with hyperaggregation ofplatelets (1-5) and their activation (6). On the other hand, aplasmatic factor has been reported to induce aggregation ofnormal human platelets and release serotonin (7-12). Previousreports on the beneficial effect of cannabinoids in migraine (13)raises the possibility that delta-1-3, 4-transtetrahydrocannabinol (delta-1-THC), the active psychoactivecomponents of the crude extract of marijuana, may be beneficial(14, 15). It is a fact that cannabis has an analgesic effect (16)decreases intraocular pressure (17), has a vasodilatory effect inbronchial asthma (18) and prevents vomiting (19). These variouseffects of cannabinoids and the effect of delta-1-THC onpreventing release of rat brain serotonin induced by reserpin(20) and its effect on platelets in vivo (21, 22) and aggregationof platelets in vitro (23) raised the possibility that it mightaffect the previously described plasmatic factor in migrainepatients responsible for 14C serotonin release of normalplatelets (8). Therefore, we assessed that in vitro effect ofthree marijuana derivatives: delta-1-THC, the psychoactivecomponent of cannabis (14) and cannabidiol (CBD) which has nopsychomimetic effect (24). The effect of both drugs might discernthe biological specificity of the marijuana derivatives. Also(6-hydroxydimethylheptyl) (DMHP-CBD) a homologue of cannabidiolwhich increases cannabinoid-activity five hundred-fold was alsoinvestigated (25). Material and methods Plasma was obtained from patients, beingfollowed at the Neurology Clinic of the Ben-Gurion UniversityMedical Center, and diagnosed according to a standard clinicaldefinition of migraine (26). Patients refrained from taking drugsten days prior to blood donation. Blood samples were obtained (inplastic tubes --- 3.8% sodium citrate 1:10 volume) once during anattack-free period and once during a migraine attack.Simultaneously, samples were obtained from normal controls of thesame age and sex and platelet rich plasma was prepared and frozenat -72 degrees C. Plasma samples were incubated at 37 degrees Cfor ten minutes with the cannabinoids delta-1-THC, CBD andDMHP-CBD. The concentrations of cannabinoids varied from 10 -7Mto 10 -3M. Ethanol 70% was used as control because it isused as the solvent for the cannabinoids. It did not affect theserotonin release during the ten minutes' incubation incomparison with normal saline. 14C labelled serotonin release wasdetermined from normal donor's platelets blood group 0 Rh-, whorefrained from taking medications for ten days. The assessment of14C serotonin release was made with plasma of migraine patientsduring an attack, and an attack-free period and of normal plasmacontrols according to Hirshman and Schulman (27). Radioactivitywas determined using a liquid Scintillation spectrometer TriCard3255 Packard. The results were calculated in percentages,considering the total radioactivity of 14C serotonin uptake bythe platelets tested as 100% value. Statistical evaluation wasdone using the Student's t-test. Results Normal plasma incubated with delta-1THC at therange of concentrations 10 -7M to 10 -3M revealed significantincreases of 14serotonin release from normal platelets only at 10-4M and 10 -3M delta-1-THC of 106+ 1.9%, 117.9+ 2.3% respectively(p<0.05). The other two cannabinoid derivatives CBD andDMHP-CBD had no effect on 14C serotonin release from normalplatelets when incubated with normal plasma, and tested at thesame range of drug concentrations. Table I documents the effect of delta-1-THC,CBD, and DMHP-CBD on 14C labelled serotonin release from normalplatelets when incubated with the migraine patient's plasmaobtained during a migraine attack. There is a statisticallyinhibitory effect of 14C serotonin release (p<0.005) at 10-5M, 10 -6M, 10 -7M delta-1-THC concentrations. It should benoted that delta-1-THC added at the same concentrations to plasmaof migraine patients obtained in an attack-free period revealedno significant inhibitory effect on 14C serotonin releasecompared with normal platelets. The other two cannabinoid derivatives CBD andDMHP-CBD had no significant inhibitory effect on 14C serotoninrelease from normal platelets, when tested either withmigraine-free period plasma or plasma obtained during a migraineattack. These two derivatives were tested at the sameconcentrations as described in Table I. Table I Inhibition of 14C serotonin releasefrom normal platelets. Effect of delta-1-THC, CBD, DMHP-CBD onplasma of migraine patients obtained during migraine attack (mean+ s.e. %). Drug Concentration THC CBD DMHP-CBD 10 -5M 84.10 + 2.8 107.1 + 3.7 105 + 3.5 10 -6M 86.8 + 2.3 106.6 + 3.7 106 + 3.6 10 -7M 87.8 + 2.5 103.99 + 3.4 108 + 3.5 Discussion Plasmatic factor present in migraine patients'plasma was reported to release serotonin in vitro from normalplatelets (7, 8). Serotonin release induced by this factoroccurred in 60-85% of the patients and is presumed to be a fattyacid (9), prostaglandin (10) or some immunological factor relatedto decrease in complement (11, 12). Previous reports concerningdelta-1-THC, the active component in marijuana derivative (14,28), documented increased serotonin in rats' brains and preventedrelease of serotonin induced by reserpine (20). The presentstudies documented significant inhibition of 14C serotoninrelease from normal platelets in 10 -7M to 10 -5M delta-1-THCconcentrations, when incubated with plasma from migraine patients( Table I). It should mention that these concentrationsinduce a psychosomatic effect in marijuana smokers and stabilizered blood cells against lysis (29). It is not clear yet howcannabinoids affect migraine. Is it due to their analgesic effect(16), vasoconstrictor effect (30) or preventive effect onmigraine (13)? The two other non psychomimetic components ofmarijuana derivatives CBD and DMHP-CBD did not show inhibitionactivity of 14C serotonin release from normal platelets inducedby migraine plasma. It was shown that the psychoactive componentof cannabis delta-1-THC did inhibit 14C serotonin release fromplatelets and it might give a clue to the effect of cannabinoidsin vivo in respect of migraine attacks and their inhibition. References 1. Hilton B.P., Cumings J.N. An assessment ofplatelet aggregation induced by 5HT. J. Clin. Path., 24, 250,1971 2. Couch J.R., Hassanein R.S. Plateletaggregability in migraine and relation of aggregability toclinical aspects of migraine. Neurol., 26, 348, 1976. 3. Hanington E. Migraine, a blood disorder.Lancet, 1, 501, 1978. 4. Hanington E., Jones RJ., Amess J.A.L.Wachowica. Migraine, a platelet disorder. Lancet2, 720, 1981. 5. Gawel M.J., Burkett M., Rose F.C. Theplatelet release reaction during migraine attacks. Headache, 19,323, 1979. 6. Manotti C., Manzoni G.C., Moretti G., PotiR., Tagliafern A. Platelet function in patients with migraine.Haematologica, 68, 775, 1983. 7. Anthony M., Hinterberger H., Lance J.W. Thepossible relationship of serotonin to the migraine syndrome.Headache, 2, 29, 1969. 8. Dvilansky A., Rishpon S., Nathan I., ZolotovZ., Korczyn A. The release of 5HT by plasma from patients duringand between migraine attacks. Pain, 2, 315, 1976. 9. Anthony M. Some aspects of clinicalpharmacology of serotonin. Agents Actions, 5, 490, 1975. 10. Anthony M. Plasma free fatty acids andprostaglandin E in migraine and stress. Headache, 16, 58, 1975. 11. Lord G.D.A., Duckworth J.W., CharlesworthJ.A. Complement activation in migraine. Lancet, 1, 781, 1977. 12. Dalesio D.J. Use of platelet agonists intreatment of migraine. Headache, 16, 129, 1977. 13. Mikuriya T.H. Marijuana in medicine: Past,present and future, Calif. Med., 110, 34-40, 1969 14. Mechoulam R. Marijuana chemistry. Science,168, 1159, 1970. 15. Mechoulam R., Gaoni Y. A total synthesis ofdelta-tetrahydrocannabinol, the active constituent of hashish. J.Amer. Chem. Soc., 87, 3273, 1965. 16. Kozersky S., Dewey W.L., Harris L.S.Antipyretic analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects ofdelta-9-THC in the rat. Europ. J. Pharmacol., 24, 1, 1973. 17. Hepler R.S., Frank J.M. Marijuana smokingand intraocular pressure. JAMA, 217, 1392, 1971. 18. Tashkin D.P., Shapiro B.J., Frank J.M.Acute effects of smoked marijuana and oral delta-9-THC onspecific airway conductance in asthmatic subjects. Amer. Rev.Resp. Dis., 109, 420, 1974. 19. Sallan S.E., Cronin C., Zelen M., ZinbergN.E. Antiemetics in patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer. Arandomized comparison of delta-9-THC land prochlorperazine. NewEngl. J. Med., 302, 135, 1980. 20. Sofia R.D., Dixit B.N., Barry H. The effectof delta-9-THC on serotonin metabolism in the rat brain. LifeSciences, 10, 425, 1971. 21. King A.B., Cowen D.L. Effect of intravenousinjection of marijuana. JAMA, 210, 724, 1969. 22. Pechet L., King A.B., Pechet G.S. Theeffect of intravenous marijuana on coagulation on platelet andwhite cell count. Fed. Proc., 29, 441, 1970. 23. Levi R., Friedlander M., DvilanskyA., Livne A. Effect of hashish component delta-1-THC on thelultrastructure of human platelets. Isr. J. Med. Sci., 2, 401,1975. 24. Neumeyer J.L., Shagoway R.A. Chemistry andpharmacology of marijuana. J. Pharmacol. Sci., 60, 1433, 1971. 25. Loev B. Bender P.E., Dowals F. Cannabinoidsstructure-activity studies related to 1.2 dimethylheptylderivates. J. Med. Chem., 16, 1200, 1973. 26. Procacci P. A survey of modern concepts ofpain. In: Vinken P.J., Bruyn G.W. eds. "Handbook of clinicalneuroloty," North Holland, Amsterdam, 1968, pp. 140-143. 27. Hirshman R.Y., Shulman N.R. The use ofplatelet serotonin as sensitive method for detecting antiplateletfactor in patients with thrombocytopenic purpura. Bri J. Haemat.,24, 793, 1973. 28. Mechoulam R. Drugs made from cannabis.Harefuah, 3, 378, 1976. 29. Rax A., Schur A., Livne A. The interactionof hashish component with human erythrocytes. Bioch. Biophys.Acta, 274, 269, 1972. 30. Adams M.D., Earnhardt J.T., Dewey W.L.,Harris L.S. Vasoconstrictor actions of delta-8 and delta-9-THC inthe ralt. J. Pharmacol.l Exp. Therap., 196, 649, 1976. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-54IA087-000627-B019-117http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/konopi.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052823 text/html 13659HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:28:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:59:08 GMTContent-length: 13441 Hemp - Its History - Traditional and Popular Application Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information HEMP -- ITS HISTORY -- TRADITIONAL AND POPULARAPPLICATION KONOPI JAKO LEK (Hemp) [in Czech {Slovak}except for summaries] Acta Universitatis PalackianawOlomucensis--Tom. VI 1955 Prof. Dr. Jan Kabelik Summary (p. 41) A review of hemp applications -- hemp shootsand hemp seeds -- taken from ancient herbaria, popularpharmacology, and the present official pharmacology has beenpresented inasmuch as partial recordings of the application ofthe cannabis extract have been extant. The author ascertains thatthe antibiotic and analgetic effect of the hemp, forgotten innowadays medical science, was made use of by our forefathersparticularly. In the following reports no mention is made of thehashish effect and this for the reason that our hemp does notpossess any stupefying effect. In Europe hashish had been unknownup to Napoleon's Campaign to Egypt and has been imported fromthen on. THE ANTIBACTERIAL EFFECT OF CANNABIS INDICA Summary (p. 55-56) Our study of the Mideuropean flora with regardto its contents of substances producing antibacterial effectscomprehends 3,000 species from which the Indian hemp --- Cannabisindica --- grown in Czechoslovakia has been selected forelaborate investigation. A preliminary method of isolationaccomplished by paper chromatography with the disclosure of aneffective zone in the biological way has been described. The most advantageous methods of extractionwere determined, and the bactericide effect of the hempsubstances experimentally proved in vitro on Gram-positivemicroorganisms: Staphylococcus pyogenes autreus haemolyticus,Staphylococcus aureus --- resistant to penicillin, Streptococcusbeta haemolyticus, Streptococcus viridans, PneumococcusCornyebacterium diphteriae, and Bacillus anthracis. Gram-negative microorganisms of the typhus-coligroup remain resistent, as well as Pseudomonas aeruginosa andProteus vulgaris. An excellent antibacterial effect onMycobacterium in vitro even in a dilution 1: 150,000 could beascertained. A parallel between the bactericide effect ofisolated, amorphous, and crystal substances, and a comparison ofthe sensibility of the two applied bacterial methods, both themodified Oxford method and the tests in a liquid medium was madein detail. The limit of efficacy in the maximal dilution ofbiologically active substance (1: 100,000) and the velocity oftheir effect in various dilutions were determined. The influenceof inactivating factors has been studied in detail. Blood,plasma, and serum partly inactivate them and reduce theirantibacterial effect. As a conclusion, a comparison of the efficacyof these active substance[s] with penicillin and streptomycin atvarious pH was worked out, and a summary of hemp preparationsmanufactured for the purpose of clinical application instomatology, oto-rhino-laryngology, dermatology and phthisiologyhas been given. PHARMACODYNAMIC EFFECT OF SUBSTANCESISOLATED FROM CANNABIS Summary (p. 71) A preliminary pharmacologic investigation ofthe hemp substances was carried out. It was ascertained that theisolated hemp extract possesses analgetic, anticonvulsive andlocally anaesthetic properties. Administered to white mice per osits toxicity was determined with 1.83 g / kg as LD-50.* (*Ed.note...LD-50 ratio of 18,300: 1 for a concentrated extract.) AcidII and the acetylderivative of the canabidiol-acid --- puresubstances obtained from hemp do not possess these pharmacologicproperties. All the investigated substances were observed tobring forth local irritations. Further studies will have to explain thisirritative effect with regard to the fact that the extract fromthe drogue, (sic) when being deprived of a part of its ballastsubstances only, does not show to be an irritative factor inclinical use but, on the contrary, does relieve pain entirely, afact having been known to ancient physicians, and nowadays newlyconfirmed both by stomatologists and oto-laryngologists. THERAPEUTICAL RESULTS IN STOMATOLOGY AFTERAPPLICATION OF SUBSTANCES OBTAINED FROM CANNABIS INDICA Summary (p. 77-78) Cannabis substances were applied either in theform of a 5% hempsalve with lanolin, or they were used in theform of alcohol extracts for mouth sprayes. (sic) The applicationof these substances shows significant positive results in thetreatment of herpes labialis, paradental painful gum pockets, gumcapuches over the wisdom teeth, dry sockets, aphthae and ulcerousgingivostomatitis. More than five hundred patients were subjectedto this treatment. Cannabis substances found their application topractical advantage mixed with sterile tooth-powder for thetreatment and maintainance of a vital tooth pulp. This was donein cases of indirect covering of the tooth pulp (about 300patients -- 80 of whom were reexamined), and in those of directcovering (about 70 cases -- with 15 patients reexamined). Evenhere quick analgesia was considered to be the positive effect. Intwo patients, direct covering was experienced with teeth destinedfor extraction beforehand, and the extraction performed a certaintime thereafter and the teeth studied histologically. For generaltherapeutical use, it is suggested to verify these methods infurther cases or, eventually, to find methods of a more suitableaplication of cannabis substances in direct or indirect coveringof the tooth pulp. APPLICATION OF THE CANNABIS INDICA EXTRACT INPRESERVING STOMATOLOGY Summary (p. 81-82) In 64% of patients with deep dental cariesincidence, and in more than 30% cases of casually opened orirritated tooth-pulp, and finally in 41% of persons sufferingfrom pulpitis partialis positive response could be observed whentreated with cannabis paste. This result corresponds to theanalogous number obtained on application of the Lezovic-paste.(Paste containing a high ratio of streptomycin, penicillin,tricresol or benzocaine respectively.) The anaesthetic effect ofcannabis has been attested: in numerous cases with negativeresponse to therapy painlessness lasting for several days couldbe attained, in many patients painless necrosis could beachieved. In a number of cases the failure was due to anunsuitable vehicle that did not liberate the antibioticum in theright proportion. (The same vehicle as with the Lezovic-paste wasmade use of.) Future research work will have to include furtherclinical control, histological investigations and the search fora more proper vehicle.) STUDY ON THE EFFECT OF CANNABIS INDICA INOTO-RHINO-LARYNGOLOGY Summary (p. 85) A positive response due to antibiotics obtainedfrom hemp could be observed in patients with otitis, ulcers ofthe anterior narines, and furuncular otitis. With chronicalotitis positive results could be obtained in most cases --failure, however, in patients with pyocyaneum and proteusinfections. The most striking effect could be observed withsinusitis, particularly with both-sided sinusitis maxillaris whenone side had been treated with penicillin on control withnegative result, whilst the other side had been healed by threepunctures of hemp extract. The sinus resultlessly treated witpenicillin showed an immediate positive response to hempthereafter. EFFECTIVENESS OF CANNABIS INDICA ON CHRONICOTITIS MEDIA Summary (p. 89) Local application of cannabis indica wasexperienced in 18 patients suffering from chronic otitis media,and in 4 patients after mastoidectomy. A significant improvementwas noticed in 13 cases of chronic otitis. Up to the present, ourexperiences are of a rather short time, i.e., of three weeksonly. It will be necessary to test cannabis with other moreproper vehicles that would gradually liberate antibiotica on asatisfactory scale. PRELIMINARY STUDY ON THE LOCAL EFFECT OFCANNABIS INDICA --- A REMEDY FOR SPECIFIC FISTULAS Summary ( p. 92) The reported results of our preliminaryinvestigations made it possible to establish that specificfistulas respod positively to hemp extracts, except the casesbrought about by pyocyaneum infection. IMPORTANCE OF HEMPSEEDS IN THE TUBERCULOSISTHERAPY Summary (p. 106-107) The application of the hempseed in thetuberculosis therapy is based on a thirty years' experienceacquired with regard to diet at the sanatorium in Jince. Theright function of the liver has always been considered by theauthors as the necessary supposition for complete assimilation:that is why those commands and limitations, nowadays known as thefundamental rules of a liver diet, have been stressed. To acertain extent, we consider it to be the universal base of everydiet therapy. Next to the vitamins B-1, C and A the tuberculosisdiet must contain protein substances above all and among thoseparticularly such as got from nature the faculty to yieldbuilding material for the construction of the organism. Such areespecially curd, egg-yolk and spare protein substances containedin corn, nuts and other fruits. It is essential to get theseproteins prepared without their being denatured. Curd prepared inan expert way becomes a precious dietetic, it is worthless in itstough or coagulated from. Analgous observations can be made withraw or hard boiled egg-yolks. A daily dose of only 15 or 20 g ofoatflakes in the form of porridge prepared in an expert wayproves to be a highly effective substance in a short time,whereas twenty times as much cereals denatured by baking orboiling in water, show to be a mere indifferent foodstuff. Ground hempseeds extracted by milk at atemperature from 60 to 80 degrees C. prove to be analogically ---even in their smallest doses --- an utmost effective remedy. Themouldable organism of the consumptive child is a good criterionfor such a diet, eked out with hempseeds. (Special thanks to Jack Herer, author of"The Emperor Wears No Clothes" for pointing out thisforgotten study from Czechoslovakia.) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-55IA088-000636-B021-263http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ms1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103707 text/html 16930HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:36:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:38 GMTContent-length: 16712 Effect of Cannabinoids on Spasticity and Ataxia inMultiple Sclerosis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information EFFECT OF CANNABINOIDS ON SPASTICITY AND ATAXIAIN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS* H.M. Meinck, P.W. Schonle, and B. Conrad Department of Clinical Neurophysiology,University of Gottingen, Federal Republic of Germany J Neurol (1989) 236: 120-122 Summary. The chronic motor handicaps of a30-year-old multiple sclerosis patient acutely improved while hesmoked a marihuana cigarette. This effect was quantitativelyassessed by means of clinical rating, electromyographicinvestigation of the leg flexor reflexes and electromagneticrecording of the hand action tremor. It is concluded thatcannabinoids may have powerful beneficial effects on bothspasticity and ataxia that warrant further evaluation. Key words: Multiplesclerosis---Spasticity---Ataxia---Cannabinoids---Flexor reflex Introduction This study was prompted by a young man withmultiple sclerosis (MS) who used marihuana as a remedy for hisvarious motor, micturition and sexual handicaps. After smoking amarihuana cigarette on the ward, he clinically improved. Heagreed to the beneficial effects of marihuana being investigatedby means of quantitative clinical and electrophysiologicalassessment. Case Report This male patient, born in 1955, had had MSsince 1983. At the time of our experiments he was bound to awheelchair because of severe limb and gait ataxia and spastictetraparesis. After micturition, his residual urine volume was100-150 ml. He complained of impotence, with erections lastingless than 5 min and lacking ejaculation. He tried a marihuanacigarette in about 1984 and noted an instantaneous improvement ofhis motor and sexual functions lasting for several days. Sincethen, he regularly took some marihuana biscuits each week, whichenabled him to climb stairs, to walk on even ground, and to haveerections for more than 30 min. allowing him a quite satisfactorysexual life. Methods >From 12 October 1985 the patient abstainedfrom all drugs, including marihuana. He was hospitalized between17 October and 25 October. On 22 October, one"experimental" marihuana cigarette was allowed, andvarious electrophysiological experiments were performed asdescribed below. Clinical rating was performed daily by the sameneurologist and on 22 October before and after the"experimental" cigarette. Rating comprised motorfunctions relevant to the electrophysiological tests describedbelow (see Fig. 1). The flexor reflex was elicited by a painfulelectrical shock to the foot sole and recorded from thequadriceps (Q), posterior biceps (PB), gastrocnemius (G) andtibialis anterior (TA) muscles. The EMG was full-wave rectified,and eight consecutive reflexes were summated. Five control seriesof eight consecutive reflexes were run at intervals of about 5min. The patient was then asked to take one whiff of his"experimental" cigarette, and further series ofreflexes were run in the manner described above (for details see[12]). Finger movements were recorded in astandardized pointing task performed before and after both the"experimental" cigarette and the flexor reflexexperiment. Basically, the recording device consisted of athree-coil-transmitter system generating non-homogeneous magneticfields, and a miniaturized receiver coil attached to the fingertip. When the finger moved through the magnetic fields a signalwas induced in the receiver coil, allowing the computation of thetwo-dimensional movement trajectory (for details see [15]). Tentrials were performed before and after marihuana smoking, eachconsisting of a pointing movement of the right index finger overa 10-cm distance. The forearm rested on a stable support, but thefinger and hand could not reach the target. Results Clinical rating showed a moderate deteriorationof motor functions between 17 October and 22 October (Fig. 1) On22 October, before the "experimental" cigarette, he wasincapable of walking a few steps even with support: his muscleforce in the legs did not exceed MRC grade 3. Muscle tone rangedbetween slightly and moderately increased, and the leg deeptendon reflexes were exaggerated or clonic with sustained ankleand knee clonus. The receptive field of the Babinski sign coveredthe whole foot and the shin. Ataxia in the arms was severe andcould not be tested in the legs because of distinct hip flexorparesis. About 145 min after the marihuana cigarette,muscle force was somewhat increased in the knee extensors andankle flexors (but not in the hip flexors), and muscle tone wasreduced. The leg deep tendon reflexes showed normalization, too,corresponding to a clear shortening of the periods of clonus. Thereceptive field of the Babinski sign was confined to the lateralfoot sole margin. Ataxia in finger-nose testing was moderate.After the flexor reflex experiment, the patient was able to walka few metres between the couch and his wheelchair with support.Some of these improvements lasted beyond 23 October and even 24October (Fig 1). The flexor reflex showed the desynchronized andprolonged reflex pattern typical of spastic paresis (Fig. 2a: cf[13]). As soon as 2 min after the whiff of the marihuanacigarette, a clear attenuation of the reflex activity was noted.Attenuation was about equal in all four muscles (20%-30% of thelast three control recordings) and progressed until 17 min afterthe whiff. A second whiff (18 min after the first one) did notinduce further reflex attenuation. Single sweep recordings showedthat the reflex attenuation after marihuana was not due toenhanced habituation;: after marihuana even the first of theeight consecutive reflex responses was attenuated. Electromagnetic recording of action tremorrevealed a coarse 3 Hz hand and finger tremor with an amplitudebetween 1 and 3 cm, persisting throughout nearly the wholemovement. Hours after the "experimental" cigarette,action tremor was almost completely abolished, although themovements were made at about the same speed (Fig. 2b). Discussion Our findings clearly show that there are indeedmotor actions of marihuana which were (a) reproducible in alaboratory situation most exhaustive to the patient. (b)quantitatively assessable by means of electrophysiologicaltesting, and (c) in line with the results of clinical rating. Ourfindings further correspond with earlier anecdotal clinicalreports [4, 6, 11, 14]. Little is known about theneurophysiological background of the antispastic and antiataxicactions of marihuana seen in our patient. However, some findingsin experimental animals seem relevant to our observations.Cannabinoids in higher dosages attenuate the monosynaptic reflex[1,2,17,18] principally corresponding to the attenuation of bothdeep tendon reflexes and clonus in our patient (Fig. 1).Polysynaptic reflexes were also attenuated aftertetrahydrocannabinol derivatives in experimental animals [1, 7,20], fitting in well with the narrowing of the receptive field ofthe Babinski sign (Fig. 1) and with the results of our flexorreflex experiment. As cannabinoids have analgesic properties[16,20], attenuation of the pathological flexor reflex in thepresent case could represent analgesic rather than antispasticeffects of the drug. However, analgesic effects are also attributedto several antispastic drugs [10,21] and, on the other hand,classical analgesics such as opioids may improve spastic symptoms[19]. One might, therefore, indeed wonder whether both theantispastic and analgesic actions of such drugs are in fact atleast to a substantial degree based on common neuronal mechanismssuch as an increase of presynaptic inhibition or a decrease ofpostsynaptic excitation of multireceptive interneurones atvarious levels of the neuraxis. Whatever the mechanism, theantispastic actions of marihuana in both clinical rating andelectrophysiological testing are similar to those seen in spasticpatients after either 0.3 mg tizanidine [13], 150 mcg clonidine,or 10 mg diazepam (unpublished observations). The importantdifference is that marihuana apparently also has antiataxicactions (Fig. 2b: see also [4] not ascribed to any antispasticdrug. The biochemical basis of the motor effects ofmarihuana is obscure. Available data, although somewhatcontroversial, suggest that cannabinoids release brain serotoninfrom its storage sites and block its re-uptake [8], inhibit thesynthesis of prostaglandins within the CNS [9] and-- in largedoses -- elevate brain acetylcholine and reduce its utilization[5]. The relationship of these neurotransmitters to spasticityand ataxia is unknown: none of the well-established antispasticdrugs is thought to interfere with them; they are only scarcely,if at all, found within the cerebellum [3]. Acknowledgement. We thank our patient for hiskind cooperation throughout this study. References 1. Boyd ES, Merritt DA (1965) Effects of atetrahydrocannabinol derivative on some motor systems in the cat.Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 153: 1-12 2. Capek R, Esplin B (1976) Effects ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the homosynaptic depression inthe spinal monosynaptic pathway: implications for transmitterdynamics in the primary afferents. In: Nahas GG, Paton WDM,Idaanpaan-Heikkila JE (eds) Marihuana -- chemistry, biochemistry,and cellular effects. Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg. pp385-395 3. Chan-Palay V (1984) Purkinje cells of thecerebellum: localization and function of multiple neuroactivesubstances. Exp Brain Res [Suppl] 9: 129-144 4. Clifford DB (1983) Tetrahydrocannabinol fortremor in multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 13: 669-671 5. Domino EF (1976) Effects ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabinol on rat brainacetylcholine. In: Nahas GG, Paton WDM, Idaanpaan-Heikkila JE(eds) Marihuana -- chemistry, biochemistry and cellular effects.Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 407-413 6. Dunn M. Davis R (1974) The perceived effectsof marijuana on spinal cord injured males. Paraplegia 12: 175 7.Gilbert PE (1981) A comparison of THC,nantradol, nabilone, and morphine in the chronic spinal dog. JClin Pharmacol 21: 311-319 8. Ho BT, Johnson KM (1976) Sites ofneurochemical action of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol: interactionwith reserpine. In: Nahas GG, Paton WDM, Idaanpaan-Heikkila JE(eds) Marihuana -- chenistry, biochemistry, and cellular effects.Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 367-381 9. Howes JF, Osgood PF (1976) Cannabinoids andthe inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis. In: Nahas GG, PatonWDM, Idaanpaan-Heikkila JE (eds) Marihuana -- chemistry,biochemistry, and cellular effects. Springer, New York BerlinHeidelberg. pp 415-424 10. Jurna J (1984) Depression of nociceptivesensory activity in the rat spinal cord due to the intrathecaladministration of drugs: effects of diazepam. Neurosurgery 15:917-920 11. Malec J, Harvey RF, Cayner JJ (1982)Cannabis effect on spasticity in spinal cord injury. Arch PhysMed Rehabil: 116-118 12. Meinck H-M, Conrad B (1986)Neuropharmacological investigations in the stiff-man syndrome. JNeurol 233: 340-347 13. Meinck H-M, Benecke R. Conrad B (1985)Cutaneo-muscular control in health and disease: possibleimplications on spasticity. In: Struppler A, Weindl A (eds)Electromyography and evoked potentials, theories andapplications. Advances in applied neurological sciences, vol 1.Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg, pp 75-83 14. Petro DJ, Ellenberger C (1981) Treatment ofhuman spasticity with delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. J ClinPharmacol 21: 413-416 15. Schonle PW, Grabe K, Wenig P, Hohne J,SchraderJ, Conrad B (1987) Electromagnetic articulography -- useof alternating magnetic fields for tracking movements of multiplepoints inside and outside the vocal tract. Brain Lang 31: 26-35 16. Segal M (1986) Cannabinoids andanalgesia. In: Mechoulam R (ed) Cannabinoids as therapeuticagents. CRC Press Boca Raton, Fla, pp 105-120 17.Tramposch A, Sangdee C, Franz DN, Karler R,Turkanis SA (1981) Cannabinoid-induced enhancement and depresionof cat monosynaptic reflexes. Neuropharmacology 20: 617-621 18. Turkanis SA, Karler R (1983) Effectsof delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on cat spinal motoneurons. BrainRes 288: 283-287 19. Will JC, Bussel B (1980) Evidence for adirect spinal mechanism in morphine-induced inhibition ofnociceptive reflexes in humans. Brain Res 187: 212-215 20. Yaksh TL (1981) The antinociceptiveeffects of intrathecally administered levonantradol anddesacetyllevonantradol in the rat. J Clin Pharmacol 21: 334-340 21. Yaksh TL, Reddy SVR (1981) Studies inthe primate on the analgetic effects associated with intrathecalactions of opiates, a-adrenergic agonists and baclofen.Anesthesiology 54: 451-467 Received November 30, 1987/ Received inrevised form October 6, 1988/ Accepted November 6, 1988 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-56IA088-000636-B021-290http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/spast1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103721 text/html 11916HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:37:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:32 GMTContent-length: 11698 Treatment of Human Spasticity with Delta-9 THC Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information TREATMENT OF HUMAN SPASTICITY WITHDELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL Denis J. Petro, M.D., and Carl Ellenberger,Jr., M.D. Bronx, NY J Clin Pharmacol. 1981; 21: 413S--416S Abstract: Spasticity is a common neurologiccondition in patients with multiple sclerosis, stroke, cerebralpalsy or an injured spinal cord. Animal studies suggest that THChas an inhibitory effect on polysynaptic reflexes. Some spasticpatients claim improvement after inhaling cannabis. We testedmuscle tone, reflexes, strength and performed EMGs before andafter double-blinded oral administration of either 10 or 5 mg THCor placebo. The blinded examiner correctly identified the trialsin which the patients received THC in seven of none cases. Forthe group, 10 mg THC significantly reduced spasticity by clinicalmeasurement (P<0.01). Quadriceps EMG interference pattern wasreduced in those four patients with primarily extensorspasticity. THC was administered to eight other patients withspasticity and other CNS lesions. Responses varied, but benefitwas seen in three of three patients with "tonicspasms." No benefit was noted in patients with cerebellardisease. Several patients with multiple sclerosisreported to us that their spasticity improved after smokingmarihuana. Preliminary uncontrolled observations of thesepatients before and after inhalation of the drug suggested to usthat the improvement in spasticity was a specific effect of themarihuana and not merely a result of the well-recognized euphoriaor altered perception experienced by social users of the drug. Methods We entered nine patients with spasticity,presumably of spinal origin and related to multiple sclerosis,into a double-blinded pilot study. The blinded observer examinedeach patient on three separate days, before and at 1 1/2-hourintervals after oral administration of a capsule containingeither 10 mg, 5 mg, or no synthetic delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol(THC). Absorption of oral THC is variable, about 90 per cent, butgenerally slower than that of inhaled THC. Blood levels andpsychologic effects peak at 3 hours after ingestion. Becauseblood level determination is costly and may be unreliable, we didnot determine levels. The examiner rated deep tendon reflexes,muscular resistance to stretch in the legs, and abnormal reflexeseach on a scale of 0 (absent) to 4 (abnormally increased) andtabulated the total divided by the number of observations as the"spasticity score" at 1 1/2 -hour intervals. Forexample, if both knee jerks were 3+, both ankle jerks were 3+,and both adductor jerks were 3+, the total was 18 and thespasticity score was 18/6= 3.0. Babinski signs were rated as 4+,their absence as 3+. The examiner viewed the EMG interferencepattern of the quadriceps muscle as the knee joint was flexedfrom 0 to 90 degrees at varying velocities. The examiner alsoassessed walking ability, inquired about the patient's subjectiveresponse and side effects of the drug, and measured vital signs. Results Three patients reported feeling"loose" and better able to walk after receiving either5 or 10 mg THC. The changes in spasticity scores for the treatedand placebo groups are illustrated in Fig. 1. Differences betweenthe groups at 180 minutes are significant (P<0.01); summedscores for the two treated groups differed significantly fromsummed scores of the placebo group (P<0.005). The spasticityscores of four patients improved more than two standarddeviations from the mean after either 5 or 10 mg THC; one patientimproved after placebo. Only two of the three patients who feltimproved actually did so by objective criteria. On the basis ofthe spasticity scores, the blinded examiner identified correctlythe placebo trials in seven of the nine patients. The EMG indexof spasticity proved to be impractical in five patients---inthree because resistance to stretch was too severe and in twobecause electrical activity was too little to record. Among theremaining four patients, the interference pattern, by visualinspection, was reduced after treatment from the pretreatmentpattern at comparable velocity of stretch. Side effects of the 5-or 10-mg oral dosage were minimal. One patient reported feeling"high" after 10 mg, and another reported a"high" after placebo. No other patients reported sideeffects at the relatively low doses we used. Discussion Our preliminary results suggest that THC or oneof its synthetic derivatives warrants further study as apotential treatment for spasticity. Although many previousinvestigators have studied the effects of marihuana on complexmotor tasks, we were not able to find previous studies of theeffects of marihuana on spasticity in the medical literature.Experimental studies in animals suggest that THC has aninhibitory effect on polysynaptic reflexes mediated through thespinal cord. The results of differential sectioning of theneuraxis in cats by Dagirmangian and Boyd (1) suggest that theability of several tetrahydrocannabinols to decrease polysynapticflexion reflexes relates to its action in the region between themesencephalon and first cervical segment. Kayaalp et al. (2)postulate that THC has an effect on both nerve conduction andskeletal muscle contraction. Sullivan (3) and colleagues found adose-dependent loss of reflexes and muscular weakness in dogs.Although THC has proved to be clinically useful in the treatmentof nausea induced by cancer chemotherapy and in reducingintraocular pressure in glaucoma, the results of these trialshave demonstrated several disadvantages of the drug. The first isits potential for psychologic effects that limits usage in higherdoses than those we employed. The second drawback to regularclinical use of the drug and of its many derivatives is theobservation that many of its therapeutic effects may diminishafter a relatively short period of regular usage. References 1. Dagirmangian R, Boyd ES. Somepharmacological effects of two tetrahydrocannabinols. J PharmacolExp Therap. 1962; 135: 25-33. 2. Kayaalp SA, Kaymakcalan S, Verimer T, IlhanM, Onur R. In vitro neuro-muscular effects ofdelta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Arch Int Pharmacodyn.1974; 212: 67-75. 3. Sullivan MF, Willard DH. The beagle dog asan animal model for marihuana smoking studies. Toxicol ApplPharmacol. 1978; 45: 445-462. Discussion of the Paper Dr. Nahas: Were the subjects that you studiednaive toward marijuana, and did you observe tolerance? Dr. Petro: All of our patients were naive tomarijuana. Anecdotally, other patients claim that they have beenusing marijuana for periods up to 15 years for control ofspasticity, but research needs to cover a larger and bettercontrolled sample before any definitive statement would bepossible. No chronic studies have been done to evaluate drugtolerance in spasticity. Dr. Ungerleider: Did you, as blinded examiner,interview the patients and perform the tests? Dr. Petro: I did all of the evaluations ofneurologic function. Dr. Ungerleider: Did you know that they feltbetter before you evaluated them objectively? Dr. Petro: No; I used only objective measures,the EMG criteria and the spasticity scores. Dr. Lindblom: Have you considered the use ofpatients other than those with multiple sclerosis (MS)? Westudied the effect of baclofen on spasticity, and found muchspontaneous variability in MS patients. In addition, some areeuphoric from the disease and cannabis might add to the euphoriaand confuse the results with unspecific effects. Furthermore,there are several types of spasticity, and in the case ofbaclofen, we found that gamma-spasticity was reduced butalpha-spasticity was unaffected. Dr. Petro: We had a population of MS patientsthat was rather large and readily accessible. Certainly, insubjects with significant cerebellar disease, marijuana (or itsderivatives) would appear to be contra-indicated because ofrelaxant effects. We examined the patient population readilyavailable for study, which was MS patients, but as you suggestthis is not the ideal group to study. Dr. Gilbert: Poly-synapticreflexes in the dog are very sensitive to THC. In themorphine-dependent animal during abstinence there is an increasedactivity in the hind limbs. That activity can be blocked withvery low doses of THC, nantradol and nabilone, before we see anyother effects of the drugs (see Gilbert et al., this monograph).Dr. Dow: Could you elaborate on your conclusion that THC is notthe ideal drug for spasticity? Dr. Petro: Patients that report effects frommarijuana don't like taking THC; after smoking a marijuanacigarette, they clearly have an improvement that is differentfrom that seen from THC. As other related substances with morespecific CNS effects become available, these should be studied;in the treatment of spasticity. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-57IA088-000636-B021-317http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/colitis1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103732 text/html 7181HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:37:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:59:13 GMTContent-length: 6964 Ulcerative Colitis and Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Ulcerative Colitis and Marijuana Annals of Internal Medicine, Volume 112, Number6, 15 March, 1990, p. 471 To the Editor: The apparent protective effectof cigarette smoking on ulcerative colitis (1) suggests thatinhaled plant products might affect the disease process. Wereport a case suggesting a relation between ulcerative colitisand smoking marijuana. In 1972, a 23-year-old woman developedabdominal pain, diarrhea, and rectal bleeding. Sigmoidoscopy to15 cm revealed diffuse cobblestone ulcerations, and asingle-contrast barium enema showed numerous small marginalirregularities in the distal sigmoid and rectum. Ulcerativecolitis was diagnosed, and her symptoms waxed and waned despitetreatment with sulfasalazine, librax, and intermittentprednisone. Discouraged, she stopped all medications in 1975. In1976, she noted that smoking marijuana resulted in fewer stools,more stable body weight, and fewer, milder exacerbations . Hertypical intake was a pipeful once or twice daily, which shemaintained despite her dislike for its euphoric effects.Cessation repeatedly resulted in exacerbations within a fewweeks; resumption led to some improvement in a day or two, withmaximal effect after several weeks. She was smoking marijuana daily when, afterhaving 2 months of symptoms, she was hospitalized at the MaryHitchcock Memorial Hospital in 1983. She was febrile and had anerythrocyte sedimentation rate of 103 mm/h. Sigmoidoscopy to 16cm showed diffuse small friable ulcerations with granularity. Abiopsy of the lower rectal fold showed marked chronicinflammation extending into the submucosa without granulomas. Sheimproved promptly with prednisone. At home she resumed takingmarijuana. Over 15 months her prednisone dose was tapered andsulfasalazine therapy begun. Sigmoidoscopy to 20 cm was normal,and a single-contrast barium enema showed a diffuse granularpattern with a "pipe-like" apearance, compatible withinactive colitis. In 1986 she stopped both sulfasalazine andmarijuana but within 2 months became symptomatic. Sulfasalazinewas resumed with minimal relief, and 2 months later she resumedtaking marijuana. Her symptoms improved within about a week, andin 2 months she was again in remission through 1988. The patienthad started smoking cigarettes before the onset of the ulcerativecolitis. She noted no relation to her symptoms and stoppedsmoking in 1982 for "health reasons." She thought hersymptoms worsened with coffee or alcohol and rarely drank eitherbeverage. This case suggests marijuana may ameliorateulcerative colitis, although an alternative explanation is thenatural variation in the severity of its symptoms. It is notclear how tobacco or marijuana might have a beneficial effect.Suggested mechanism for cigarettes include enhanced catecholaminerelease, disturbed prostaglandin production, and immunologicchanges (1). Cigarettes increase colonic motility and marijuanain large doses may cause diarrhea (2), although it is difficultto relate these observations to ulcerative colitis. A fewsystemic effects are similar for both drugs. Both have beenassociated with T-cell suppression (3), but the relation ofulcerative colitis with immune disturbances is weak (4).Interference with the pituitary-ovarian axis can occur fromeither drug (2, 5); for tobacco, this interference seems to causerelative estrogen deficiency in women (5). Through effects onestrogen receptors in the colon or changes in bile composition,such hormonal changes could conceivably affect the colon. Although an ameliorative effect of marijuanasmoking on ulcerative colitis, if verified, would probably havelittle direct clinical relevance, it might lead to new therapyand help elucidate the disease. John A. Baron, MD, MS, MSc Richard D. Folan, MDDartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center Hanover, NH 03756 References 1. Cope EF, Heatley RV, Kelleher J, Lee PN.Cigarette smoking and inflammatory bowel disease: a review. HumToxicol. 1987; 6: 189-93. 2. Nahas GG. Toxicology and pharmacology. In:Nahas GG, ed. Marihuana in Science and Medicine. New York: RavenPress; 1984. 3. Holt PG, Keast D. Environmentally inducedchanges in immunological function: acute and chronic effect ofinhalation of tobacco smoke and other atmospheric contaminants inman and experimental animals. Bacteriol Rev. 1977; 41: 205-16. 4. Kirsner JB, Shorter RG. Recent developmentsin nonspecific inflammatory bowel disease, part 2. N Engl J Med.1982; 305: 837-48. 5. Baron JA. Smoking and estrogen-relateddisease. Am J Epidemiol. 1984; 119: 9-22. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-58IA088-000636-B021-362http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/court_ruling.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103759 text/html 26190HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:37:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:04:24 GMTContent-length: 25974 U.S. Court of Appeals Decision re Medical Cannabis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information 15 F.3d 1131 printed in FULL format. ALLIANCE FOR CANNABIS THERAPEUTICS, PETITIONERv. DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION, RESPONDENT PHYSICIANSASSOCIATION FOR AIDS CARE AND THE LYMPHOMA FOUNDATION OF AMERICA,INTERVENORS; DRUG POLICY FOUNDATION AND THE NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THEREFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS, PETITIONERS v. DRUG ENFORCEMENTADMINISTRATION, RESPONDENT No. 92-1168, No. 92-1179 UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIACIRCUIT 15 F.3d 1131; 1994 U.S. App. LEXIS 2684; 304 U.S. App. D.C.400 October 1, 1993, Argued February 18, 1994, Decided PRIOR HISTORY: [**1] Petitions for Review of an Order of theDrug Enforcement Administration. COUNSEL: Steven K. Davidson argued the cause for petitioners.With him on the briefs were Amy W. Lustig and Kevin B. Zeese.Thomas C. Collier, Jr. entered an appearance for petitionerAlliance for Cannabis Therapeutics and intervenors in No.92-1168. Lena D. Mitchell, Attorney, U. S. Department of Justice,argued the cause for respondent. With her on the brief was JohnC. Keeney, Acting Assistant Attorney General. Eumi L. Choientered an appearance for respondent. Steven K. Davidson and Amy W. Lustig were also on the brieffor intervenors. JUDGES: Before MIKVA, Chief Judge, and BUCKLEY and GINSBURG,Circuit Judges. Opinion for the court filed by Circuit JudgeBUCKLEY. OPINION BY: BUCKLEY OPINION: [*1132] BUCKLEY, Circuit Judge: The Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics, the Drug PolicyFoundation, and the National Organization for the Reform ofMarijuana [*1133] Laws petition for review of a finalorder of the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administrationdeclining to reschedule marijuana from Schedule I to Schedule IIof the Controlled Substances Act. Rescheduling to Schedule IIwould permit doctors to prescribe marijuana [**2] fortherapeutic purposes. Petitioners central claim is that theAdministrators order rests on an unreasonableinterpretation of the statute. Because our previous dispositionof this matter in Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics v. DEA,289 U.S. app. D.C. 214, 930 F.2d 936 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (ACT)constitutes the law of the case, we decline to reconsider thisclaim. We also find that the Administrator satisfied ACTsmandate on remand and that petitioners other claims lackmerit. I. BACKGROUND A. Statutory Scheme The Controlled Substances Act (CSA places hazardousdrugs in five categories, or schedules, which impose varyingrestrictions on access to the drugs. See 21 U.S.C.  812 (1988).Marijuana is assigned by statute to Schedule I, the mostrestrictive of these. See id. Schedule I drugs may be obtainedand used lawfully only by doctors who submit a detailed researchprotocol for approval by the Food and Drug Administration and whoagree to abide by strict record-keeping and storage rules. See21C.F.R.  1301.33, 1301.42. The CSA allows the Attorney General to reschedule a drug if hefinds that it does not [**3] meet the criteria for the scheduleto which it has been assigned. 21 U.S.C.  811(a). TheAttorney General has delegated this authority to theAdministrator. See 28 C.F.R.  0.100(b). In rescheduling a drug,the Administrator must consider, inter alia, scientificevidence of [the drugs] pharmacological effect, ifknown, and the state of current scientific knowledgeregarding the drug or other substance in determiningwhether to reschedule the drug. 21 U.S.C.  811(c)(2), (3). A drug is placed in Schedule I if (1) it has a highpotential for abuse, (2) it has no currently acceptedmedical use in treatment in the United States, and (3)there is a lack of accepted safety for use of thedrug...under medical supervision. 21 U.S.C.  812(b)(f)(1988) (emphasis added). The Schedule II criteria are somewhatdifferent: (1) the drug has a high potential forabuse. (2) it has a currently accepted medical use intreatment in the United States or a currently accepted medicaluse with severe restrictions, and (3) abuse of thedrug...may lead to severe psychological [**4] or physicaldependence. 21 U.S.C.  812(b)(2) (1988) (emphasisadded). Petitioners central claim is that the Administratormisinterpreted the language italicized above. B. Procedural History This is the latest chapter in petitioners efforts tomove marijuana into a less restrictive CSA schedule. They claimthat marijuana is misclassified because it has been shown toserve various medicinal purposes. Specifically, they content thatmarijuana alleviates some side effects of chemotherapy in cancerpatients, aids in the treatment of glaucoma, an eye disease, andreduces muscle spasticity in patients suffering from multiplesclerosis and other maladies of the central nervous system. Insupport of these contentions, they introduced affidavits andtestimony for a number of patients and practicing physicians whoinsist that, in their experience, marijuana has proven safe andeffective. The petition to reschedule marijuana was first filed in 1972and has been before this court on four prior occasions--NationalOrg. for the Reform of Marijuana Laws v. Ingersoll, 162 U.S. App.D.C. 67, 497 F.2d 654 (D.C. Cir. 1974); National Org. for theReform of Marijuana Laws v. Drug Enforcement Admin., 182 U.S. AppD.C. 114, 559 F.2d 735 (D.C. Cir. 1977); [**5}National Org. for the Reform of Marijuana Laws v. DrugEnforcement Admin. & Dept. of Health, Education &Welfare, No. 79-1660 (D.C. Cir. Oct. 16, 1980); and mostrecently, ACT, 289 U.S. App. D.C. 214, 930 F.2d 936 (D.C. Cir.1991). ACT is the only part of this history we need recount. In ACT, the Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics(Alliance) and the National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws (NORML) argued that theAdministrators refusal to reschedule marijuana rested on anunreasonable interpretation of the statutory phase,currently accepted medical use, [*1134] 930F.2d at 939; see 21 U.S.C.  812(b)(l)(B), (2)(B). In ascheduling proceeding involving another drug, the Administratordetermined that the characteristics of a drug or othersubstance with an accepted medical use include: (1) scientifically determined and accepted knowledge of itschemistry; (2) the toxicology and pharmacology of the substance inanimals; (3) establishment of its effectiveness in humans throughscientifically designed clinical trials; (4) general availability of the substance [**6] andinformation regarding the substance and its use; (5) recognition of its clinical use in generally acceptedpharmacopeia, medical references, journals or textbooks; (6) specific indications for the treatment of recognizeddisorders; (7) recognition of the use of the substance by organizationsor associations of physicians; and (8) recognition and use of the substance by a substantialsegment of the medical practitioners in the United States. 53 Fed. Reg. 5,156, 5,157-58 (Feb. 22, 1988). Applying these criteria to the petition to reschedulemarijuana, the Administrator found on December 29, 1989, thatmarijuana had no currently accepted medical use and thus had toremain in Schedule I. 54 Fed. Reg. 53,767, 53,768 (1989).The eight-factor test had been published in the Federal Registeron February 22, 1988, 17 days after the close of the evidence butbefore the oral arguments to the administrative law judge in themarijuana rescheduling proceedings. On reviewing the Administrators decision, we found theeight-factor test for determining whether a drug had acurrently accepted medical use to be [**7]in the main acceptable. ACT, 930 F.2d at 937.We noted the ambiguity of the phrase and dearth of legislativehistory on point and deferred to the Administratorsinterpretation as reasonable. Id, at 939 (citing Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 467 U.S. 387,843-45, 81 L. Ed. 2d 694, 104 S. Ct. 2778 (1984) (court maynot substitute its own construction of ambiguous statutoryprovision for reasonable interpretation by agency of statuteentrusted to its administration)). We were troubled, however, bythree of the eight criteria and remanded the case for anexplanation as to how [these] had been utilized by theAdministrator in reaching his decision. 930 F.2d at 940.In particular, we were concerned over the apparent impossibilityof meeting the fourth, fifth, and eighth criteria, all of whichassumed an availability of marijuana for medical purposes thatwas prohibited by Schedule I. On March 26, 1992, the current Administrator issued the orderthat is the subject of this appeal. See 57 Fed. Reg. 10,499(Mar. 26, 1992) (Final Order). He concluded, onremand, that [**8] his predecessor had not in fact reliedon two of the three impossible criteria; he explainedthe third; and, after applying new criteria, he again denied thepetition to reschedule marijuana. Id. at 10,508. II. DISCUSSION A. Law of the Case We held, in ACT, that the Administrators interpretationof the CSA was reasonable. Under the law of the casedoctrine, appellate courts do not reconsider matters resolved ona prior appeal in the same proceeding. 18 Wright & Miller, Federal Practice & Procedure 4478at 788 (1981). The doctrine is not a jurisdictional limitation;rather, it merely expresses the practice of courtsgenerally to refuse to reopen what has been decided....Meseightcriteria and remanded the case for an explanation as to how[these] had been utilized by the Administrator in reaching hisdecision. 930 F.2d at 940. In particular, we wereconcerned over the apparent impossibility of meeting the fourth,fifth, and eighth criteria, all of which assumed an availabilityof marijuana for medical purposes that was prohibited by Schedule I. On March 26, 1992, the current Administrator issued the orderthat is the subject of this appeal. See 57 Fed. Reg. 10,499(Mar. 26, 1992) (Final Order). He concluded, onremand, that [**8] his predecessor had not in fact reliedon two of the three impossible criteria; he explainedthe third; and, after applying new criteria, he again denied thepetition to reschedule marijuana. Id. at 10,508. II. DISCUSSION A. Law of the Case We held, in ACT, that the Administrators interpretationof the CSA was reasonable. Under the law of the casedoctrine, appellate courts do not reconsider matters resolved ona prior appeal in the same proceeding. 18 Wright & Miller, Federal Practice & Procedure 4478at 788 (1981). The doctrine is not a jurisdictional limitation;rather, it merely expresses the practice of courtsgenerally to refuse to reopen what has been decided....Messengerv. Anderson, 225 U.S. 436, 444, 56 L. Ed. 1152, 32 S. Ct. 739(1912). Thus, courts will reconsider previously decidedquestions in such exceptional cases as those in which there hasbeen an intervening change of controlling law, or new evidencehas surfaced, or the previous disposition has resulted in clearerror or manifest injustice. 18 Wright & Miller, 4478 at 790. Petitioners do not contend that any of these exceptions applyhere. Instead, they assert [**9] that in ACT we gave onlycursory attention the statutory interpretation argument whereas,in their view, the law of the [*1135] case doctrineapplies only where the prior appeal has analyzed an issue atlength. We disagree on both counts. First, our treatment of thestatutory interpretation question was entirely adequate. Second,even summarily treated issues become the law of the case. In Christiansonv. Colt Industries Operating Corp., 486 U.S. 800, 817, 100 L. Ed.2d 811, 108 S. Ct. 2166 (1988), the Supreme Court noted: That the Federal Circuit did not explicate its rationaleis irrelevant, for the law of the case turns on whether a courtpreviously decided upon a rule of law--which theFederal Circuit necessarily did--not on whether, or how well, itexplained the decision. In ACT, we decided that it was notan unreasonable application of the statutory phrase [forthe Administrator] to emphasize the lack of exact scientificknowledge as to the chemical effects of the drugselements. 930 F.2d at 939. As noted above, our only concern, in ACT, was with three ofthe standards adopted by the Administrator and his possiblereliance on them. As a consequence, [**10] in remandingthe case, we asked him to explain how his decision had beenaffected by those standards. In the Final Order, the presentAdministrator found that two of these criteria--the generalavailability of the substance and the use of thesubstance by a substantial segment of ... medicalpractitioners--played no role in his predecessorsdecision. See 57 Fed. Reg. at 10,507. Further, the Administrator found that his predecessorsconclusion that marijuana failed to meet the third of thequestioned criteria--recognition of [the drugs]clinical use in generally accepted pharmacopeia--rested ona determination that marijuana lacked a known, reproduciblechemistry. See id. We had objected to the recognition ofclinical use standard only because it seemed to requirewidespread therapeutic use of the drug--an impossibility forSchedule I substances. See ACT, 930 F.2d at 940. TheAdministrators interpretation of that criterion meets ourobjection. The Final Order discards the earlier formulation and applies anew five-part test for determining whether a drug is incurrently accepted medical use: (1) The [**II] drugs chemistry must be known andreproducible (2) there must be adequate safety studies; (3) there must be adequate and well-controlled studies provingefficacy; (4) the drug must be accepted by qualified experts; and (5) the scientific evidence must be widely available. 57 Fed. Reg. at 10,506. None of these criteria isimpossible for a Schedule I drug to meet; in fact, petitionersconcede in their briefs that the new standard has corrected theflaws we identified in ACT. B. Petitioners Other Arguments Petitioners make two additional arguments: (1) They assertthat they were deprived of the opportunity to confirm theirevidentiary submissions to the governing legal standard becausethe previous Administrator had failed to publish the eight-factortest on which he relied, as required by the Freedom ofInformation Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C.  552(a)(I)(D),until two weeks after the close of the evidence in therescheduling proceeding; and (2) they claim that theAdministrators ruling was not the produce of reasoneddecisionmaking because he was biased and ignored the record. While [**12] Alliance and NORML had apparently raisedthese issues in ACT, we did not expressly address them; nor didwe decide them by necessary implication because our limitedremand in ACT could have reflected a decision to postponeconsideration of these remaining arguments. Accordingly, weconclude that ACT did not establish the law of the case as tothese issues. See Bouchet v. Natl Urban League, 235 U.S.App. D.C. 37, 730 F.2d 799, 806 (D.C. Cir. 1984) ( Onlywhen an issue not expressly addressed must have been decided bynecessary implication will the [law of the case]doctrine be applied ...). 1. The FOIA Claim Section 552(a)(1) of FOIA provides in relevant part: [*1136] Each agency shall separately state andcurrently published in the Federal Register for the guidance ofthe public-- ... (D) ... statements of general policy or interpretations ofgeneral applicability formulated and adopted by the agency... ... Except to the extent that a person has actual and timelynotice of the terms thereof, a person may not in any manner ...be adversely affected by [] a matter required to be published inthe Federal Register and not so published. [**13] 5 U.S.C.  552(a)(1) (emphasis added). This provisionrequires agencies to set out in advance the legal standards thatwill be applied so that actions can be guided, andstrategies planned. Northern Calif. Pwr.Agency v.Morton, 396 F. Supp. 1187, 1191 (D.D.C.), affd mem.sub. nom. Northern Calif. Pwr. Agency v. Kleppe, 176 U.S. App.D.C. 241, 539 F.2d 243 (D.C. Cir. 1976). To establish a claimunder the statute, however, the litigant must show that hewas adversely affected by a lack of publication or that he wouldhave been able to pursue an alterative course of conducthad the information been published. Zaharakis v. Heckler, 744F.2d 711, 714 (9th Cir. 1984). Petitioners argue that the Administrator violated the statuteby using the eight-factor test to evaluate the evidence presentedin the marijuana rescheduling petition. As the test was notpublished until 17 days after the close of the evidence, theycontend that they were adversely affected by theAdministrators reliance on the test because they had noopportunity to tailor their evidence to meet its requirements. [**14]Accordingly, they ask us to remand the case to the Administratorwith instructions to reopen the record for the submission of newevidence. We decline to do so because petitioners have failed todemonstrate that they have in fact been adversely affected by thelack of notice. During the nearly two years between thepublication of the eight-factor test on February 22, 1988, andthe Administrators ruling on December 29, 1989, petitionersnever sought to reopen the record. As parties to an importantcontroversy, they had a responsibility to proffer any evidencethat was made newly relevant by the adoption of the criteria.Their failure to do so suggests either that they were satisfiedthat the evidence already presented would meet the test or thatthey had no further evidence to offer. Thus, we have no reason to believe that petitioners would havepursued an alternative course of conduct had the testbeen published earlier. Zaharakis, 744 F.2d at 714. Furthermore, we do not agree that McLouth Steel Products v.Thomas, 267 U.S. App. D.C. 367, 838 F.2d 1317 (D.C. Cir. 1988) supportstheir position. That case is distinguishable. McLouth arose [**15]in the context of a rulemaking in which an agency failed toidentify adequately a key standard in its notice of proposedrulemaking in violation of 5 U.S.C.  553. Unlikepetitioners, the McLouth challengers knew the governing legalstandard by the time they were called on to submit evidence;their complaint was that they had not had a chance to challengethe standard at the time it was adopted. 838 F.2d at 1322-23.We held that the challengers were not required to demonstratethat the failure of notice had caused specificprejudice because we cannot say with certaintywhether petitioners comments would have had some effect [onthe adoption of the standard] if they had been considered whenthe issue was open. Id, at 1323-24. Here, petitionerschallenge is not to the standard but to their claimed inabilityto respond to it. 2. The Reasoned Decisionmaking Claim In ACT, Alliance and NORMAL argued that the priorAdministrator had been biased and ignored the record. On thisappeal, petitioners repeat these claims and accuse his successorof the same errors. We need not consider [**16] whetherthe previous Administrators ruling stemmed from reasoneddecisionmaking, however, because we remanded it to the agency. Wethus confine our review to the current Administratorstreatment of the record in the Final Order. In support of their bias claim, petitioners point to what theydescribe as a long history of the Drug EnforcementAdministrations [*1137] anti-marijuana prejudice asevidenced by this courts need to remand their petition onfour occasions and what they describe as the priorAdministrators unusually strident decisionrejecting the administrative law judges recommendation thatthe drug be rescheduled. They also cite various statements by thepresent Administrator in the Final Order as evidence of a lack ofobjectivity. See, e.g., 57 Fed. Reg. at 10,502 (Theonly favorable evidence that could be found by [petitioners]consists of stories by marijuana users); id. (sickpeople are not objective scientific observers, especially when itcomes to their own health.); id. at 10,503(sick men, women, and children can be fooled by theseclaims and experiment with the drug....It is a cruel hoaxto offer [**17] false hope to desperately illpeople.) We are not impressed. The need to remand a case several timesis not evidence per se of agency prejudice. Nor do we think thestatements cited by petitioners show that the Administrator wasunfair, especially when considered in the context of a reasonablepreference for rigorous scientific proof over anecdotal evidence,even when reported by respected physicians. Moreover, our review of the record convinces us that theAdministrators findings are supported by substantialevidence. See 21 U.S.C.  877(1988) (substantial evidencestandard applies to findings of fact in reschedulingproceedings). The Final Order canvasses the record at length. Itrecites the testimony of numerous experts that marijuanasmedicinal value has never been proven in sound scientificstudies. The Administrator reasonably accorded more weight to theopinions of these experts than to the anecdotal testimony oflaymen and doctors on which petitioners relied. The Administratornoted that with one exception, none of [these doctors] couldidentify under oath the scientific studies they swore they reliedon. Only one had enough [**18] knowledge to discuss thescientific technicalities involved. Eventually, each one admittedhe was basing his opinion on anecdotal evidence, on stories heheard from patients and on his impression about the drug. Final order, 57 Fed. Reg. at 10,502-03. These findingsare consistent with the view that only rigorous scientific proofcan satisfy the CSAs currently accepted medicaluse requirement. Id at 10,500. III. CONCLUSION For the foregoing reasons, the petitions for review are Denied. S Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-59IA088-000636-B021-399http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/dearuling2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103819 text/html 69671HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:38:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:04:11 GMTContent-length: 69455 DEA Marijuana Decision 21 CFR Part 1308 Docket N0. 86-22 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE Drug Enforcement Administration 21 CFR Part 1308 [Docket No. 86-22] Marijuana Scheduling Petition; Denial of Petition; Remand AGENCY: Drug Enforcement Administration ACTION: Final Rule SUMMARY: This is the final rule of the Administrator of theDrug Enforcement Administration (DEA) concluding the plantmaterial marijuana has no currently accepted medical use anddenying the petition of the National Organization for Reform ofMarijuan a Laws (NORML) to reschedule marijuana from Schedule Ito Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Office of Congressional andPublic Affairs, 202-307-7363. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Background On December 21, 1989, the former Administrator of DEA,following rulemaking on the record, which included a hearingbefore an administrative law judge, issued a final orderconcluding the plant material marijuana has no currently acceptedmedical use, and denying the petition of NORML to reschedulemarijuana from Schedule I to Schedule II of the ControlledSubstance Act. 54 FR 53767. On April 26, 1991, the United StatesCourt of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit remandedthe matter to the Administrator for clarification of DEAsinterpretation of the term currently accepted medical usein treatment in the United States. Alliance for CannabisTherapeutics v. DEA, 930 F.2d 936. Following a review of the entire record in this matter, and acomprehensive re-examination of the relevant statutory standard,I conclude that marijuana has no currently accepted medical useand must remain in Schedule I. Further hearings are unneces sarysince the record is extraordinarily complete, all parties hadample opportunity and wide latitude to present evidence and tobrief all relevant issues, and the narrow question on remandcenters exclusively on this Agencys legal interpretation of a statutorily-created standard. Summary of the Decision Does the marijuana plant have any currently accepted medicaluse in treatment in the United States, within the meaning of theFederal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 801, et seg.? Putsimply, is marijuana good medicine for illnesses we all fear,such as multiple sclerosis (MS), glaucoma and cancer? The answer might seem obvious based simply on common sense.Smoking causes lung cancer and other deadly diseases. Americanstake their medicines in pills, solutions, sprays, shots, drops,creams and sometimes in suppositories, but never by smoking. Nomedicine prescribed for us today is smoked. With a little homework, one can learn that marijuana has beenrejected as medicine by the American Medical Association, theNational Multiple Sclerosis Society, the American GlaucomaSociety, the American Academy of Ophthalmology and the AmericanCanc er Society. Not one American health association acceptsmarijuana as medicine. For the last century, drug evaluation experts at the UnitedStates Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have been responsiblefor protecting Americans from unsafe and ineffective newmedicines. Relying on the same scientific standards used to judgeall other drugs, FDA experts repeatedly have rejected marijuanafor medical use. Yet claims persist that marijuana has medical value. Are theseclaims true? What are the facts? Between 1987 and 1988, DEA and NORML, under the guidance of anadministrative law judge, collected all relevant information onthis subject. Stacked together it stands nearly five feet high.Is there reliable scientific evidence that marijuana is medically effective? If it has medical value, do its benefitsoutweigh its risks? What do Americas top medical andscientific experts say? Would they prescribe it for theirpatients, their families, their friends? As the current Administrator of Drug Enforcement, and as aformer United States District Judge, I have made a detailedreview of the evidence in this record to find the answers. There are significant short-term side effects and long-termrisks linked to smoking marijuana. Marijuana is likely to be morecancer-causing than tobacco; damages brain cells; causes lungproblems, such as bronchitis and emphysema; may weaken the bodys antibacterial defenses in the lungs; lowers overallblood pressure, which could adversely affect the supply of bloodto the head; causes sudden drops in blood pressure (orthostatichypotension), rapid heart beat (tachycardia), and heart palpitations; suppresses luteinizing hormone secretion in women, whichaffects the production of progesterone, an important femalehormone; causes anxiety and panic in some users because of itsmind-altering effects; produces dizziness, trouble with thinking,trou ble with concentrating, fatigue, and sleepiness; and impairsmotor skills. As a plant, marijuana can contain bacteria capable of causingserious infections in humans, such as salmonella enteritidis,Klebsiella pneumonia, group D streptococcus and pathogenicaspergillus. Several of these risks stand out. The immune systems of cancerpatients are weakened by radiation and chemotherapy, leaving themsusceptible to infection. If they experiment with marijuana tocontrol nausea, they risk weakening their immune systems furtherand exposing themselves to the infection-causing bacteria in theplant. It is estimated, for example, that at MemorialSloan-Kettering Cancer Center 60 patients die each year frompathogenic aspergillus infections. Glaucoma patients face possible blindness caused by very highfluid pressures within their eyes. If they experiment withmarijuana to lower their eye fluid pressure, it can causedramatic drops in their blood pressure and reduce the bloodsupply to t heir heads. Glaucoma experts testified this reducesthe blood supply to the optic nerves and could speed up, ratherthan slow down, their loss of eyesight. MS, glaucoma and cancer patients who have undiagnosed heartproblems risk heartpalpitations, very rapid heart beats andsudden dramatic drops in blood pressure if they experiment withmarijuana. For MS and glaucoma patients who must take medicationsfor the rest of their lives, experimenting with marijuana posesthe additional risks of lung cancer, emphysema, bladder cancerand leukemia. Many risks remain unknown. Marijuana contains over 400separately identified chemicals. No one knows all the effects ofburning these chemicals together and inhaling the burnt mix. Arethese risks outweighed by medical benefits? There are scientific studies showing pure THC(Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol), one of the many chemicals foundin marijuana, has some effect in controlling nausea and vomiting.Pure THC is pharmaceutically made in a clean capsule form, calledMarinol, and is available for use by the medical community. Moreinformation on Marinol can be found in the PhysiciansDesk Reference, available in most libraries. Since marijuana contains THC, you might think marijuana alsowould be effective. However, the effect of taking a drug incombination with other chemicals is seldom the same as takingjust the pure drug. As already noted, marijuana contains over 400o ther chemicals, not just THC. There are no reliable scientificstudies that show marijuana to be significantly effective incontrolling nausea and vomiting. People refer to the Sallan studyas proving marijuanas effectiveness. They are mistaken. TheSallan study involved pure THC, not marijuana. People refer tothe Chang study to support marijuanas effectiveness. Theyalso are mistaken. Doctor Chang tested the combination of pureTHC and marijuana to treat nausea and vomiting. The prel iminaryresults he got were probably due to the THC, not the marijuana.Because he tested the combination, we cannot tell just whateffects can be attributed to marijuana alone. People cite a thirdstudy, done by Doctor Levitt, as proof marijuana is eff ective.They are mistaken. Doctor Levitt compared marijuana to THC incontrolling nausea and vomiting, and he concluded that THC wasthe more effective drug. A librarian can help locate copies of these studies should youwant to see them for yourself. Sallan, et al., AntiemeticEffect of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannibinol in Patients ReceivingCancer Chemotherapy, 293 New England Journal of Medicine795-797 (1975); Chang, et al., Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinolas an Antiemetic in Cancer Patients Receiving High-DoseMethotrexate, 91 Annals of Internal Medicine 819-824(1979); Levitt, et al., Randomized Double Blind Comparisonof Delta -9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and Marijuana asChemotherapy Antiemetics, (Meeting Abstract) 3 Proceedingsof the Annual Meeting of the American Society of ClinicalOncology 91 (1984). During the 1970's and 1980's, a number of states set upresearch programs to give marijuana to cancer and glaucomapatients, on the chance it might help. Some people point to theseprograms as proof of marijuanas usefulness. Unfortunately,all research is not necessarily good scientific research. Thesestate programs failed to follow responsible scientific methods.Patients took marijuana together with their regular medicines, soit is impossible to say whether marijuana helped them. Observations or results were not scientifically measured. Procedureswere so poor that much critical research data were lost or neverrecorded. Although these programs were well-intentioned, they arenot scientific proof of anything. Some people refer to a study by Doctor Thomas Ungerleider asproof marijuana reduced nausea in bone marrow transplantpatients. Unfortunately, Doctor Ungerleider neglected to followresponsible scientific methods in his study. Like the stateprogram s, it proves nothing. Doctor Ungerleider chose not topublish his study evidently because of its serious weaknesses. Headmitted as much when questioned under oath. Those who say there are reliable scientific studies showingmarijuana is an effective drug for treating nausea and vomitingare wrong. No such studies exist. Our nations top cancer experts reject marijuana formedical use. Doctor David S. Ettinger, a professor of oncology atthe Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, an author ofover 100 scholarly articles on cancer treatment, and a nationally respected cancer expert, testified: There is no indication that marijuana is effective in treatingnausea and vomiting resulting from radiation treatment or othercauses. No legitimate studies have been conducted which make suchconclusions. Doctor Richard J. Gralla, a professor of medicine at CornellUniversity Medical College, an associate attending physician atthe Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, and an expert incancer research, testified: Most experts would say, and our studies support, that thecannabinoids in general are not very effective against the majorcauses of nausea and vomiting. Doctor Gralla added: I have found that because of the negative side effects andproblems associated with marijuana..., most medical oncologistsand researchers have little interest in marijuana for thetreatment of nausea and vomiting in their patients. Doctor John Laszlo, Vice President of Research for theAmerican Cancer Society, an expert who has spent 37 yearsresearching cancer treatments, and who has written a leadingtextbook on the subject, Antiemetics and CancerChemotherapy, tes tified there is not enough scientificevidence to justify using marijuana to treat nausea and vomiting.Not one nationally-recognized cancer expert could be found totestify on marijuanas behalf. To be an effective treatment for glaucoma, a drug must: (I)lower the pressure within the eye (intraocular pressure), (ii)for prolonged periods of time, and (iii) actually preserve sight(vidual fields). Five scientific studies are cited as evidencemarijuana is an effective glaucoma treatment. Those who citethese studies are mistaken. These studies tested pure THC, notmarijuana. W.D. Purnell and J.M. Gregg,Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol, Euphoria and IntraocularPressure in Man, 7 A nnals of Ophthalmology 921-923 (1975);M. Perez-Reyes, D. Wagner, M.E. Wall, and K.H. Davis,Intravenous Administration of Cannabinoids on IntraocularPressure, The Pharmacology of Marijuana 829-832 (M.C.Braude and S. Szara eds. 1976); J.C. M erritt, S.M. McKinnon,J.R. Armstrong, G. Hatem, and L.A. Reid, OralDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Hyperogeneous Glaucomas, 12Annals of Ophthalmology 947 (1980); K. Green and M. Roth,Ocular Effects of Topical Administration of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man, 100 Archives ofOphthalmology 265-267 (1982); and W.M. Jay and K. Green,Multiple-Drop Study of Topically Applied 1%Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Human Eyes, 101 Archives ofOphthalmology 591-593 (1983). Three studies show very heavy doses of marijuana, taken forshort periods of time, can reduce eye pressure. R.S. Hepler, I.M.Frank, and T.J. Ungerleider, Pupillary Constriction AfterMarijuana Smoking, 74 American Journal of Ophthalmolog y1185-1190 (1972); R.S. Hepler, I.M. Frank, and R. Petrus,Ocular Effects of Marijuana Smoking, The Pharmacologyof Marijuana 815-824 (1976); and J.C. Merritt, W.J. Crawford,P.C. Alexander, A.L. Anduze and S.S. Gelbart, Effect ofMarij uana on Intraocular and Blood Pressure in Glaucoma,87 Ophthalmology 222-228 (1980). Unusually large doses of marijuana were needed in these threestudies to achieve the desired effect. Heavy marijuana useproduces dizziness, trouble with thinking, impaired motor skills,fatigue and sleepiness. The 1976 study by Doctors Hepler, Fran kand Petrus emphasized Our subjects were sometimes toosleepy to permit measurement of intraocular pressures...3 hoursafter intoxication. If a glaucoma patient were to smokemarijuana 8 to 10 times every day for the rest of his life, wouldh e be alert and energetic enough to live a relatively normallife? Would he develop other diseases? No scientific studiesexist to answer these questions. Robert Randall claims to havesaved his sight by smoking 8 to 10 marijuana cigarettes everyday. U nder oath he admits he stays at home most days, follows nodaily schedule or routine, and has not held a regular job in over15 years. He also has avoided having a comprehensive medicalexamination since 1975. No scientific studies have shown marijuana can reduce eyepressure over long periods of time. No scientific studies have shown marijuana can save eyesight. Americas top glaucoma experts reject marijuana asmedicine. Doctor Keith Green is a professor of Ophthalmology whoserves, or has served, on the editorial boards of eightprestigious eye journals (Ophthalmic Research, Oftalmo Abstracto,Current Eye Research, Experimental Eye Research, InvestigativeOphthalmology, American Journal of Ophthalmology, Archives ofOphthalmology, and Survey of Ophthalmology). Doctor Green hasconducted extensive basic and clinical research using marijuanaand THC to treat glaucoma patients. He has authored over 200books or research articles in ophthalmology and is a highlyrespected expert on this subject. Doctor Green testified: There is no scientific evidence...that indicates thatmarijuana is effective in regulating the progression of symptomsassociated with glaucoma. *** It is clear that there is noevidence that marijuana use prevents the progression of visualloss in gla ucoma. *** The quantities of the drug required toreduce intraocular pressure in glaucoma sufferers are large, andwould require the inhalation of at least six marijuana cigaretteseach day. *** Smoking is not a desirable form of treatment formany reason s...[M]arijuana...has little potential future as aglaucoma medication. Doctor George Spaeth is the Director of the Glaucoma Serviceat Wills Eye Hospital in Philadelphia, the largest service in theUnited States devoted to researching and treating glaucoma and toteaching other doctors about this disease. Doctor Spaeth isPresident of the American Glaucoma Society. He is a professor ofophthalmology, the editor of a scholarly eye journal (OphthalmicSurgery), and the author of over 200 research articles onglaucoma. He testified: I have not found any documentary evidence which indicates thata single patient has had his or her natural history of thedisease altered by smoking marijuana. Amputees and victims of MS can suffer from extreme musclespasms. It is claimed marijuana is useful in treating spasticity.Three unusually small, inconclusive studies have tried using pureTHC, not marijuana, to treat spasticity. D.J. Petro and C.Ellenberger, Treatment of Human Spasticity withDelta-9-Tetrahydro-cannabinol, 21 Journal of ClinicalPharmacology 413S-416S (1981) (included only nine patients). Twoof the studies are mere abstracts, or short digests, without muchdetail. Hanigan, Destee & Troung Abstr. B45, Clin. Pharmacol.Ther. 198 (1986) (included only five patients), and Sandyk,Cannoe, Stern and Snider Abstr. PP 331, 36 Neurology 342 (1986)(included only three patients). No scientific studies exist which test marijuana to relievespasticity. National experts on MS reject marijuana as medicine. DoctorKenneth P. Johnson is chairman of the Department of Neurology atthe University of Maryland School of Medicine. He manages theMaryland Center for MS, one of the most active MS research andtreatment centers in the United States. He sits on the editorialboards of noted medical journals related to MS (Neurology andJournal of Neuroimmunology). He is the author of over 100scientific and medical articles on MS. Doctor Johnson has spentmo st of his long career researching MS and has diagnosed andtreated more than 6,000 patients with MS. Doctor Johnsontestified: At this time, I am not aware of...any legitimate medicalresearch in which marijuana was used to treat the symptoms ofmultiple sclerosis. *** To conclude that marijuana istherapeutically effective without conducting rigorous testingwould be professi onally irresponsible. Doctor Stephen Reingold is Assistant Vice President ofResearch for the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, whichspends over $7 million each year on MS research. Only the FederalGovernment spends more. Doctor Reingold testified: I could find no actual published research which has usedmarijuana.... In the existing research using THC, the resultswere inconclusive.... In the absence of any well-designed,well-controlled research..., the National Multiple SclerosisSociety...d oes not endorse or advocate its use.... Doctor Donald H. Silberberg is Chairman of the Department ofNeurology at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicineand Chief of the Neurology Service at the Hospital ofPennsylvania. Doctor Silberberg is on the editorial board ofAnnals of N eurology and is President of the National MedicalAdvisory Board for the National Multiple Sclerosis Society. Hehas been actively researching and treating MS for most of hiscareer, has written over 130 medical articles on MS and isCo-Director of a lar ge MS research center at the University ofPennsylvania. Doctor Silberberg testified: I have not found any legitimate medical or scientific workswhich show that marijuana...is medically effective in treatingmultiple sclerosis or spasticity. *** The long-term treatment ofthe symptoms of multiple sclerosis through the use of marijuanacould be devastating. *** [T]he use of (marijuana), especiallyfor long-term treatment...would be worse than the originaldisease itself. The only favorable evidence that could be found by NORML andDEA consists of stories by marijuana users who claim to have beenhelped by the drug. Scientists call these stories anecdotes. Theydo not accept them as reliable proofs. The FDAs regulations, for example, provide that in deciding whether a newdrug is a safe and effective medicine, isolated casereports...will not be considered. 21 CFR 314.126(e). Why doscientists consider stories from patients and their doctors to be unreliable? First, sick people are not objective scientific observers,especially when it comes to their own health. We all have heardof the placebo effect. Patients have a tendency to respond todrugs as they believe is expected of them. Imagine how magnifie dthis placebo effect can be when a suffering person experiments onhimself, praying for some relief. Many stories no doubt are dueto the placebo effect, not to any real medical effects ofmarijuana. Second, most of the stories come from people who tookmarijuana at the same time they took prescription drugs for theirsymptoms. For example, Robert Randall claims marijuana has savedhis sight, yet he has taken standard glaucoma drugs continuouslysince 1972. There is noobjective way to tell from these storieswhether it is marijuana that is helpful, or the proven,traditional medicines. Even these users can never know for sure. Third, any mind-altering drug that produces euphoria can makea sick person think he feels better. Stories from patients whoclaim marijuana helps them may be the result of the mind-alteringeffects of the drug, not the results of improvements in the irconditions. Fourth, long-time abusers of marijuana are not immune toillness. Many eventually get cancer, glaucoma, MS and otherdiseases. People who become dependent on mind-altering drugs tendto rationalize their behavior. They invent excuses, which they can come to believe, to justify their drug dependence. Stories ofmarijuanas benefits from sick people with a prior historyof marijuana abuse may be based on rationalizations caused bydrug dependence, not on any medical benefits caused by the drug.Robert Randall, for example, admits under oath to becoming aregular marijuana user in 1968, four years before he showed thefirst signs of, and was diagnosed as having, glaucoma. Since thenhe has smoked marijuana 8 to 10 times every day. A century ago many Americans relied on stories to pick theirmedicines, especially from snake oil salesmen. Thanks toscientific advances and to the passage of the Federal Food, Drugand Cosmetic Act (FDCA) in 1906, 21 U.S.C. 301 et seg., we nowrely on rigorous scientific proof to assure the safety andeffectiveness of new drugs. Mere stories are not considered anacceptable way to judge whether dangerous drugs should be used asmedicines. There are doctors willing to testify that marijuana hasmedical uses. NORML found over a dozen to testify in this case.We have a natural tendency to believe doctors. We assume theiropinions are entitled to respect. But what if a doctor is givingan opinion beyond his professional competence? Evaluating thesafety and effectiveness of drugs is a specialized area. Does thedoctor have this specialized expertise? Is he familiar with allthe published scientific studies? Or is he improperly basi ng hisopinion on mere stories or anecdotal evidence? Does he reallyknow what he is talking about? Does he have a personal motive toexaggerate or lie? Questions like these led the United StatesSupreme Court, in 1973, to warn about the opinions of do ctorsconcerning the value of drugs as medicine, when not supported byrigorous scientific testing, Weinberger v. Hynson, etc., 412 U.S. 609, 639: [I]mpressions or beliefs of physicians, no matter howfervently held, are treacherous. Nearly half the doctors who testified for NORML arepsychiatrists. They do not specialize in treating or researchingcancer, glaucoma or MS. One is a general practitioner who worksas a wellness counselor at a health spa. Under oath he admits tous ing every illegal, mind-altering drug he has ever studied, andhe prides himself on recommending drugs that would never berecommended by medical schools or reputable physicians. Anotheris a general practitioner who quit practicing in 1974. He admitsh e has not kept up on new medical and scientific informationabout marijuana for 18 years. Only one of the doctors called by NORML is anationally-recognized expert. Doctor John C. Merritt is aboard-certified ophthalmologist and researcher who has authoredarticles on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to reduce eyepressure. He is in private practice and sees mostly children whosuffer from glaucoma. Doctor Merritt testified, [M]arijuanais a highly effective IOP-lowering drug which may be of criticalvalue to some glaucoma patients who, without marijuana, wouldprogressively go blind. The last scientific study usingmarijuana in glaucoma patients, published by Doctor Merritt in1979, concluded: It is because of the frequency and severity with which theuntoward events occurred thatmarijuana inhalation is not an idealtherapeutic modality for glaucoma patients. One year later, in 1980, Doctor Merritt gave the followingtestimony, under oath, before the United States Congress, HouseSelect Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control: For me to sit here and say that the lowering pressure effectsoccurred repeatedly, day in and day out, I have no data, andneither does anyone else, and that is the real crux of thematter. When we are talking about treating a disease likeglaucoma, w hich is a chronic disease, the real issue is, doesthe marijuana repeatedly lower the intraocular pressure? I haveshown you no...studies and to my knowledge there is no data tothat effect. Doctor Merritt was unable to explain, under oath, thecontradictory positions he has taken on this subject. Each of NORMLs doctors testified his opinion is based onthe published scientific studies. With one exception, none ofthem could identify under oath the scientific studies they sworethey relied on. Only one had enough knowledge to discuss th escientific technicalities involved. Eventually, each one admittedhe was basing his opinion on anecdotal evidence, on stories heheard from patients, and on his impressions about the drug. Sadly, Doctor Ivan Silverberg, an oncologist from SanFrancisco, exaggerated while on the witness stand. At first heswore there is voluminous medical research which showsmarijuana is effective in easing nausea and vomiting.Pushed on c ross-examination to identify this voluminousresearch, Doctor Silverberg replied, Well..., Imgoing to have to back off a little bit from that. How farwould Doctor Silberberg back off? Was he aware, at least, of theapproximate number of scientific studies that have been doneusing marijuana to treat nausea? Under oath, he replied, Iwould doubt very few. But, no, Im not. Beyond doubt, the claims that marijuana is medicine are false,dangerous and cruel. Sick men, women and children can be fooled by these claims andexperiment with the drug. Instead of being helped, they riskserious side effects. If they neglect their regular medicineswhile trying marijuana, the damage could be irreversible. It i sa cruel hoax to offer false hope to desperately ill people. Those who insist marijuana has medical uses would servesociety better by promoting or sponsoring more legitimatescientific research, rather than throwing their time, money andrhetoric into lobbying, public relations campaigns and perenniallitigati on. Clarification of Currently Accepted Medical Use The Controlled Substances Act of 1970 divides the universe ofall drugs of abuse into five sets or schedules. Drugs in ScheduleI are subject to the most severe controls, because they have ahigh potential for abuse and no currently accepted medical use intreatment in the United States. 21 U.S.C. 812 (b) (1). Drugs ofabuse which have currently accepted medical use in treatment inthe United States are placed in Schedules II, III, IV and V.Regrettably the Controlled Substances Act does not speak directlyto what is meant by currently accepted medical use. A century before the Controlled Substances Act was enacted,the determination of what drugs to accept as medicine was totallydemocratic and totally standardless. Each patient and eachphysician was free to decide for himself, often based on no morethan anecdotal evidence. This state of affairs became unsatisfactory to a majority ofthe American people. In 1906, Congress intervened with thepassage of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FDCA). A shift beganaway from anecdotal evidence to objectively conducted scientificresearch, away fromuninformed opinions of lay persons and localdoctors to expert opinions of specialists trained to evaluate thesafety and effectiveness of drugs, and away from totallydemocratic decision-making to oversight by the FederalGovernment. By 1969, Congress had developed detailed Federal statutorycriteria under the FDCA to determine whether drugs are acceptablefor medical use. Those deemed acceptable can be marketednationally. Those deemed unacceptable are subject to Federalseizur e if marketed interstate. The FDCA is a very complexregulatory scheme not easily summarized. However, it is fair tosay that drugs falling into one of four FDCA categories wereaccepted by Congress for medical use. First, Congress accepted new drugs which have been approved byFDAs experts as safe and effective for use in treatment,based on substantial scientific evidence. 21 U.S.C. 321(p) and355 (so-called NDA-approved drugs). Second, Congress accepted those drugs generallyrecognized, among experts qualified by scientific training andexperience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of drugs, assafe and effective, based on substantial scientificevidence. 21 U.S.C. 321(p) and 355; Weinberger v. BentexPharmaceuticals, Inc., 412 U.S.645 (1973). An acronym for thiscategory is human GRASE drugs (Generally RecognizedAs Safe and Effective). These drugs achieve acceptance throughrigorous scienti fic proof, through a past history of widespreaduse in treatment in the United States, and through recognition bya consensus of drug experts outside the FDA. Third, Congress accepted for use in veterinary medicine thosedrugs generally recognized, among experts qualified byscientific training and experience to evaluate the safety andeffectiveness of animal drugs, as safe and effective, basedon substantial scientific evidence. 21 U.S.C. 321(w) and 355. Anacronym for these is animal GRASE drugs. They achieveacceptance through rigorous scientific evidence and throughrecognition by a consensus of drug experts outside the FDA. Unlike human GRASE drugs, animal GRASE drugs need not have a pasthistory of widespread use. Finally, Congress accepted those drugs marketed prior to 1938which had been subject to the 1906 provisions of the FDCA,provided these very old drugs retain their exact formulations andare never promoted for new uses. 21 U.S.C. 321(p) and (w). The seare politically grandfathered drugs. They need notmeet modern standards for safety and effectiveness. A fifth group of drugs was accepted for research use only, notfor use in treatment of patients. 21U.S.C. 355(I) (so-calledIND or approved investigational new drugs). Drugs intended for medical use and shipped interstate aresubject to Federal seizure under the FDCA if they do not fitwithin one of the above accepted sets or groupings. It seems fairto say that seizable drugs were rejected by Congress for medicaluse. In enacting the Controlled Substances Act in 1970, couldCongress have intended to create a totally new Federal standardfor determining whether drugs have accepted medical uses? Or didCongress intend to rely on standards it had developed over the prior 64 years under the FDCA? There is nothing in the ControlledSubstances Act, its legislative history, or its purposes thatwould indicate Congress intended to depart radically fromexisting Federal law. Indeed, it seems likely that the core standards developedunder the FDCA represent a long-term consensus of expert medicaland scientific opinion concerning when a drug should be acceptedby anyone as safe and effective for medical use. Fortunately, there is a way to corroborate what Congressintended. Congress did more than just announce criteria forscheduling drugs of abuse under the Controlled SubstancesAct;Congress applied those criteria to an initial listing ofdrugs that it placed into the original five schedules of the Act. NDA-approved drugs were placed by Congress into Schedules II,III, IV and V of the Act. For example, pethidine (also known asmeperidine) received New Drug Application (NDA) approval in 1942.Congress put it into Schedule II(b) (14). Methamphetamin e had anapproved NDA. Congress put it into Schedule III(a) (3). I am notaware of any drug with an approved NDA that Congress originallyput into Schedule I. Drugs with medical uses, but without approved NDAs alsowere placed by Congress into Schedules II, III, IV and V. Forexample, cocaine was put into Schedule II(a) (4). Codeinecombinations were put into Schedules III(d) (I) and V. Morphineco mbinations were put into Schedule III(d) (8). Phenobarbitalwas put into Schedule IV(11). Barbiturates were put into ScheduleIII(b) (1). Amphetamines were put into Schedule III(a) (1). The Court of Appeals for the First Circuit was correct when itdecided in Grinspoon v. DEA, 828 F.2d 881 (1987) that NDAapproval is not the only method by which drugs can achieveFederal recognition as having medical uses. Congress put bothGRASE an d pre-1938-grandfathered drugs into Schedules II, III,IV and V of the CSA. Drugs recognized under the FDCA for research use only, not foruse in treatment, such as alphacetylmethadol and marijuana, wereplaced by Congress into Schedule I. Unfortunately, Federal records are not complete enough to do acomprehensive mathematical mapping, tracing every drug in theinitial Controlled Substances Act schedules back to its legalstatus under the FDCA. Nevertheless, determining legislative intent does not require mathematical certainty. Probability basedon circumstantial evidence, on samplings, and in inductivereasoning can suffice, especially when there is nowhere else toturn. The pattern of initial scheduling of drugs in the ControlledSubstances Act, viewed in light of the prior legal status ofthese drugs under the FDCA, convinces me that Congress equatedthe term currently accepted medical use in treatment in theUnited States as used in the Controlled Substances Act withthe core FDCA standards for acceptance of drugs for medical sue. This is not to say that every FDCA requirement for GRASEstatus, or for NDA approval, is pertinent to schedulingdeterminations under the Controlled Substances Act. There aredifferences. But the core FDCA criteria appear to have guided theCongress in the decisions it made concerning the initialscheduling of drugs in the Act. These same core FDCA criteria served as the basis for aneight-point test used by my predecessor as Administrator todescribe drugs with currently accepted medical uses. 54 FR 53783 (December 29, 1989): 1.Scientifically determined and accepted knowledge of itschemistry; 2.The toxicology and pharmacology of the substance in animals; 3.Establishment of its effectiveness in humans throughscientifically designed clinical trials; 4.General availability of the substance and informationregarding the substance and its use; 5.Recognition of its clinical use in generally acceptedpharmacopeia, medical references, journals or textbooks; 6.Specific indications for the treatment of recognizeddisorders; 7.Recognition of the use of the substance by organizations orassociations of physicians; and 8.Recognition and use of the substance by a substantialsegment of the medical practitioners in the United States. Some uncertainty remains over the precise meaning andapplication of parts of this test. Therefore, the Court ofAppeals for the District of Columbia Circuit remanded theseproceedings for a further explanation. In addition to addressingthose parts o f the test that concerned the Court of Appeals, itwould be useful to clarify the entire test, pinpoint its origins,and identify which elements are both necessary and sufficient toestablish a prima facie case of currently accepted medical use.This is not an effort to change the substantive law. Thestatutory meaning of currently accepted medical use remains thesame as enacted by Congress in 1970. My purpose simply is toclarify this Agencys understanding of the law. A. The Drugs Chemistry Must Be Known and Reproducible. The ability to recreate a drug in standardized dosages isfundamental to testing that drug and to using it as a medicine.Knowing the composition, properties, methods of production, andmethods of analysis of a drug is essential to reproducing it instandardized dosages. To be GRASE or to receive NDA approval, adrugs chemistry must be known and reproducible. See e.g.,21 CFR 314.50(d) (1) and 314.126(b) (7) (d); Dorovic v.Richardson, 749F.2d 242, 251 (7th Cir. 1973). The listing of adrug in a current edition of one of the official compendianormally satisfies this requirement. 21 U.S.C. 321(j); 21 CFR314.50(d) (1). The first element of our eight-point test, namely,scientifically determined and accepted knowledge of itschemistry, should be clarified to read: The substances chemistry must be scientificallyestablished to permit it to be reproduced into dosages which canbe standardized. The listing of the substance in a currentedition of one of the official compendia, as defined by Section201(j) of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. 321(j), issufficient generally to meet this requirement. Acceptance of this knowledge will be discussed elsewhere. B. There Must Be Adequate Safety Studies No drug can be considered safe in the abstract. Safety hasmeaning only when judged against the intended use of the drug,its known effectiveness, its known and potential risks, theseverity of the illness to be treated, and the availability ofalter native therapies. Hess & Clark Division of Rhodia, Inc.v. FDA, 495 F.2d 975, 993 (D.C. Cir. 1974). To know the risks,there must be adequate studies, by all methods reasonablyapplicable, to show the pharmacological and toxicological effectsof the drug. 21 CFR 314.125(b) (2). This includes animal studiesand clinical trials in large numbers of humans. 21 CFR 312.21.The studies need not be well-controlled, but they must beadequate. Edison Pharmaceuticals Co. v. FDA, 600 F.2d 831 (D.C.Cir. 1 979). Short term (acute) studies of a drug intended totreat long term (chronic) illness, such as glaucoma or MS, areclearly inadequate. United States v. Naremco, Inc., 553 F.2d1138, 1143 (8th Cir. 1977). The second element of our eight-pointtest, n amely, the toxicology and pharmacology of thesubstance in animals, should be clarified as follows: There must be adequate pharmacological and toxicologicalstudies, done by all methods reasonably applicable, on the basisof which it could fairly and responsibly be concluded, by expertsqualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate thesafety and effectiveness of drugs, that the substance is safe fortreating a specific, recognized disorder. It must be emphasized that while the existence of adequatesafety tests is a separate analytical question, the ultimatedetermination of whether a drug is safe for a specific use is notadistinct issue. Safety and effectiveness are inextricably linkedin a risks-benefits calculation. A determination that a drug isineffective is tantamount to a determination that it is unsafe.United States v. Rutherford, 442 U.S. 544 (1970). The scheduling criteria of the Controlled Substances Actappear to treat the lack of medical use and lack of safety asseparate considerations. Prior rulings of this Agency purportedto treat safety as a distinct factor. 53 FR 5156 (February 22,198 8). In retrospect, this is inconsistent with scientificreality. Safety cannot be treated as a separate analyticalquestion. C. There Must Be Adequate and Well-Controlled Studies ProvingEfficacy. Since 1962, Congress has prohibited the FDA to approve an NDAunless the applicant submits adequate, well-controlled,well-designed, well-conducted, and well-documented studies,performed by qualified investigators, which prove the efficacy ofa drug for its intended use. 21 U.S.C. 355(d); 21 CFR 314.126.Similarly, a drug cannot be considered GRASE unless it issupported by this same quantity and quality of scientific proof.21 CFR 314.200(e) (I); Weinberger v. Hynson, Etc. , 412 U.S. 609,629 (19 73). Studies involving related, but not identical, drugs areirrelevant. United States v. Articles of Food & Drug, 518F.2d 743, 747 (5th Cir. 1975). Studies involving the same drug combined with other drugs are irrelevant. United Statesv. Articles of Drug...Promise Toothpaste, 826 F.2d 564, 570 (7thCir. 1987). Incomplete studies are insufficient. United States v.Articles of Food & Drug, supra. Uncontrolled studies a reinsufficient. 21 U.S.C. 355(d); Cooper Labs v. FDA, 501 F.2d 772,778 (D.C. Cir. 1974). Statistically insignificant studies areinsufficient. 21 CFR 312.21, 314.50(d) (6) and 314.126(b) (7).Poorly designed studies are insufficient. 21 CFR 314.126( b) (2).Poorly conducted studies are insufficient. 21 CFR Part 58 - -Good Laboratory Practices. Poorly documented studies areinsufficient. 21 CFR 312.58 and 314.200(e) (4). Studies byinvestigators who are not qualified, both to conduct and to evaluate them, are insufficient. 21 U.S.C. 355(d). Moreover, sincescientific reliability requires a double examination with similarresults, one valid study is insufficient. There must be two ormore valid studies which corroborate each other. See l J. OReilley Food and Drug Administration 13-55 n.12(1985). Lay testimonials, impressions of physicians, isolated casestudies, random clinical experience, reports so lacking indetails they cannot be scientifically evaluated, and all otherforms of anecdotal proof are entirely irrelevant. 21 CFR314.126(e); Weinberger v. Hynson, Etc., 412 U.S. 609, 630 (1973). Element three of our eight-point test, namely,establishment of its effectiveness in humans throughscientifically designed clinical trials, should be restatedas: There must be adequate, well-controlled, well-designed,well-conducted and well-documented studies, including clinicalinvestigations, by experts qualified by scientific training andexperience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of drugs, onthe basis of which it could fairly and responsibly be concludedby such experts that the substance will have the intended effectin treating a specific, recognized disorder. D. Acceptance by Qualified Experts Is Required. The opinions of lay persons are totally irrelevant to whethera drug is GRASE or meets NDA requirements. The observations andopinions of medical practitioners who are not experts inevaluating drugs also are irrelevant to whether a drug is GRASEor meets NDA requirements. Weinberger v. Hynson, Etc., 412 U.S. 609, 619 (1973). Byexplicit requirements in the FDCA since 1938, the only body ofopinion that counts is that of experts qualified by scientifictrainingand experience to evaluate the safety and effectivenessof d rugs. 21 U.S.C. 321(p) and (w). From this, one would conclude that expert acceptance of a drugas safe and effective for its intended use is essential to a drughaving a currently accepted medical use under the CSA. Howwidespread must this expert acceptance be? To be GRASE, a drug must be generally recognizedamong experts as safe and effective for its intended use. Thedrug must be known or familiar to the national community ofrelevant experts. United States v Articles of Drug...FurestrolVag inal Suppositories, 294 F. Supp. 1307, 1309 (N.D. Ga. 1968)affd, 415 F.2d 390 (5th Cir. 1969). To determine if a drugis known to the community of experts, courts have looked towhether there is widely available scientific literature about thedru g, Premo Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Inc. v. United States,629 F.2d 795, 803 (2d Cir. 1980), whether it is widely taught inmedical schools, Lemmon Pharmaceuticals Co. v. Richardson, 319 F.Supp. 375, 378 (E.D. Pa. 1970), and whether it is widely discussed by experts. United States v. Bentex Ulcerine, 469 F.2d 875,880 (5th Cir. 1972). The recognition of a drug as GRASE need not be universal.General recognition is sufficient. United States v. 41Cartons...Ferro-Lac, 420 F.2d 1126, 1132 (5th Cir. 1970). TheSupreme Court has interpreted this to mean a consensus of expertsis fami liar with and accepts a drug as safe and effective.Weinberger v. Hynson, Etc., 412 U.S. 609, 629 (1973). However, ifthere is a serious dispute among the experts, a drug cannot beconsidered GRASE. United States v. An Article of Food...CocoRico, 752 F.2d 11, 15 (lst Cir. 1985); Merrit Corp. v. Folsom,165 F. Supp. 418, 421 (D.D.C. 1958). During the NDA process, the FDA may reach out to the expertcommunity for its views. 21 CFR 314.103 (3). The FDA need notdetermine that a drug is generally known and accepted by theexpert community. Nor must the FDA develop a consensus of opinion among outside experts. The FDA has both the experts and thestatutory mandate to resolve conflicts over the safety andefficacy of new drugs. Weinberger v. Bentex Pharmaceuticals,Inc., 412 U.S. 638, 653 (1973). In drafting the Controlled Substances Act, Congress appears tohave accommodated, rather than chosen from these different FDCAstandards. Clearly, the Controlled Substances Act does notauthorize the Attorney General, nor by delegation the DEA Administrator, to make the ultimate medical and policy decision as towhether a drug should be used as medicine. Instead, he is limitedto determining whether others accept a drug for medical use. Anyother construction would have the effect of reading the wo rdaccepted out of the statutory standard. SinceCongress recognized NDA-approved drugs as having currentlyaccepted medical uses, without any need for a national consensusof experts, FDA acceptance of a drug through the NDA processwould see m to satisfy the Controlled Substances Act. And, sinceCongress recognized GRASE drugs as having currently acceptedmedical uses, without the need for NDA approval, acceptance of adrug by a national consensus of experts also would seem tosatisfy the Ac t. When a drug lacks NDA approval and is not accepted by aconsensus of experts outside FDA, it cannot be found by theAttorney General or his delegate to have a currently acceptedmedical use. To do so would require the Attorney General toresolve comp lex scientific and medical disputes among experts,to decide the ultimate medical policy question, rather thanmerely determine whether the drug is accepted by others. Because the recognition of a drug by non-experts is irrelevantto GRASE status, to NDAapproval, and to currently acceptedmedical use under the Controlled Substances Act, points seven andeight of our eight-point test should be combined and restated a sfollows: The drug has a New Drug Application (NDA) approved by the Foodand Drug Administration pursuant to the Food, Drug and CosmeticAct, 21 U.S.C. 355. Or, a consensus of the national community ofexperts, qualified by scientific training and experience toevaluate the safety and effectiveness of drugs, accepts thesafety and effectiveness of the substance for use in treating aspecific, recognized disorder. A material conflict of opinionamong experts precludes a finding of consensus. This restatement also incorporates the component of part oneof our eight-point test concerning accepted knowledge ofits chemistry. E. The Scientific Evidence Must Be Widely Available. Nothing in the FDCA, nor in FDAs regulations, requiresthat scientific evidence supporting an NDA be published. Thisstems from the fact that a consensus of experts outside FA is notrequired for NDA approval. In contrast, most courts have hel dthat a drug cannot be considered GRASE unless the supportingscientific evidence appears in the published scientific andmedical literature. Without published studies, it would bedifficult for the community of experts outside FDA to develop aninforme d acceptance of a drug for medical use. Cooper Labs Inc.v. FDA, 501 F.2d 772, 786 (D.C. Cir. 1974). Point four of the eight-point test focuses, in part, on thegeneral availability of information regarding the substanceand its use. This should be clarified to read: In the absence of NDA approval, information concerning thechemistry, pharmacology, toxicology and effectiveness of thesubstance must be reported, published, or otherwise widelyavailable, in sufficient detail to permit experts, qualified byscientifi c training and experience to evaluate the safety andeffectiveness of drugs, to fairly and responsibly conclude thesubstance is safe and effective for use in treating a specific,recognized disorder. F. General Availability of a Drug Is Irrelevant. The second component of point four of the eight-point testinvolves the general availability of the substancefor use in treatment. The second component of point eight focuseson use of the substance by a substantial segment of themedical practitioners in the United States. These elementsjustifiably concerned the Court of Appeals, leading to the remandin this case. Under the FDCA, a human GRASE drug must have a materialhistory of past use in treatment in the United States. 21 U.S.C.321 (p) (2) (which has..., otherwise than in such investigations,been used to a material extent or a material time); Weinberger v.Hynson, Etc., 412 U.S. 609, 631 (1973). Rigorous scientificproofs and current unanimous acceptance by the medical andscientific community are not enough for a human drug to be GRASE.Tri-Bio Labs, Inc. v. United States, 836 F.2d 135, 142 n.8 (3dCir .. 1987). The general availability of a drug for use intreatment is a factor courts have considered to determine if ahuman drug is GRASE. In contrast, a drug can achieve current acceptance for humanmedical use through the NDA process without a past history ofmedical use in treatment. Also, animal drugs can become acceptedas GRASE without any past history of medical use. Given thisconflict in FDCA standards, which did Congress choose whendrafting the CSA? As the Court of Appeals points out, requiring a materialhistory of past use in treatment before recognizing a drug ashaving a currently accepted medical use, would permanentlyfreezeall Schedule I drugs into Schedule I. 930 F.2d at 940.Clearly, C ongress did not intend this result. Moreover, the useof the word currently before the term acceptedmedical use would indicate Congress rejected the humanGRASE requirement of past material use in treatment. I concludethat the general availability of a drug is irrelevant to whetherit has a currently accepted medical use in treatment within themeaning of the Controlled Substances Act. G. Recognition in Generally Accepted Texts Is Irrelevant. Point five of the eight-point test deals withrecognition of its clinical use in generally acceptedpharmacopeia, medical references, journals or textbooks.The listing of a drug in an official compendium is sufficient toshow its chemist ry is scientifically established. This appearsin my clarification to point one. The requirement thatinformation concerning the chemistry, pharmacology, toxicologyand effectiveness of the substance be reported, published orotherwise widely available, is explained adequately in revisedpoint four. To the extent the scheduling of a drug directlyinfluences its recognition in publications, this element issubject to the same criticism identified by the Court of Appealsconcerning point four. Therefore , this should not be treated asa distinct requirement. H. Specific, Recognized Disorders Are the Referent. It is impossible to judge the safety and effectiveness of adrug except in relation to a specific intended use. A drug cannotobtain NDA approval or GRASE status except in relation to thetreatment of a specific, recognized disorder. This is an essential aspect of whether a drug has currently accepted medicaluse. Rather than standing alone, this requirement will be moreclearly understood by incorporating it into the other criticalelements. To summarize, the five necessary elements of a drug withcurrently accepted medical use in treatment in the United Statesare: (I) The Drugs Chemistry Must Be Known and Reproducible The substances chemistry must be scientificallyestablished to permit it to be reproduced into dosages which canbe standardized. The listing of the substance in a currentedition of one of the official compendia, as defined by Section201(j) of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. 321(j), issufficient generally to meet this requirement. (ii) There Must Be Adequate Safety Studies There must be adequate pharmacological and toxicologicalstudies done by all methods reasonably applicable on the basis ofwhich it could fairly and responsibly be concluded, by expertsqualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate thesa fety and effectiveness of drugs, that the substance is safefor treating a specific, recognized disorder. (iii) There Must Be Adequate and Well-Controlled StudiesProving Efficacy There must be adequate, well-controlled, well-designed,well-conducted and well-documented studies, including clinicalinvestigations, by experts qualified by scientific training andexperience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of drugs onthe b asis of which it could fairly and responsibly be concludedby such experts, that the substance will have its intended effectin treating a specific, recognized disorder. (iv) The Drug Must Be Accepted by Qualified Experts The drug must have a New Drug Application (NDA) approved bythe Food and Drug Administration, pursuant to the Food, Drug andCosmetic Act. 21 U.S.C. 355. Or, a consensus of the nationalcommunity of experts, qualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of drugs, mustaccept the safety and effectiveness of the substance for use intreating a specific, recognized disorder. A materialconflict ofopinion among experts precludes a finding of consensus. (v) The Scientific Evidence Must Be Widely Available In the absence of NDA approval, information concerning thechemistry, pharmacology, toxicology and effectiveness of thesubstance must be reported, published, or otherwise widelyavailable in sufficient detail to permit experts, qualified byscientific training and experience to evaluate the safety andeffectiveness of drugs, to fairly and responsibly conclude thesubstance is safe and effective for use in treating a specific,recognized disorder. Together these five elements constitute prima facie evidencethat a drug has currently accepted medical use in treatment inthe United States. In the interest of total clarity, let meemphasize those proofs that are irrelevant to the determinationof currently accepted medical use, and that will not beconsidered by the Administrator: (I) Isolated case reports; (ii) Clinical impressions of practitioners; (iii) Opinions of persons not qualified by scientific trainingand experience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of thesubstance at issue; (iv) Studies or reports so lacking in detail as to precluderesponsible scientific evaluation; (v) Studies or reports involving drug substances other thanthe precise substance at issue; (vi) Studies or reports involving the substance at issuecombined with other drug substances; (vii) Studies conducted by persons not qualified by scientifictraining and experience to evaluate the safety and effectivenessof the substance at issue; (viii) Opinions of experts based entirely on unrevealed orunspecified information (ix) Opinions of experts based entirely on theoreticalevaluations of safety or effectiveness. Bad Medicine By Any Standard My predecessor as DEA Administrator developed and relied uponan eight-point test to determine whether marijuana has acceptedmedical uses. 54 FR 53783 (December 29, 1989): 1.Scientifically determined and accepted knowledge of itschemistry; 2.The toxicology and pharmacology of the substance in animals; 3.Establishment of its effectiveness in humans throughscientifically designed clinical trials; 4.General availability of the substance and informationregarding the substance and its use; 5.Recognition of its clinical use in generally acceptedpharmacopeia, medical references, journals or textbooks; 6.Specific indications for the treatment of recognizeddisorders; 7.Recognition of the use of the substance by organizations orassociations of physicians; and 8.Recognition and use of the substance by a substantialsegment of the medical practitioners in the United States. The Court of Appeals remanded the decision of my predecessorfor clarification of what role factors (4), (5) and (8) of theinitial eight-point test played in his reasoning. For ease ofdiscussion, these factors can be divided as follows: (4) (a) General availability of the substance...; (4) (b) General availability of...information regarding thesubstance and its use; (5) Recognition of its clinical use in generally acceptedpharmacopeia; medical references, journals or textbooks; (8)(a) Recognition...of the substance by a substantial segmentof the medical practitioners in the United States; and (8) (b) [U]se of the substance by a substantial segment of themedical practitioners in theUnited States. I have found no evidence indicating initial factors (4) (a) or(8) (b) played any role in my predecessors decision. Inlight of my understanding of the legal standard involved, thesefactors are irrelevant to whether marijuana has a currently accepted medical use. My predecessor emphasized the lack of scientific evidence ofmarijuanas effectiveness, and the limited data available onits risks, as reflected in the published scientific studies. Healso emphasized the importance of this data to the conclusi onsreached by experts concerning the drug. 54 FR 53783. I take thisto mean that, under initial factor (4) (b), he believed theinformation available to experts is insufficient for themresponsibly and fairly to conclude that marijuana is safe andeffec tive for use as medicine Marijuana is not recognized as medicine in generally acceptedpharmacopeia, medical references and textbooks, as noted by mypredecessor. 54 FR 53784. I take this to mean, under initialfactor (5), that he determined that marijuanas chemistry isneither known, no reproducible, as evidenced by its absence fromthe official pharmacopeia. Finally, my predecessor concluded,under initial factor (8) (a), that the vast majority ofphysicians does not accept marijuana as having medical use. 54 FR5 3784. Along the way, he found that highly respected oncologistsand antiemetic researchers reject marijuana for use incontrolling nausea and vomiting, 54 FR 5377, that expertsexperienced in researching glaucoma medications reject marijuanafor use in t reating glaucoma, 54 FR 53779, and that notedneurologists who specialize in treating and conducting researchin spasticity reject marijuana for use by MS patients, 54 FR53780. I take this to mean my predecessor found no nationalconsensus of qualified experts accepts marijuanas value asmedicine. Certainly I cannot know my predecessors unstatedreasoning. However, I have reviewed the entire record de novo,and I am convinced that his application of the initialeight-point test to this record correctly resulted in theconclusion that mar ijuana has no currently accepted medical usein treatment in the United States. Therefore, I adopt in theirentirety the findings of facts and conclusions of law reached bythe former Administrator in his final order of December 21, 1989,54 FR 53767. Pursuant to the remand of the Court of Appeals, I havecondensed and clarified the initial standard into a five-pointtest. My application of the refined, five-point test to thisrecord is set out briefly below. First, marijuanas chemistry is neither fully known, norreproducible. Thus far, over 400 different chemicals have beenidentified in the plant. The proportions and concentrationsdiffer from plant to plant, depending on growing conditions, ageof the plant, harvesting and storage factors. THC levels can varyfrom less than 0.2% to over 10%. It is now known how smoking orburning the plant material affects the composition of all thesechemicals. It is not possible to reproduce the drug in dos ageswhich can be considered standardized by any currently acceptedscientific criteria. Marijuana is not recognized in any currentedition of the official compendia. 21 U.S.C. 321(j). Second, adequate safety studies have not been done. Allreasonably applicable pharmacological and toxicological studieshave not been carried out. Most of the chronic animal studieshave been conducted with oral or intravenous THC, not withmarijuan a. Pharmacological data on marijuanasbioavailability, metabolic pathways and pharmacokinetics isinadequate. Studies in humans are too small and too few.Sophisticated epidemiological studies of marijuana use in largepopulations are required, si milar to those done for tobacco use.Far too many questions remain unknown for experts fairly andresponsibly to conclude marijuana is safe for any use. Third, there are no adequate, well-controlled scientificstudies proving marijuana is effectivefor anything. Fourth, marijuana is not accepted for medical use in treatmentby even a respectable minority, much less a consensus, of expertstrained to evaluate drugs. The FDAs expert drug evaluatorshave rejected marijuana for medical use. No NDA has bee napproved by FDA for marijuana. The testimony of nationallyrecognized experts overwhelmingly rejects marijuana as medicine,compared to the scientifically empty testimony of thepsychiatrists, a wellness counselor and general practitionerspresented by NORML. Fifth, given my conclusions on points one, two and three, itfollows that the published scientific evidence is not adequate topermit experts to fairly and responsibly conclude that marijuanais safe and effective for use in humans. A failure to meet just one of the five points precludes a drugfrom having a currently accepted medical use. Marijuana fails allfive points of the test. NORML has argued, unsuccessfully, that the legal standard forcurrently accepted medical use should be whether a respectableminority of physicians accepts the drug. The key to this medicalmalpractice defense is that the minority opinion must be recognized as respectable, as competent, by members of theprofession. In the absence of reliable evidence adequately establishingmarijuanas chemistry, pharmacology, toxicology andeffectiveness, no responsible physician could conclude thatmarijuana is safe and effective for medical use. To quote DoctorKenneth P. Johnson, Chairman of the Department of Neurology atthe University of Maryland, and the author of over 100 scientificand medical articles on MS: To conclude that marijuana istherapeutically effective without conducting rigorous testingwould be professionally irresponsible. By any modern scientific standard, marijuana is no medicine. List of Subjects in 21 CRF Part 1308 Administrative practice and procedure, Drug traffic control,Narcotics, Dangerous drugs. Under the authority vested in the Attorney General by section201(a) of the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. 811(a), anddelegated to the Administrator of the Drug EnforcementAdministration by regulations of the Department of Justice, 28CFR 0.1 00(b), the Administrator hereby orders that marijuanaremain in Schedule I as listed in 21 CFR 1308.11(d) (14). Dated: March 18, 1992 Robert C. Bonner Administrator Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-60IA088-000636-B022-12http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/jenks.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103835 text/html 23077HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:38:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:04:17 GMTContent-length: 22861 JENKS v. FLORIDA, 582 So.2d 676 (Fla.App. 1 Dist. 1991) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information 582 SOUTHERN REPORTER, 2d SERIES 676 Kenneth L. JENKS and Barbara J. Jenks, Appellants, v. STATE of Florida, Appellee. No. 90-2462. District Court of Appeal of Florida, First District. June 18, 1991. Defendants were convicted in the Circuit Court, Bay County, Clinton Foster, J., of cultivating cannabis and possession of drug paraphernalia, and they appealed. The District Court of Appeal, Ervin, J., held that: (1) statute defining cannabis as Schedule I substance did not preclude defense of medical necessity, and (2) defendants established medical necessity defense. Reversed. Nimmons, J., dissented. 1. Drugs and Narcotics 78 Statute defining cannabis as Schedule I substance did not preclude defense of medical necessity raised by defendant's charged with cultivating cannabis and possession of drug paraphernalia, who allegedly used marijuana to treat nausea which they suffered in connection with their contraction of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). West's F.S.A.  893.03(1)(d). JENKS v. STATE Fla. 677 Cite as 582 So.2d 676 (Fla.App. 1 Dist. 1991) 2. Drugs and Narcotics 78 Defendants charged with cultivating cannabis and possession of drug paraphernalia established medical necessity defense; medical expert and physician testified that no other drug or treatment was available that would effectively eliminate or diminish nausea suffered by defendants, who had contracted acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), and defendants established that if their nausea was not controlled, their lives were in danger. West's F.S.A.  893.13, 893.147. 3. Drugs and Narcotics 78 Elements of medical necessity defense to use of controlled substance are: that defendant did not intentionally bring about circumstances which precipitated unlawful act; that defendant could not accomplish same objective using less offensive alternative available to defendant; and that evil sought to be avoided was more heinous than unlawful act perpetrated to avoid it. John F. Daniel, of Daniel & Komarek, Chartered, Panama City, for appellants. Robert A. Butterworth, Atty. Gen., and Gypsy Bailey, Asst. Atty. Gen., Tallahassee, for appellee. ON MOTION FOR REHEARING ERVIN, Judge. We substitute the following opinion for Jenks v. State, 16 F.L.W. D1070, 1991 WL 61786 (Fla. 1st DCA Apr. 16, 1991). Kenneth and Barbara Jenks appeal their convictions for cultivation of marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia, contending that the trial court erred in refusing to recognize their defense of medical necessity. We agree and reverse. Kenneth Jenks inherited hemophilia from his mother, and contracted the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) virus from a blood transfusion in 1980. He unknowingly passed it to his wife, Barbara Jenks. Mrs. Jenks' health began to decline rapidly. Her weight dropped from 150 to 112 pounds during a three week period as a result of constant vomiting, and she was hospitalized at least six times for two to three weeks at a time. Although she had been prescribed over a half-dozen oral medications for nausea, none of them worked. When given shots for nausea, she was left in a stupor and unable to function. Like wise, when Mr. Jenks started AZT treatment, he was not able to eat because the medication left him constantly nauseous. He also lost weight, although not as dramatically as his wife. When the Jenks began participating in a support group sponsored by the Bay County Health Department, a group member told them how marijuana had helped him. Although initially reluctant, Mr. and Mrs. Jenks tried marijuana and found that they were able to retain their AIDS medications, eat, gain weight, maintain their health, and stay out of the hospital. They asked their treating physician about prescribing the drug, but were unable to obtain a legal prescription. The Jenks decided to grow two marijuana plants to insure its availability, avoid the expense of buying it on the street, and reduce the possibility of arrest. On March 29, 1990, the Jenks were arrested and charged with manufacturing (cultivating) cannabis, pursuant to Section 893.13, Florida Statutes (1989), and possession of drug paraphernalia, a violation of Section 893.147, Florida Statutes (1989). The Jenks admitted to cultivating the marijuana and advised officers at the scene that they each had AIDS and used the marijuana to relieve their symptoms. The Jenks waived their right to a jury trial and agreed that the bench trial should center on their defense of medical necessity. Because their physician, Thomas Sunnenberg, was not available to testify, the parties stipulated that Dr. Sunnenberg's testimony would be, in part: Defense witness, THOMAS D. SUNNENBERG, M.D. ... will testify as follows: * * * * * * * * 8. That he has been unable to find any effective drug for treating the defendants' nausea. 582 SOUTHERN REPORTER, 2d SERIES 678 9. That the nausea is so debilitating that if it is not controlled, the defendants could die. 10. That if he could legally prescribe Cannabis Sativa as a drug to control their nausea he would. 11. That the only drug that controls their nausea is Cannabis Sativa. 12. That he is presently seeking access to legal Cannabis Sativa through the Food and Drug Administration under the Compassionate Investigational New Drug Program (IND) for the Jenks. At trial, the defense also presented two expert witnesses, Robert Randall, who suffers from glaucoma and who successfully asserted the defense of medical necessity against a charge of marijuana cultivation in 1976,* and Dr. Daniel Dansak of Alabama, who has treated over fifty patients who have used marijuana to alleviate both disease symptoms and side-effects of medication. The trial judge rejected the defense of medical necessity, found the Jenks guilty of manufacturing marijuana, and withheld adjudication of guilt, placing the Jenks on one year of unsupervised probation. He ordered the Jenks to perform 500 hours of community service, to be discharged only by "providing care, comfort and concern for each other." The necessity defense has been formulated as follows: The pressure of natural physical forces sometimes confronts a person in an emergency with a choice of two evils: either he may violate the literal terms of the criminal law and thus produce a harmful result, or he may comply with those terms and thus produce a greater or equal or lesser amount of harm. For reasons of social policy, if the harm which will result from compliance with the law is greater than that which will result from violation of it, he is by virtue of the defense of necessity justified in violating it. W.R. LaFave & A.W. Scott, Jr., 1 Substantive Criminal Law  5.4, at 627 (1986) (hereinafter LaFave & Scott). Or, as stated by Justice Holmes, "'Detached reflection cannot be expected in the presence of an uplifted knife.'" Arnolds & Garland, The Defense of Necessity in Criminal Law: The Right to Choose the Lesser Evil, 65 J.Crim.L. & Criminology 289, 290 (1974) (hereinafter Arnolds & Garland) (quoting Brown v. United States, 256 U.S. 335, 41 S.Ct. 501, 65 L.Ed. 961 (1921)). Although there is no specific legislative acceptance of the necessity defense in Florida, we conclude that the defense was recognized at common law and that there has been no clearly expressed legislative rejection of such defense. The necessity defense was articulated as early as 1551 in Reninger v. Fagossa, 1 Plowd. 1, 19, 75 Eng.Rep. 1, 29-30 (1551): "[W]here the words of [the law] are broken to avoid greater inconvenience, or through necessity, or by compulsion," the law has not been broken. Arnolds & Garland, at 291. The authors state that the defense is poorly developed in Anglo-American jurisprudence because there are so few cases dealing with it, "probably because these cases are not often prosecuted." In any event, they indicate that although there is some disagreement on this, "it seems clear that necessity was a defense at common law." Arnolds & Garland, at 290. The authors cite a number of pre-1776 cases involving the necessity defense. Arnolds & Garland, at 291 n. 29.* Consequently, we consider that Florida has adopted the necessity defense pursuant to Section 2.01, Florida Statutes (1989), which provides: The common and statute laws of England which are of a general and not a local nature ... are declared to be of force in this state; provided, the said statutes and common law be not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States and the acts of the Legislature of this state. JENKS v. STATE Fla. 679 Cite as 582 So.2d 676 (Fla.App. 1 Dist. 1991) The medical-necessity defense is merely a more particular application of the necessity defense, See, e.g., LaFave & Scott at  5.4(c)7, at 631-33; G.E. Torcia, 1 Wharton's Criminal Law  88 (1978); 22 C.J.S. Criminal Law  50 (1989). In fact, in Bavero v. State, 347 So.2d 781 (Fla. 1st DCA 1977), this court recognized the defense of medical necessity there asserted by a prison escapee. Accord State v. Alcantaro, 407 So.2d 922, 924 (Fla. 1st DCA 1981) ("Medical necessity was recognized as an arguable defense by this court in Bavero v. State[.]"), review denied, 413 So.2d 875 (Fla.1982). [1] Although the state conceded at oral argument that the necessity defense exists in Florida's common law, the state nevertheless contends that Section 893.03, Florida Statutes (1989), is inconsistent with and therefore precludes the defense in the case at bar. We disagree. Section 893.03(1) provides: SCHEDULE 1. A substance in Schedule I has a high potential for abuse and has no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the United States and in its use under medical supervision does not meet accepted safety standards except for such uses provided for in s. 402.36. The following substances are controlled in Schedule I: * * * * * * * * (c)4. Cannabis. (Footnote omitted.) However, subsection (1)(d) provides, Notwithstanding the aforementioned fact that Schedule I substances have no currently accepted medical use, the Legislature recognizes that certain substances are currently accepted for certain limited medical uses in treatment in the United States but have a high potential for abuse. The state argues that section 893.03 permits no medical uses of marijuana whatsoever. In fact, all that subsection (1) states is that marijuana is not generally available for medical use. Subsection (1)(d), however, clearly indicates that Schedule I substances may be subject to limited medical uses. It is well established that a statute should not be construed as abrogating the common law unless it speaks unequivocally, and should not be interpreted to displace common law more than is necessary. Carlile v. Game & Fresh Water Fish Comm'n, 354 So.2d 362, 364 (Fla.1977) (quoting 30 Fla.Jur. Statutes  130 (rev. ed. 1974); State v. Egan, 287 So.2d 1, 6-7 (Fla.1973); Sullivan v. Leatherman, 48 So.2d 836, 838 (Fla.1950) (en banc). We conclude that section 893.03 does not preclude the defense of medical necessity under the particular facts of this case. [2, 3] Moreover, we conclude that the Jenks met their burden of establishing this defense at trial. The elements of the defense have previously been addressed by trial courts in United States v. Randall, 104 Daily Wash.L.Rep. 2249 (Super.Ct.D.C. Nov. 24, 1976), and in Florida in State v. Mussika, 14 F.L.W. 1 (Fla. 17th Cir.Ct. Dec. 28, 1988), which both involved the medically necessary use of marijuana by people with glaucoma. Those elements are as follows: 1. That the defendant did not intentionally bring about the circumstance which precipitated the unlawful act; 2. That the defendant could not accomplish the same objective using a less offensive alternative available to the defendant; and 3. That the evil sought to be avoided was more heinous than the unlawful act perpetrated to avoid it. As applied to the case at bar, the Jenks obviously did not intend to contract AIDS. Furthermore, the Jenks' medical expert and physician testified that no drug or treatment is available that would effectively eliminate or diminish the Jenks' nausea.* Finally, the Jenks established that if their nausea was not controlled, their lives were 582 SOUTHERN REPORTER, 2d SERIES 680 in danger.* The state put on no evidence that contradicted the Jenks, and the trial court had no authority to reject the witnesses' testimony. Based upon these facts, we conclude the trial court erred in reject ing the Jenks' defense and in convicting them as charged. REVERSED with directions that judgment of acquittal be entered. ZEHMER, J., concurs. NIMMONS, J., dissents without written opinion. FOOTNOTES: 1. United States v. Randall, 104 Daily Wash.L. Rep. 2249 (Super.Ct.D.C. Nov. 24. 1976). 2. Other pre-1776 cases are cited in Note, "Necessity: The Right to Present a Recognized Defense," 21 N.Eng.L.Rev. 779, 781-83 (1985-86). 3. Dr. Sunnenberg testified by stipulation that "he has been unable to find any effective drug for treating the defendants' nausea," and that "the only drug that controls their nausea is Cannabis Sativa." Dr. Dansak testified that there is a drug, Raglan, that is "a little more effective than marijuana," but that it must be given intravenously in "fairly whopping doses," thus creating problems with infections, particularly in AIDS patients. 4. The Jenks described their constant vomiting and weight loss at the hearing. Dr. Sunnenberg stated in his stipulated testimony that his patients' "nausea is so debilitating that if it is not controlled, the defendants could die." 589 SOUTHERN REPORTER, 2d SERIES 292 SUPREME COURT Docket Appeal from Title Number Date Disposition and Citation State v. Jenks 78165 10/8/91 Rev. den. 1st DCA 582 So.2d 676 Review of this decision was denied by the Supreme Court of Florida on October 8, 1991, affirming the decision of the Florida District Court of Appeals for the First District. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-61IA087-000627-B019-145http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/potency.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052836 text/html 45444HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:28:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:09:12 GMTContent-length: 45226 Cannabis, 1988, Old Drug, New Dangers, The PotencyQuestion Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Cannabis 1988 Old Drug, New Dangers The Potency Question TOD H. MIKURIYA, M.D.* & MICHAEL R. ALDRICH, PH.D.** *Psychiatrist and Substance Abuse Therapist, 41 Tunnel Road,Berkeley, California 94705. **Curator, Fitz Hugh Ludlow Memorial Library, San Francisco,California. The story of the new, allegedly stronger and more dangerousmarijuana was rebirthed in January 1986 by the late Sidney Cohen,M.D., Professor of Psychiatry at UCLA: ``. . . material ten ormore times potent than the product smoked ten years ago is beingused, and the intoxicated state is more intense and lastslonger." In addition, Cohen (1986) asserted that ``theamount of THC [tetrahydrocannabinol] in confiscated streetsamples averaged 4.1 percent THC during 1984. The sinsemilla varieties were about 7 percent with somesamples reaching 14 percent. . . . all marijuana research to datehas been done on 1 or 2 percent THC material and we may beunderestimating present day smoking practices." The average potency of marijuana samples seized by the DrugEnforcement Administration (DEA) increased from 0.5 percent THCin 1974 to 3.5 percent in 1985-1986, with sinsemilla (seedlessmarijuana) at 6.5 to 12 percent, announced Dr. Richard Hawks ofNIDA later that year (Kerr 1986: 1). ``Parents who experimentedin their youth are not aware that the potency is muchhigher," added Donald M. Delzer, Chairman of the NationalFederation of Parents for Drug Free Youth (Kerr 1986: 18). ``Now perceived as a hard drug, marijuana has increased 1,400percent in potency since 1970," proclaimed the flyer of anational conference on marijuana (Henry Ohlhoff OutpatientPrograms 1986). Drug abuse treatment professionals soonelaborated on the outcry. Tennant (1986) asserted that the drugof the 1970's contained one to three percent THC, while that ofthe 1980's contained five to 15 percent. Furthermore, the brainregisters the difference exponentially, so the difference betweenone percent and 10 percent THC was not nine percent, but morelike 900 percent (Garcia 1986: 3). Smith (1987) stated that Cohen``taught us that marijuana was a lot more dangerous than weoriginally thought, particularly with the use of more potentpreparations by young people." Inaba (1987) added that``this new, stronger marijuana has a more disruptive effect onbrain chemistry and body physiology than we had imaginedpreviously," and mentioned heretofore undescribed sideeffects among athletes: ``Baseball players who get beaned a lotadmit to smoking marijuana. It impairs their ability to followthe ball." In a column for drug abuse counselors, Meyers (1987) advised``supportive therapy" for the effects of the ``new"marijuana, which were described as ``depersonalization,disorientation, derealization, changes in perception, andalterations in body image . . . acute brain syndromes withtemporary clouding of mental processes . . . a change of timesense---where minutes seem like hours---slowed thinking, andfeared perception of brain damage." Schick Shadel HealthServices drug abuse treatment clinics (Unsigned 1987) nowadvertise that ``marijuana has increased THC content from onepercent THC in 1975 to six to fourteen percent THC in 1985 due tohybridization techniques. . . . For those who have become addicted to marijuana, whether itwas years ago, or recently, treatment is necessary---even morecritical today." Despite the respectability of these authorities, none of thesealarming claims are new, and neither is the potency issue. Thereare several claims intertwined: (1) that the marijuana availabletoday is much stronger than that available previously,particularly since the early 1970's; (2) that the effects of thisso-called new marijuana are different from effects known earlier;and (3) that all previous marijuana research has been done withweak material and is therefore irrelevant. Before leaping on thebandwagon, one should examine the validity of these assertions. HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE Extremely potent marijuana has been described for 150 years byWestern scientists and (with the possible exception of thebean-ball syndrome) so have the effects of the new marijuana.There has been a great deal of research on high-potency cannabisin many countries. In the paper that introduced cannabis to Western medicine,O'Shaughnessy (1839) discussed the widespread social and medicaluses of ganja (sinsemilla) in India and noted symptoms of``delirium which the incautious use of the Hemp preparationsoften occasions, especially among young men first commencing thepractice." Cannabis tinctures soon appeared in Europe andAmerica (Robertson 1847; Savory 1843) and Fitz Hugh Ludlow (1857)described florid psychedelic trips after their oral ingestion,including all the symptoms mentioned by Meyers (1987). The OhioState Medical Society (McMeens 1860) reviewed some 15 years ofclinical experience with the drug and acknowledged the intensebut physiologically benign mental effects caused by high doses oridiosyncratic sensitivity. Wood (1869) reported the subjective effects of a tincture madefrom North American marijuana, experiencing a distortion in timesense, convulsions and memory loss, but no adverse aftereffects.He reported considerable success with it in the treatment ofsevere neuralgia. However, 15 years later Wood and Smith (1884)commented on the variable potency of cannabis and outlinedappropriate treatment for overdoses in medical practice. Early investigators (McMeens 1860; Bell 1857) attributed thisvariability to ``defective pharmaceutic processes" employedin foreign countries, and recommended that extracts prepared athome would be preferable. However, extreme variations in locallymanufactured preparations were soon recognized in theDispensatory of the United States (Wood & Bache 1868:379-382). A practical bioassay technique was gradually perfectedstarting from the systematic observations of Hare (1887),followed by Evans (1894) and Marshall (1898), to compensate forbatch-to-batch potency variations. Pragmatically, the solution to the overdose/potency problem inboth the United States (Wood & Bache 1868: 382) and Englandwas to titrate the dose. In London, a patient who signed a letterto the editors of Lancet, W.W. (1890) reported a typical case:W.W. had inadvertently been given an overdose of cannabis fortreatment of neuralgia by his doctor and had suffered perceptualdistortion, agitation, mood swings, and fear of death. Sir J.Russell Reynolds, M.D., F.R.S., physician to Queen Victoria'shousehold, responded with a recommendation based on 30 years ofexperience with the drug (Reynolds 1890), stating ``that Indianhemp, when pure and administered carefully, is one of the mostvaluable medicines we possess. . . . a minimum dose should begiven to begin with, and . . . the dose should be very graduallyand cautiously increased." During the nineteenth century, social and scientific researchon marijuana, as well as tinctures, were conducted with muchstronger material than is available on the illicit market today.For example, the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission of 1893-1894investigated the social, religious and medical uses of bhang(marijuana), ganja (sinsemilla) and charas (hashish). Thepotencies of varieties from different parts of the subcontinentwere evaluated by government chemists and botanists (Evans 1894;Hooper 1894), using the ``acknowledged superiority" ofBengal ganja as the standard. The Commission found that themoderate use of even highly potent marijuana caused nosignificant physical, mental or moral damage (Kaplan 1969;Mikuriya 1968). In the 1890's, at the peak of medical interest in the drug,British chemists (Wood, Spivey & Easterfield 1899) isolatedan impure active principle, cannabinol, using a ``red oil"distilled from Indian cannabis as a starting point, which wasconsidered to be the active ingredient until the 1930's (Work,Bergel & Todd 1939; Cahn 1931). In 1909, Marshalldemonstrated that oxidation during storage was the primary causeof the drug's variable potency. With this advance thepharmaceutical industry shifted its attention to the productionof standard extracts that could be used to assay medicinalcompounds (Colson 1920). Because it had long been known thatganja and charas produced the most reliable extracts (Wallich1883; Robertson 1847), in practical terms this meant the Europeanand American producers had to learn how to grow ganja. Sinsemilla cultivation by the Indian technique of culling maleplants from the fields before female plants could set seeds---thevery process to which recent researchers attribute the potency ofthe new marijuana---was exhaustively described by the Britishgovernment in India (Kaplan 1969: 59-84; Prain 1893; Kerr 1877).In an effort to promote Bengali ganja, the British Raj imposed anexport duty on inferior Bombay ganja at the turn of the century,and pharmacognosists in Europe and the U.S. began learningsinsemilla cultivation (Mair 1900). Holmes (1900) discussed the potencies of Calcutta and Bombayganja and recommended that the former be used for pharmaceuticalpreparations, either by home cultivation of ganja according tothe Bengal methods he outlined (Holmes 1902a) or by extracting itimmediately in Bengal and shipping it in tightly closedcontainers (Holmes 1902b). Comparing the potency of cannabis fromUganda, France and India, Holmes (1905) urged that only Indiansinsemilla preparations be admitted to the British Pharmacopoeia. Likewise, Whineray (1909) and Hooper (1908) described ganjacultivation and manufacture, pointing out that cannabis grown inNorth America by the Indian methods could be as fully potent asIndian hemp. The National Standard Dispensatory of 1909, whichincluded medicines from the pharmacopoeias of the U.S., Britainand Germany, gave the details of sinsemilla cultivation andfeatured a drawing of a perfect Calcutta ganja flower top (seeFigure 1) as an example to be emulated by Western cultivators(Hare, Caspari & Rusby 1909: 374). In the U.S., Hamilton and his colleagues (Hamilton 1918;Hamilton 1915; Hamilton, Lescohier & Perkins 1913; Houghton& Hamilton 1908) demonstrated that if care was exercised incultivating and processing the plant for extraction,American-grown ganja and its extracts were as reliable as thosefrom India and would not deteriorate significantly if storedproperly. Information on cultivation of extremely potent seedlessmarijuana was thus widely disseminated to Western pharmaceuticalproducers during the first two decades of the twentieth century. The U.S. government ignored these sensimilla cultivationtechniques at the first federal marijuana farm established in1904 on the Potomac Flats (where the Pentagon now sits) inWashington, D.C. (Silver 1979: 262-263), and as a result the10-foot marijuana plants grown there and elsewhere in Americaproved to be much less potent than good samples of Indian hemp(Eckler & Miller 1912). However, private pharmaceutical firmswere more successful. The Eli Lilly and Parke-Davis companies rana cooperative venture at Parkedale (Parke-Davis's farm nearRochester, Michigan) from 1913 until 1938 to develop cannabisextracts for medical use, at first from Cannabis indica, butlater standardized on a highly potent strain they developed thatthey called Cannabis Americana (Wheeler 1968). Pharmaceutical companies were marketing cannabis extracts thatwere uniformly effective at 10 mg dose levels (Parke-Davis &Company 1930: 82) 11 years before its official removal frommedicinal availability. In 1941, cannabis was removed from the United StatesPharmacopoeia (USP) at the behest of the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics, which suddenly claimed that marijuana had no medicaluses (Mikuriya 1973: xx). Yet even the removal of cannabis fromthe USP did not end scientific and social research on highlypotent forms of cannabis, ranging from the red-dirt marijuana ofthe Midwest to the red oil of the laboratories. Adams, Pease andClark (1940) described improved procedures for preparing purifiedred oil from Minnesota wild hemp, and comparison of the potenciesof Minnesota marijuana and red oil was of significant interest toLoewe, pharmacological director of the LaGuardia Committee(Mayor's Committee on Marihuana 1944: 186ff). Red oilconcentrates were used along with marijuana in the LaGuardia Committee's experiments on prisoners, under Loewe's personaldirection (Mayor's Committee on Marihuana 1944: 32); for asubjective account see Mezzrow and Wolfe (1946: 317ff). In the1940's, Adams and Loewe in the U.S. and Todd in England isolatedother cannabinoids, including THC, which Adams (1940) postulatedas the active principle. Such isolates were the mainstay of marijuana research duringthe 1940's and 1950's. A potent marijuana oil created as a truthdrug for interrogation purposes by the Office of StrategicServices during World War II (Lee & Shlain 1985: 3-5) was theforerunner of later clandestine experiments conducted by the CIAand the Department of Defense at the Edgewood Arsenal in Marylandfrom the 1950's to the 1970's (Mikuriya 1973: xxii). Experimentswith the designer drug synhexyl, a potent analog of delta3-THC,were conducted from the 1940's (Adams et al. 1941) until themid-1970's (Lemberger 1976; Pars & Razdan 1976), but wereabandoned before its potential was fully explored. In the 1960's, the identification of pure delta9-THC as theactive principle in cannabis (Gaoni & Mechoulam 1964) made itpossible to assay the relative potencies of cannabinoids directlyin human subjects (Isbell et al. 1967). Although Weil, Zinbergand Nelsen (1968) demonstrated the safety of human marijuanaresearch, much of the U.S. research of the 1970's was conductedwith low-potency marijuana because the government would notapprove human research with high-potency strains. Indeed, in oneearly study (Jones & Stone 1970), a THC concentrate wasremoved from Mexican marijuana and then redistributed back intothe bulk marijuana to return its potency to 0.9 percent THC.Outside the U.S., these strictures did not apply: The fact thatcannabidiol interferes with the effects of delta9-THC wasdiscovered in Brazil, using both purified cannabinoids on humans(Karniol et al. 1974). The 1960's and 1970's saw a worldwide flowering of cannabisresearch, including its social, psychological, chemical,botanical and legal aspects as well as covering an enormous rangeof potencies and dosages. Major botanical work involved potencyquestions: observing phenotypes at the University of Mississippi(Fetterman et al. 1971) and in Canada (Small 1979); establishinga lectotype for Cannabis sativa L. (Stearn 1974); distinguishingC. sativa from C. indica and C. ruderalis (Schultes et al. 1974);and cultivation techniques for increased THC production (Clarke1981; Frank & Rosenthal 1978). Thus the claim by Cohen (1986) that ``all marijuana researchto date has been done on 1 or 2 percent THC material" is notaccurate for the 1970's or for any other decade going back to1839. It ignores much of the laboratory research in the U.S. thatwas summarized by Cohen himself (Cohen & Stillman 1976),Hollister (1986) and the National Academy of Sciences (1982), andall of the social research on high-potency marijuana in Jamaica(Rubin & Comitas 1975; Bowman & Pihl 1973), Costa Rica(Carter & Doughty 1976), Greece (Fink et al. 1976) and Africa(DuToit 1980). It is difficult to think of any country in whichthe claim is true. RECENT ESTIMATES OF POTENCY Since the advent of quantitative analysis technology, therehas been sporadic reportage of the percentage of delta9-THC andother cannabinoids in natural and semisynthetic cannabisproducts. Notwithstanding the psychophysical effects of othercannabinoids, the amount of THC present in a marijuana sample isbelieved to determine the drug's potency (National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse 1972: 50), and potency is usuallyexpressed in percent THC by weight. The results of quantitativeanalyses performed on street samples of marijuana have beenpublished since the late 1960's. These results are generallyhigher than the alleged 0.5 percent THC content of marijuanacited for the early 1970's. Lerner and Zeffert (1968) described the development ofquantitative analysis for the determination of THC content, andnoted much variation among samples of marijuana, hashish, and redoil (still being used experimentally in the 1960's). The THCcontent of confiscated Mexican marijuana was 0.8 to 1.4 percent,hashish averaged eight percent and red oil 31 percent in 1968. Quantitative analyses of street samples of marijuana andhashish conducted by Canadian laboratories in 1971 for theCommission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs (1972:28-29) showed a range of 0.02 to 3.46 percent THC (median=0.93%)for marijuana, with hashish ranging from 1.0 to 14.3 percent THC(median=4.82%). Samples seized in police raids were less potent:marijuana was 0.05 to 1.65 percent THC (median=0.21%), whilehashish was 0.0 to 8.6 percent THC (median=1.3%). The reporteddifference between confiscated police seizures and street samplessubmitted to laboratories for analysis may be due to thevoluntary samples being submitted precisely because of theirextraordinary potency, or that storage conditions in policeevidence lockers are hardly optimal for potency stability. This has a bearing on the potency question because the lowpotency cited by both Cohen (1986) and Hawks (see Kerr 1986)referred to samples confiscated by the DEA. It has been knownsince the early days of its isolation (Wollner et al. 1942) thatTHC oxidizes to cannabinol rapidly in samples stored at roomtemperature (24oC). Lerner (1963) reported that the concentrationof THC in marijuana decreased at a rate of three to five percentunder normal room conditions, and Razdan (1970) reported a rateof 10 percent per month. The influence of temperature, light and age on potency wasaddressed by Starks (1977: 13-15). The low-baseline percentage ofTHC reported for the early 1970's may be due to thisdeterioration in confiscated, stored samples. In any case, thelow baseline makes the difference in the THC content oflater-reported samples appear much greater than it may have beenin actuality, assuming that the marijuana smoked by consumers wasfresher than stored police seizures. For a short while in the early 1970's, PharmChem Laboratoriesin Palo Alto, California, tested and reported the percent of theTHC content in anonymously submitted marijuana samples. For 1973,PharmChem reported an average THC content of 1.62 percent inmarijuana, compared with hashish at 4.6 percent and hash oil (arefined extract of hashish) at 13.5 percent (Ratcliffe 1974). In 1974, the DEA published guidelines that no longer allowedlaboratories to provide quantitative results directly to thesample donors. This, in effect, restricted public access toanalysis information to whatever government officials wished toreveal. However, nonspecific summaries of THC percentage rangeswere allowed to be published (Unsigned 1974). The results of an independent examination of gas-liquidchromatographs of street samples of marijuana from Californiathat were submitted to PharmChem during 1973 and 1974 are shownin Table I. Seeded varieties ranged in THC from an average of 2.2 percent(Mexican) to 4.9 percent (Panama Red), while sinsemilla averaged2.8 percent for Big Sur ``Holy Weed" to above six percentfor Thai Sticks and Hawaiian ``Maui Wowie." This wouldappear to be a much more representative sample of the types ofmarijuana available in California in 1973-1974 than thehalf-percent grade cited by Cohen (1986) and Hawks (see Kerr1986), or the one to three percent grade cited by Tennant (1986). A retrospective summary of street-drug analysis trends from1969 through 1975 published by PharmChem (Perry 1977) confirmsthe fact that quite potent forms of cannabis were available onthe illicit U.S. market by 1975: ``Early quantitative work showeda range of 1.0-2.5 percent THC for average marijuana. In 1975,the range was 1.0-2.5 percent; samples in the range of 5.0-10.0percent were not uncommon, and some contained as much as 14.0percent THC. . . . Hash oil (concentrated from hash, usuallyamber or red in color) and grass oil (from marijuana, dark greenor black in color) . . . vary greatly in potency, some samples[containing] up to 40 percent THC." Abundant information onthe comparative potencies of cannabis grown in the U.S. and othercountries in the mid-1970's was summarized by Starks (1977:41-87). In the spring of another election year, 1980, Cohen and DuPontlaunched a similar campaign, stating that confiscated marijuanain 1975 contained only 0.4 percent THC, while in 1979 the averagewas four percent, a 10-fold increase (Brody 1980: C1). This dataconflicts directly with that published by PharmChem for 1975street samples (Perry 1977) and that shown in Table I. Perhapsone should be thankful that, according to these estimates,marijuana potency dropped from four percent THC in 1979 to 3.5percent THC in 1986 (Kerr 1986). The most recent comparison of cannabis potencies was compiledfrom published sources from 1972 through 1981 by the NationalAcademy of Sciences (1982: 16), and is summarized in Table II. Itagain demonstrates the great range of products available legally(i.e., NIDA samples) and illegally during that decade, and may infact underestimate some potencies. For example, the 2.8 percentTHC content cited for Jamaican ganja (Marshman, Popham &Yawney 1976) is slightly lower than the mean 2.96 percent THCmaterial studied by Rubin and Comitas in 1970 through 1972(Unsigned 1973), and significantly lower than the four to eightpercent THC Jamaican ganja cited by the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse (1972: 50). The government ``research harvests" in Table II(Rosenkrantz 1981) are considerably less potent than thesinsemilla samples that averaged three to 11 percent THC (Turner1981, 1980). Perhaps this is because cultivators at thegovernment marijuana farm at the University of Mississippi, liketheir predecessors in 1904, never learned proper sinsemillacultivation (Turner et al. 1979), while illicit cultivators inCalifornia and Hawaii were making it standard for the industry(Frank & Rosenthal 1978: 258-259). If so, this alone couldexplain the wide discrepancies between the potency of marijuanareported by government sources and that actually being grown inthe U.S. during the 1970's and 1980's. SELF-ADJUSTMENT OF DOSE An important consideration in regard to the potency issue isautotitration, the adjustment of dose by the individual user toobtain optimal effects and avoid unpleasant ones. As noted above,cautious titration of dose was standard practice when cannabispreparations were used in medicine. Smoking marijuana, customaryin present social use of the drug, requires knowledge of when tostop in order to avoid symptoms of overdose. The smoked routegives rapid feedback to the user with regard to levels of effectbecause the drug goes directly to the brain from the lungs,unimpeded by the gut or the liver. Researchers for the Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944: 13)were among the first to notice that experienced marijuana smokersin the ``tea-pads" of Harlem routinely practicedautotitration. The confirmed user, they noted, ``appears to bequite conscious of the quantity he requires to reach the effectcalled `high.' Once the desired effect is obtained he cannot bepersuaded to consume more. He knows when he has had enough . . .and is ever-conscious of preventing himself from becoming `toohigh.'" Similarly the Commission of Inquiry into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs (1972: 48) observed that ``greatvariations in potency are usually accommodated by the experienceduser through a `titration' of dose (intake is reduced or stoppedwhen the smoker reaches the preferred level ofintoxication)." For U.S. users, the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse (1972: 166) commented: ``. . . whateverthe potency of the drug used, individuals tend to smoke only theamount necessary to achieve the desired effect." SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Observation of the real world of social marijuana use, whereautotitration is the norm, renders the scare tactics of the newmarijuana proponents not only inaccurate but irrelevant. There ismuch published evidence about the availability of highly potentvarieties of cannabis from the nineteenth century through thepresent day. The effects attributed to the new marijuana are thesame ones debated for centuries in many different cultures. Theassertion that ``all marijuana research to date has been done on1 or 2 percent THC material" (Cohen 1968) ignores severalthousand years of human experience with the drug. The old medicalcannabis extracts were stronger than most of the forms nowavailable, though the potency of illicit hash oils by themid-1970's was approaching the level of medicinal preparationsavailable before their removal from the USP. While it may be true that sinsemilla is more widely availablethan 10 or 15 years ago, its potency has not changedsignificantly from the 2.4 to 9.5 percent THC materials availablein 1973-1974 (see Table I), or the five to 14 percent sinsemillaof 1975 (Perry 1977). The range of potencies available then (marijuana at 0.1% to7.8% THC, averaging 2.0% to 5.0% THC by 1975) was approximatelythe same as that reported now. With such a range, the evidencesimply cannot support the argument by Cohen (1986) that marijuanais ``ten or more times more potent than the product smoked tenyears ago." And to say that marijuana potency has increased1,400 percent since any date in history is patent nonsense. It is not legitimate to imply that average low potenciesrepresent the full range of potencies available in reality.Neither is it valid to cite the low end of the range then as abaseline to compare with the high end of the range now. Theclaimed baseline for THC content in the early 1970's would appearto be too low, probably because confiscated, stored policesamples were utilized; and this low baseline makes the claimeddifference in potency appear to be greater than it has been inreality. In sum, the new marijuana is not new and neither is thehyperbole surrounding this issue. The implications of the newdisinformation campaign are serious. Many people, particularlythe experienced users of the 1960's and their children, will onceagain shrug off the warnings of drug experts and not heed morereasonable admonishments about more dangerous drugs. This is notonly abusive to those who look to science, the medicalprofession, and government for intelligent leadership, but willsully the reputations of drug educators who wittingly cry wolf,and will inevitably diminish the credibility of drug abusetreatment professionals who pass on such flawed reports. REFERENCES Adams, R. 1940. Marihuana. Science Vol. 92: 115-119. Adams, R.; Loewe, S.; Jelinek, C. & Wolff, H. 1941. Tetrahydrocannabinol homologs with marihuana activity. IX.Journal of the American Chemical Society Vol. 63: 1971-1973. Adams, R.; Pease, D.C. & Clark, J.H. 1940. Isolation ofcannabinol, cannabidiol and quebrachitol from red oil ofMinnesota wild hemp. Journal of the American Chemical Society Vol. 62: 2194-2196. Aldrich, M.R. 1974. Comparative range of delta1-THC inCalifornia cannabis samples at PharmChem, 1973-74. Unpublishedmanuscript. Bell, J. 1857. On the haschisch or Cannabis indica. BostonMedical and Surgical Journal Vol. 56(11): 209-216. Bowman, M. & Pihl, R.O. 1973. Cannabis: Psychologicaleffects of heavy use. A controlled study of intellectualfunctioning in chronic users of high potency cannabis.Psychopharmacologia Vol. 29(2): 159-170. Braenden, O.J. 1972. United Nations reference samples ofcannabis. In: Paton, W.D.M. & Crown, J. (Eds.). Cannabis andIts Derivatives. New York: Oxford University Press. Brody, J.E. 1980. The evidence builds against marijuana. NewYork Times May 21. Cahn, R.S. 1931. Cannabis indica resin. Part II. Journal ofthe Chemical Society (1931): 630-638. Carter, W.E. & Doughty, P.C. 1976. Social and culturalaspects of cannabis use in Costa Rica. Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Sciences Vol. 282: 2-16. Clarke, R.C. 1981. Marijuana Botany. Berkeley, California:And/Or Press. Cohen, S. 1986. Marijuana research: Selected recent findings.Drug Abuse and Alcoholism Newsletter Vol. 15(1): 1-3. Cohen, S. & Stillman, R.C. (Eds.). 1976. The TherapeuticPotential of Marihuana. New York: Plenum. Colson, H.C. 1920. Cannabis. Journal of the AmericanPharmaceutical Association Vol. 9: 302. Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs. 1972. Cannabis: A Report of the Commission of Inquiry into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs. Ottawa: Information Canada. Dominguez, R. 1987. Marijuana trends and trafficking update:Whatever happened to marijuana? Street Pharmacologist Vol. 11(2):1. DuToit, B.M. 1980. Cannabis in Africa, a Survey of ItsDistribution in Africa, and a Study of Cannabis Use and Users inMulti-ethnic South Africa. Rotterdam: A.A. Balkema. Eckler, C.R. & Miller, F.A. 1912. A study of Americangrown cannabis in comparison with samples from various othersources. American Journal of Pharmacy Vol. 84: 488-495. Evans, J.F. 1894. Report by Surgeon-Captain J.F. Evans,Chemical Examiner to the Governor of Bengal, regardingphysiological investigations concerning hemp drugs. In: Report ofthe Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. Appendix Vol. 3: 206-227.Simla, India: Government Central Printing Office. Fetterman, P.S.; Keith, E.S.; Waller, C.W.; Guerrero, O.;Doorenbos, N.J. & Quimby, M.W. 1971. Mississippi-grownCannabis sativa L.: Preliminary observations on chemical definition of phenotypeand variation in tetrahydrocannabinol content versus age, sex,and plant part. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Vol. 60(8):1246-1249. Fink, M.; Volavka, J.; Panayiotopoulos, C. & Stefanis, C.1976. Quantitative EEG studies of marihuana,delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, and hashish in man. In: Braude, M.& Szara, S. (Eds.). Pharmacology of Marihuana. New York:Raven Press. Frank, M. & Rosenthal, E. 1978. Marijuana Growers' Guide.Berkeley, California: And/Or Press. Gaoni, Y. & Mechoulam, R. 1964. Isolation, structure, andpartial synthesis of an active constituent of hashish. Journal ofthe American Chemical Society Vol. 86: 1646-1647. Garcia, D. 1986. Stronger pot creating addicts, doctor says.San Francisco Chronicle October 4. Hamilton, H.C. 1918. The stability of Cannabis sativa and itsextracts. Journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association Vol.7: 333-336. Hamilton, H.C. 1915. Cannabis sativa. Is the medicinal valuefound only in the Indian grown drug? Journal of the AmericanPharmaceutical Association Vol. 4: 448-451. Hamilton, H.C.; Lescohier, A.W. & Perkins, R.A. 1913. Thephysiological activity of Cannabis sativa. Comparison of extractsfrom Indian and American-grown drug upon human subjects. Journalof the American Pharmaceutical Association Vol. 2: 22-30. Hare, H.A. 1887. Clinical and physiological notes on theaction of Cannabis indica. Therapeutic Gazette Vol. 11: 225-228. Hare, H.A.; Caspari, C., Jr. & Rusby, H.H. 1909. Cannabisindica. The National Standard Dispensatory. Philadelphia: Lea& Febiger. Henry Ohlhoff Outpatient Programs. 1986. Promotional flyer for``Marijuana Dependence: A National Conference." SanFrancisco, October 3-4. Hollister, L.E. 1986. Health aspects of cannabis.Pharmacological Reviews Vol. 38(1): 1-20. Holmes, E.M. 1905. Notes on Cannabis indica. PharmaceuticalJournal Vol. 74: 550-551. Holmes, E.M. 1902a. Cannabis indica. Pharmaceutical JournalVol. 69: 129-131. Holmes, E.M. 1902b. Notes on Cannabis indica. PharmaceuticalJournal Vol. 68: 342. Holmes, E.M. 1900. Cannabis indica. Pharmaceutical JournalVol. 64: 522-523. Hooper, D. 1908. Charas of Indian hemp. Pharmaceutical JournalVol. 81: 347-349. Hooper, D. 1894. Report by Mr. David Hooper, GovernmentQuinologist, Madras, on the results of analysis of hemp drugs.In: Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. Appendix Vol. 3: 197-199. Simla,India: Government Central Printing Office. Houghton, E.M. & Hamilton, H.C. 1908. A pharmacologicalstudy of Cannabis Americana (Cannabis sativa). American Journalof Pharmacy Vol. 80: 16-20. Inaba, D. 1987. Marijuana '87---a new drug. Recovering Vol.1(1): 16. Isbell, H.; Gorodetzky, C.W.; Jasinski, D.; Claussen, U.;Spulak, F. von & Korte, F. 1967. Effects of(--)delta9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. PsychopharmacologiaVol. 11: 184-188. Jones, R.T. 1980. Human effects: An overview. In: Petersen,R.C. (Ed.). Marijuana Research Findings: 1980. NIDA ResearchMonograph 31. Rockville, Maryland: NIDA. Jones, R.T. & Stone, G.C. 1970. Psychological studies ofmarijuana and alcohol in man. Psychopharmacologia Vol. 18:108-117. Kaplan, J. 1969. Marijuana: Report of the Indian Hemp DrugsCommission 1983-1894. Silver Spring, Maryland: Thomas Jefferson. Karniol, I.G.; Shirakawa, I.; Kasinki, N.; Pfeferman, A. &Carlini, E.A. 1974. Cannabidiol interferes with the effects ofdelta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. European Journal ofPharmacology Vol. 28: 172-177. Kerr, H.C. 1877. Report of the cultivation of, and trade in,ganja in Bengal, by Mr. Hem Chunder Kerr, Deputy Collector, onspecial duty. In: Papers Relating to the Consumption of Ganja andOther Drugs in India. Simla, India: Government Central PrintingOffice. Kerr, P. 1986. Increases in potency of marijuana prompt newwarnings for youths. New York Times September 25. Lee, M.A. & Shlain, B. 1985. Acid Dreams: The CIA, LSD andthe Sixties Rebellion. New York: Grove Press. Lemberger, L. 1976. Clinical pharmacology of natural andsynthetic cannabinoids. In: Cohen, S. & Stillman, R.C.(Eds.). The Therapeutic Potential of Marihuana. New York: Plenum. Lerner, M. 1963. Marihuana: Tetrahydrocannabinol and relatedcompounds. Science Vol. 140: 175-176. Lerner, M. & Zeffert, J.T. 1968. Determination oftetrahydrocannabinol isomers in marijuana and hashish. Bulletinon Narcotics Vol. 20(2): 53-54. Ludlow, F.H. 1857. The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages from theLife of a Pythagorean. New York: Harper & Row. (LudlowLibrary edition, 1974. San Francisco: Level Press.) Mair, W. 1900. The cultivation and manufacture of the officialCannabis indica. Pharmaceutical Journal Vol. 65: 732-733. Marshall, C.R. 1909. Experiments on the cause of the loss ofactivity of Indian hemp. Pharmaceutical Journal Vol. 82: 418. Marshall, C.R. 1898. A contribution to the pharmacology ofCannabis indica. Journal of the American Medical Association Vol.31: 882-891. Marshman, J.A.; Popham, R.E. & Yawney, C.D. 1976. A noteon the cannabinoid content of Jamaican ganja. Bulletin onNarcotics Vol. 26: 63-68. Mayor'sCommittee on Marihuana. 1944. The Marihuana Problem in theCity of New York. Lancaster, Pennsylvania: Jacques Cattell. McMeens, R.R. 1860. Report of the Ohio State Medical Committeeon Cannabis indica. Transactions of the Fifteenth Annual Meetingof the Ohio State Medical Society June 12-14: 75-100. Meyers, M.J. 1987. More about the ``new" marijuana.Professional Counselor Vol. 1(6): 3. Mezzrow, M. & Wolfe, B. 1946. Really the Blues. New York:Random House. Mikuriya, T.H. (Ed.). 1973. Marijuana: Medical Papers1839-1972. Oakland, California: Medi-Comp. Mikuriya, T.H. 1968. Physical, mental and moral effects ofmarijuana: The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission report. InternationalJournal of the Addictions Vol. 3(2): 253-270. National Academy of Sciences. 1982. Marijuana and Health:Report of a Study by a Committee of the Institute of Medicine.Division of Health Sciences Policy. Washington, D.C.: NationalAcademy Press. National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. 1972. Marihuana: A Signal ofMisunderstanding. Washington, D.C.: U.S. GPO. O'Shaughnessy, W.B. 1839. On the preparations of Indian hemp,or gunjah. Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society ofBengal. 1838-1840: 421-461. Parke-Davis and Company. 1930. Physicians' Catalog ofPharmaceutical and Biological Products. In: Mikuriya (1973: 66). Pars, H.G. & Razdan, R.K. 1976. Heterocyclic analogs ofthe cannabinoids. In: Cohen, S. & Stillman, R.C. (Eds.). TheTherapeutic Potential of Marihuana. New York: Plenum. Perry, D.C. 1977. Street drug analysis and drug use trends1969-1975. Part II. PharmChem Newsletter Vol. 6(4): 1-3. Prain, D. 1893. Report on the Cultivation and Use of Ganja.Calcutta, India: Bengal Secretariat Press. Ratcliffe, B. 1974. Summary of street drug results---1973.PharmChem Newsletter Vol. 3(3): 1-3. Razdan, R.K. 1970. In: Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences Committee on Problems of Drug Dependence. 32nd meeting.Toronto, February 17-20. Reynolds, J.R. 1890. Therapeutic uses and toxic effects ofCannabis indica. Lancet Vol. 1: 637-638. Robertson, A. 1847. On extract of Indian hemp. PharmaceuticalJournal Vol. 6: 70-72. Rosenkrantz, H. 1981. In: Report of an Addiction ResearchFoundation/World Health Organization (ARF/WHO) Scientific Meetingon Adverse Health or Behavioral Consequences of Marijuana Use.Toronto: ARF/WHO. Rubin, V. & Comitas, L. 1975. Ganja in Jamaica: A MedicalAnthropological Study of Chronic Marihuana Use. The Hague:Mouton. Savory. 1843. Extractum Cannabis indicae. PharmaceuticalJournal Vol. 3: 80. Schultes, R.E.; Klein, W.M.; Plowman, T. & Lockwood, T.E.1974. Cannabis: An example of taxonomic neglect. Botanical MuseumLeaflets, Harvard University Vol. 23(9): 337-367. Silver, G. (Ed.). 1979. The Dope Chronicles 1850-1950. SanFrancisco: Harper & Row. Small, E. 1979. The Species Problem in Cannabis. Science andSemantics. Volume 1: Science. Toronto: Corpus. Smith, D.E. 1987. In memoriam (Sidney Cohen, M.D.). Journal ofPsychoactive Drugs Vol. 19(2): ii. Starks, M. 1977. Marijuana Botany. Berkeley, California:And/Or Press. Stearn, W.T. 1974. Typification of Cannabis sativa L.Botanical Museum Leaflets, Harvard University Vol. 23(9):325-336. Tennant, F.S., Jr. 1986. The clinical syndrome of marijuanadependence. Psychiatric Annals Vol. 16(4): 225-234. Turner, C.E. 1981. Personal communication to National Academyof Sciences. Turner, C.E. 1980. Chemistry and metabolism. In: Petersen,R.C. (Ed.). Marihuana Research Findings: 1980. NIDA ResearchMonograph 31. Rockville, Maryland: NIDA. Turner, C.E. 1974. Active substances in marijuana. Archivos deInvestigacion Medica Vol. 5(Suppl.): 135-140. Turner, C.E.; Cheng, P.C.; Lewis, G.S.; Russell, M.H &Sharma, G.K. 1979. Constituents of Cannabis sativa. XV. Botanicaland chemical profile of Indian variants. Planta Medica Vol. 37:217-225. Unsigned. 1987. Marijuana Questions and Answers. Los Angeles:Schick Shadel Health Services. Unsigned. 1974. Effectiveness of drug analysis curbed.PharmChem Newsletter Vol. 3(4): 1. Unsigned. 1973. Study of chronic use of marijuana demonstratesno chromosome breaks, brain damage, or untoward effects. MedicalTribune Vol. 14(39): 1. Wallich, G.C. 1883. Cannabis indica. British Medical JournalVol. 1: 1224. Weil, A.T.; Zinberg, N.E. & Nelsen, J.M. 1968. Clinicaland psychological effects of marihuana in man. Science Vol. 162:1234-1242. Wheeler, L.M. 1968. Personal communication. In: Mikuriya 1973:67-68. Whineray, E. 1909. A pharmaceutical study of Cannabis sativa.The Equinox Vol. 1(1). Reprinted in Regardie, I. (Ed.). 1968.Roll Away the Stone. St. Paul: Llewellyn. Wollner, H.J.; Matchett, J.R.; Levine, J. & Loewe, S.1942. Isolation of a physiologically active tetrahydrocannabinolfrom Cannabis sativa resin. Journal of the American ChemicalSociety Vol. 64: 26-29. Wood, G.B. & Bache, F. 1868. Extractum Cannabis.Dispensatory of the United States of America. 12th ed.Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. Wood, H.C. 1869. On the medical activity of the hemp plant, asgrown in North America. Proceedings of the American PhilosophicalSociety Vol. 11: 226-232. Wood, H.C. & Smith, R.M. 1884. Poisoning by Cannabisindica. Therapeutic Gazette Vol. 5: 514-515. Wood, T.B.; Spivey, W.T.N. & Easterfield, T.H. 1899.Cannabinol. Part I. Journal of the Chemical Society Vol. 75:20-36. Work, T.S.; Bergel, F. & Todd, A.R. 1939. The activeprinciples of Cannabis indica resin. I. Biochemical Journal Vol.33: 123-127. W.W. 1890. Toxic effects of Cannabis indica. Lancet Vol. 1:March 15. In: Mikuriya, T.H. (1973: 144). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-62IA087-000627-B019-181http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/medpaper.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052850 text/html 39307HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:28:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:59 GMTContent-length: 39089 Introduction to Marijuana: Medical Papers Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Introduction from Marijuana: Medical Papers by Todd Mikuriya, M.D. Medi-Comp Press, 1973, pp. xiii-xxvii Medicine in the Western World has forgotten almost all it onceknew about therapeutic properties of marijuana, or cannabis. Analgesia, anticonvulsant action, appetite stimulation,ataraxia, antibiotic properties and low toxicity were describedthroughout medical literature, beginning in 1839, whenO'Shaughnessy introduced cannabis into the Western pharmacopoeia. As these findings were reported throughout Western medicine,cannabis attained wide use. Cannabis therapy was described inmost pharmacopoeial texts as a treatment for a variety of diseaseconditions. During the second half of the 1800s and in the presentcentury, medical researchers in some measure corroborated theearly reports of the therapeutic potential of cannabis. Inaddition, much laboratory research has been concerned withbioassay, determination of the mode of action, and attempts tosolve the problems of insolubility in water and variability ofstrength among different cannabis specimens. "Recreational" smoking of cannabis in the twentiethcentury and the resultant restrictive federal legislation havefunctionally ended all medical uses of marijuana. In light of such assets as minimal toxicity, no buildup oftolerance, no physical dependence, and minimal autonomicdisturbance, immediate major clinical reinvestigation of cannabispreparations is indicated in the management of pain, chronicneurologic diseases, convulsive disorders, migraine headache,anorexia, mental illness, and bacterial infections. Recently declassified secret U.S. Defense Department studiesreconfirm marijuana's congeners to have therapeutic utility. Cannabis indica, Cannabis sativa, Cannabis americana, Indianhemp and marijuana (or marihuana) all refer to the same plant.Cannabis is used throughout the world for diverse purposes andhas a long history characterized by usefulness, euphoria orevil--depending on one's point of view. To the agriculturistcannabis is a fiber crop; to the physician of a century ago itwas a valuable medicine; to the physician of today it is anenigma; to the user, a euphoriant; to the police, a menace; tothe traffickers, a source of profitable danger; to the convict orparolee and his family, a source of sorrow. This book is concerned primarily with the medicinal aspects ofcannabis. The Chinese emperor Shen-nung is reported to have taught hispeople to grow hemp for fiber in the twenty-eighth century B.C. Atext from the period 1500-1200 B.C. documents a knowledge of theplant in China- -but not for use as fiber. In 200 A.D., the useof cannabis as an analgesic was described by the physicianHoa-tho.[44] The Chinese emperor Shen-nung is reported to have taught hispeople to grow hemp for fiber in the twenty-eighth century B.C. Atext from the period 1500-1200 B.C. documents a knowledge of theplant in China- -but not for use as fiber. In 200 A.D., the useof cannabis as an analgesic was described by the physicianHoa-tho.[44] In India the use of hemp preparations as a remedy wasdescribed before 1000 B.C. In Persia, cannabis was known severalcenturies before Christ. In Assyria, about 650 B.C., itsintoxicating properties were noted.[44] Except for Herodotus' report that the Scythians used the smokefrom burning hemp seeds for intoxication, the ancient Greeksseemed to be unaware of the psychoactive properties of cannabis.Dioscorides in the first century A.D. rendered an accuratemorphologic description of the plant, but made no note ofintoxicating properties.[10] In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, Arabic writersdescribed the social use of cannabis and resultant cruel butunsuccessful attempts to suppress its non-medical use.[44] Although Galen described the use of the seeds for creatingwarmth, he did not describe the intoxicating qualities of hemp.Of interest is the paucity of references to hemp's intoxicatingproperties in the lay and medical literature of Europe before the1800s.[44] The therapeutic use of cannabis was introduced into Westernmedicine in 1839, in a forty-page article by W. B. O'Shaughnessy,a thirty- year-old physician serving with the British inIndia.[27] His discussion of the history of the use of cannabisproducts in the East reveals an awareness that these drugs hadnot only been used in medicine for therapeutic purposes, but hadalso been used for recreational and religious purposes. O'Shaughnessy is not primarily known for his discovery of hempdrugs, but rather for his basic studies on intravenouselectrolyte therapy in 1831, and his introduction of thetelegraph into India in the 1850s.[26] After studying the literature on cannabis and conferring withcontemporary Hindu and Mohammedan scholars O'Shaughnessy testedthe effects of various hemp preparations on animals, beforeattempting to use them to treat humans. Satisfied that the drugwas reasonably safe, he administered preparations of cannabisextract to patients, and discovered that it had analgesic andsedative properties. O'Shaughnessy successfully relieved the painof rheumatism and stilled the convulsions of an infant with thisstrange new drug. His most spectacular success came, however,when he quelled the wrenching muscle spasms of tetanus and rabieswith the fragrant resin. Psychic effects resembling a curiousdelirium, when an overdose was given, were treated with strongpurgatives, emetics with a blister to the nape of the neck, andleeches on the temples.[27] The use of cannabis derivatives for medicinal purposes spreadrapidly throughout Western medicine, as is evidenced in thereport of the Committee on Cannabis Indica of the Ohio StateMedical Society, published in 1860. In that report physicianstold of success in treating stomach pain, childbirth psychosis,chronic cough, and gonorrhea with hemp products.[25] A Dr.Fronmueller, of Fuerth, Ohio, summarized his experiences with thedrug as follows: I have used hemp many hundred times to relieve local pains ofan inflammatory as well as neuralgic nature, and judging fromthese experiments, I have to assign to the Indian hemp a placeamong the so-called hypnotic medicines next to opium; its effectsare less intense, and the secretions are not so much suppressedby it. Digestion is not disturbed; the appetite rather increased;sickness of the stomach seldom induced; congestion never. Hempmay consequently be employed in inflammatory conditions. Itdisturbs the expectoration far less than opium; the nervoussystem is also not so much affected. The whole effect of hempbeing less violent, and producing a more natural sleep, withoutinterfering with the actions of the internal organs, it iscertainly often preferable to opium, although it is not equal tothat drug in strength and reliability. An alternating course ofopium and Indian hemp seems particularly adapted to those caseswhere opium alone fails in producing the desired effect.[25] Because cannabis did not lead to physical dependence, it wasfound to be superior to the opiates for a number of therapeuticpurposes. Birch, in 1889, reported success in treating opiate andchloral addiction with cannabis,[5] and Mattison in 1891recommended its use to the young physician, comparing itfavorably with the opiates. He quoted his colleague Suckling: With a wish for speedy effect, it is so easy to use thatmodern mischief-maker, hypodermic morphia, that they [youngphysicians] are prone to forget remote results of incautiousopiate giving. Would that the wisdom which has come to their professionalfathers through, it may be, a hapless experience, might servethem to steer clear of narcotic shoals on which many a patienthas gone awreck. Indian hemp is not here lauded as a specific. It will, attimes, fail. So do other drugs. But the many cases in which itacts well, entitle it to a large and lasting confidence. My experience warrants this statement: cannabis indica is,often, a safe and successful anodyne and hypnotic.[23] In their study of the medical applications of cannabis,physicians of the nineteenth century repeatedly encountered anumber of difficulties. Recognizing the therapeutic potential ofthe drug, many experimenters sought ways of overcoming thesedrawbacks to its use in medicine, in particular the following: Cannabis products are insoluble in water. The onset of the effects of medicinal preparations of cannabistakes an hour or so; its action is therefore slower than that ofmany other drugs. Different batches of cannabis derivatives vary greatly instrength; moreover, the common procedure for standardization ofcannabis samples, by administration to test animals, is subjectto error owing to variability of reactions among the animals. There is wide variation among humans in their individualresponses to cannabis. Despite these problems regarding the uncertainty of potencyand dosage and the difficulties in mode of administration,cannabis has several important advantages over other substancesused as analgesics, sedatives, and hypnotics: The prolonged use of cannabis does not lead to the developmentof physical dependence. [11, 13, 14, 24, 39, 44] There is minimal development of tolerance to cannabisproducts. (Loewe notes a slight "beginner'shabituation" in dogs, during the first few trials with thedrug, as the only noticeable tolerance effect.[20]) [11, 13, 14,24, 44] Cannabis products have exceedingly low toxicity.[9, 21, 22,24] (The oral dose required to kill a mouse has been found to beabout 40,000 times the dose required to produce typical symptomsof intoxication in man.)[21] Cannabis produces no disturbance of vegetative functioning,whereas the opiates inhibit the gastrointestinal tract, the flowof bile and the cough reflex.[1, 2, 24, 44, 46] Besides investigating the physical effects of medicinalpreparations of cannabis, nineteenth-century physicians observedthe psychic effects of the drug in its therapeuticapplications.[4, 27, 33] They found that cannabis first mildlystimulates, and then sedates the higher centers of the brain.Hare suggested in 1887 a possible mechanism of cannabis'analgesic properties: During the time that this remarkable drug is relieving pain avery curious psychical condition manifests itself; namely, thatthe diminution of the pain seems to be due to its fading away inthe distance, so that the pain becomes less and less, just as thepain in a delicate ear would grow less and less as a beaten drumwas carried farther and farther out of the range of hearing. This condition is probably associated with the other well-known symptom produced by the drug; namely, the prolongation oftime.[16] Reynolds, in 1890,[33] summed up thirty years of his clinicalexperience using cannabis, finding it useful as a nocturnalsedative in senile insomnia, and valuable in treatingdysmenorrhea, neuralgias including tic douloureux and tabeticsymptoms, migraine headache and certain epileptoid or choreoidmuscle spasms. He felt it to be of uncertain benefit in asthma,alcoholic delirium and depressions. Reynolds thought cannabis tobe of no value in joint pains that were aggravated by motion andin cases of true chronic epilepsy. Reynolds stressed the necessity of titrating the dose of eachpatient, increasing gradually every third or fourth day, to avoid"toxic" effects: The dose should be given in minimum quantity, repeated in notless than four or six hours, and gradually increased by one dropevery third or fourth day, until either relief is obtained, orthe drug is proved, in such case, to be useless. With theseprecautions I have never met with any toxic effects, and haverarely failed to find, after a comparatively short time, eitherthe value or the uselessness of the drug.[33] Concerning migraine headache, Osler stated in his text:Cannabis indica is probably the most satisfactory remedy.[11, 28] In his definitive survey of the literature and report of hisown studies, deceptively titled "Marihuana, America's NewDrug Problem," Walton notes that cannabis was widely usedduring the latter half of the nineteenth century, andparticularly before new drugs were developed: This popularity of the hemp drugs can be attributed partly tothe fact that they were introduced before the synthetic hypnoticsand analgesics. Chloral hydrate was not introduced until 1869 andwas followed in the next thirty years by paraldehyde, sulfonaland the barbitals. Antipyrine and acetanilide, the first of theirparticular group of analgesics, were introduced about 1884. Forgeneral sedative and analgesic purposes, the only drugs commonlyused at this time were the morphine derivatives and theirdisadvantages were very well known. In fact, the most attractivefeature of the hemp narcotics was probably the fact that they didnot exhibit certain of the notorious disadvantages of theopiates. The hemp narcotics do not constipate at all, they moreoften increase than decrease appetite, they do not particularlydepress the respiratory center even in large doses, they rarelyor never cause pruritis or cutaneous eruptions and, mostimportant, the liability of developing addiction is very muchless than with opiates.[44] The use of cannabis in American medicine was seriouslyaffected by the increased use of opiates in the latter half ofthe nineteenth century. With the introduction of the hypodermicsyringe into American medicine from England in 1856 by Barker andRuppaner, the use of the faster acting, water-soluble opiatedrugs rapidly increased. The Civil War helped to spread the useof opiates in this country; the injected drugs were administeredwidely--and often indiscriminately--to relieve the pain of maimedsoldiers returning from combat. (Opiate addiction was once calledthe "army disease."[41]) As the use of injected opiatesincreased, cannabis declined in popularity. Cannabis preparations were still widely available in legendand over-the-counter forms in the 1930s. Crump (Chairman,Investigating Committee, American Medical Association) in 1931mentioned the proprietaries "Piso's Cure," "OneDay Cough Cure" and "Neurosine" as containingcannabis.[44] In 1937 Sasman listed twenty-eight pharmaceuticalscontaining cannabis.[36] Cannabis was still recognized as amedicinal agent in that year, when the committee on legislativeactivities of the American Medical Association concluded asfollows: . . . there is positively no evidence to indicate the abuse ofcannabis as a medicinal agent or to show that its medicinal useis leading to the development of cannabis addiction. Cannabis atthe present time is slightly used for medicinal purposes, but itwould seem worthwhile to maintain its status as a medicinal agentfor such purposes as it now has. There is a possibility that are-study of the drug by modern means may show other advantages tobe derived from its medicinal use.[32] Meanwhile, in Mexico, the poor were smoking marijuana to relaxand to endure heat and fatigue. (Originally marijuana was theMexican slang word for the smoking preparation of dried leavesand flowering tops of the Cannabis sativa plant--the indigenousvariety of the hemp plant.) The recreational smoking of marijuana may have started in thiscountry in New Orleans in about 1910, and continued on a smallscale there until 1926, when a newspaper ran a six-part series onthe use of the drug.[44] The fad subsequently spread up theMississippi and throughout the United States, faster than localand state laws could be passed to discourage it. The use of"tea" or "muggles" blossomed into a minor"psychedelic revolution" of the 1920s. Narcoticsofficers encouraged the enactment of local prohibitory laws andeventually succeeded in bringing about restrictive Federallegislation. In 1937 Congress passed the Marihuana Tax Act, thefinale to a series of prohibitory acts in the individual states.Under the new laws, the already dwindling use of cannabis as atherapeutic substance in medicine was brought to a virtual halt.In 1941, cannabis was dropped from the "National Formularyand Pharmacopoeia." Around the time of the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act,Walton postulated sites of action for cannabis drugs. Corticalareas, he found, are affected at low dosage, while at high dosagethere seems to be a depressant effect on the thalamo-corticalpathways. Hyperemia of the brain appears to be a localphenomenon, unless centers controlling vasodilation might belocated in the thalamo-cortical region. Similar possiblemechanisms are suggested for the phenomenon of mild hypoglycemia,usual hunger and thirst and occasional lacrimation andnausea.[44] Despite restrictive legislation, a few medical researchershave had the opportunity to continue the investigation of thetherapeutic applications of cannabis in recent years. In hisstudy of the medical applications of cannabis for Mayor LaGuardia's committee, Dr. Samuel Allentuck reported, among otherfindings, favorable results in treating withdrawal of opiateaddicts with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful purifiedproduct of the hemp plant.[1, 24] An article in 1949, buried in a journal of chemical abstracts,reported that a substance related to THC controlled epilepticseizures in a group of children more effectively thandiphenylhydantoin (Dilantin(R)), a most commonly prescribedanticonvulsant.[9] A number of experimenters, believing that cannabis productsmight be of value in psychiatry, have investigated theapplications of various forms of them in the treatment of mentaldisorders. Cannabis had been used in the nineteenth century totreat mental illness.[19, 25, 45, 46] However, aside from somerather equivocal clinical studies, primarily in the treatment ofdepression,[29, 30, 35, 39] and another report of success intreating withdrawal from alcohol and opiate addiction,[42] nosignificant contemporary psychiatric studies involving cannabistherapy have been reported to date. Many current "authoritative" publicationsunequivocally state that there is no legitimate medical use formarijuana. As compared with the 1800s, this century has seen verylittle medical research on the array of some twenty chemicalsthat are found in the hemp plant.[37] Today's readers may tend to be skeptical about a report of acure for gonorrhea published over a century ago.[19, 25] Suchfindings may bear reinvestigation, however, in the light of areport from Czechoslovakia in 1960 that cannabidiolic acid, aproduct of the unripe hemp plant, has bacteriocidalproperties.[7] Some of the therapeutic applications reported inthe early medical papers have been corroborated by laterinvestigators, but for the most part the therapeutic aspects ofcannabis remain to be re-explored under modern clinicalconditions. In the past twenty years, clinical and basic research oncannabis have dwindled to practically nothing. The record of taxstamps issued by the Federal Bureau of Narcotics for cannabisresearch, as compared with those for research on narcotic drugs,tells the story of the twenty-year "drought" in theinvestigation of cannabis products:[43]                       Users for Purposes of Research,                          Instruction, or Analysis       Year                       Narcotic Drugs     Marijuana       1938 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...               5       1941 . . . . . . . . . . . . .    94              ..       1943 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...              43       1946 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   323              ..       1948 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...              87       1951 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1078              ..       1953 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...              18       1956 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   284              ..       1958 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...               6       1961 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   344              ..       1965 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   431              16 The rising non-medical use of marijuana both floated and wasbuoyed by the "psychedelic revolution" of the mid1960s. The panicked reaction included a renewed scientificinterest in the drug. Eleven studies funded by the National Institute of MentalHealth 1967 concerning cannabis were either specialized animalexperiments, part of an observational sociologic study of anumber of drugs, or explorations of chemical detection methods.No human studies were included. Of the fifty-six projects funded during the next fiscal years1968-69 only two used humans.[52] The next year was somewhat lesscautious with eight out of thirty-five projects devoted toclinical studies.[53] Some of the preliminary results are in from these studies.Much is still unpublished. According to Harris, the toxicity factor of marijuanaderivatives is over two hundred and that chronic smoking ofmarijuana is less harmful to the lungs than tobaccocigarettes.[49] Domino described the cross tolerance of THC and alcohol inpigeons[47] corroborating Jones' clinical observations.[50, 51]These rediscoveries demand therapeutic trial. In August 1971 certain secret Defense Department documentswere declassified. While at NIMH as a consulting researchpsychiatrist in 1967 I had become aware of the existence ofclandestine research at Edgewood Arsenal in Maryland. From 1954-59 Dr. Van M. Sim was in charge of the project. Hereported to "Medical World News:" "Marijuana . . .is probably the most potent anti-epileptic known to medicinetoday."[49] Dr. Harold F. Hardman, then with the Defense contracting groupat the University of Michigan's Department of Pharmacologyreported effects of profound hypothermia and felt marijuanaderivatives to be potentially quite useful in brain and traumaticsurgery.[48] The principal focus was, however, on the possible use of THChomologs as incapacitating agents. Besides the aforementionedgovernment agency and university, the private sector wasrepresented by the Arthur D. Little Company of Cambridge,Massachusetts.[55] Recently in the course of a study of effects on driving, itwas incidentally discovered that cannabis lowers intraocularpressure, thus being possibly useful in the treatment ofglaucoma.[56] Thus, a helix is made. Modern technologic methods confirmO'Shaughnessy's observations 130 years ago. After swinging awayfrom the knowledge of marijuana's properties through the worshipof new synthetics, an unrelated rise of marijuana use socially,illegalization and removal from availability for clinical use,medicine rediscovers marijuana. The flame of knowledge is at a low ebb, kept alive by isolatedscientists and clinicians; it is now being rekindled by theserecent circumscribed revelations. Unless existing restrictive state and federal laws governingmarijuana are changed, there will be no future for either modernscientific investigation or controlled clinical trial bypresent-day methods. The tide is turning. The Federal Bureau of Narcotic andDangerous Drugs, National Institute of Mental Health and The Foodand Drug Administration Joint Committee recently authorized humantherapeutic trial of cannabis products. We may now look forwardto reinvestigation of the numerous possible medical uses ofmarijuana.[54] A concerted effort is indicated for full-scale investigationswhere knowledge is lacking. Acute and chronic effects of cannabisshould be restudied by modern methods. Metabolic pathways ofaction and detoxification need exploration by the pharmaceuticalmeans of today. Chronic toxicity studies must be undertaken toexamine possible long- term effects of cannabis use. (Cunninghamin 1893 found no gross central nervous system changes withchronic administration of hemp drugs to primates over severalmonths.[8]) Medical science must again confront the problems of cannabis'insolubility in water and its variable strength. Since human andanimal responses vary a great deal, individual doses must betitrated. The popular "double blind" type of studymethods will require revision. The reporting of personal drugexperience was once acceptable to the scientific community.[15,22, 25, 29, 34, 39, 44] Humans who are drug"sophisticates" will again become indispensable topsychoactive drug research, as wine tasters are to the wineindustry, for only humans can verbally report the subtle andcomplex effects of these substances. Government agencies having stimulated little significantclinical research in this field, the pharmaceutical industryshould take the initiative in starting basic research andclinical studies into the purified congeners of cannabis fortheir chemical properties, pharmacologic qualities andtherapeutic applications. "Possible Therapeutic Applications ofTetrahydrocannabinols and Like Products" Analgesic-hypnotic [16, 18, 19, 23, 25, 27,33, 45] Appetite stimulant [18, 25, 27] Antiepileptic-antispasmodic [9, 18, 27, 33, 40, 45, 49] Prophylactic and treatment of the neuralgias, including migraineand tic douloureux [3, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23, 25, 28, 31, 33, 38,40, 45] Antidepressant-tranquilizer [6, 16, 18, 19, 23, 25, 31, 33, 40,45] Antiasthmatic [18, 25, 45] Oxytocic [25, 45] Antitussive [3, 16, 25, 38, 45] Topical anesthetic [8] Withdrawal agent for opiate and alcohol addiction [5, 23, 24, 38,42, 45, 47, 50, 51] Childbirth analgesic [12] Antibiotic [7] Intraocular hypotensive [56] Hypothermogenic [48] Medicine, being an empiric art, has not hesitated in the pastto utilize a substance first used for recreational purposes,(Morton "discovered" ether for anesthetic purposesafter observing medical students at "ether frolics" in1846. [Howard W. Haggard: "Devils, Drugs and Doctors,"Harper and Row, New York, 1929, p. 99.]) in the pursuit of themore noble purposes of healing, relieving pain and teaching usmore of the workings of the human mind and body. The activeconstituents of cannabis appear to have remarkably low acute andchronic toxicity factors and might be quite useful in themanagement of many chronic disease conditions. More reasonablelaws and regulations controlling psychoactive drug research arerequired to permit significant medical inquiry to begin so thatwe can fill the large gaps in our knowledge of cannabis. REFERENCES 1. Adams, Koger: "Marihuana," "Bulletin of theNew York Academy of Medicine," 18:705-29, Nov. 1942. 2. Ames, Frances: "A clinical and metabolic study ofacute intoxication with cannabis sativa and its role in the modelpsychoses," "J. of Mental Science," 104:972-99,Oct. 1958. 3. Anderson, G. S. D.: "Remarks on the remedial virtuesof cannabis indica, or Indian hemp," "Boston Med. andSurg. J.," 67:427-30, 1863. 4. Bell, John: "On the haschisch or cannabisindica," "Boston Med. and Surg. J.," 56:209-16,229-36, 1857. 5. Birch, Edward A.: "The use of Indian hemp in thetreatment of chronic chloral and chronic opium poisoning,""Lancet," 1:625, 30 Mar. 1889. 6. Boyd, E. S., and Merritt, D. A.: "Effects of atetrahydrocannabinol derivative on some motor systems in thecat," "Arch. Internat. de Pharmacodynamie et deTherapie," 153:1-12, 1965. 7. CIBA Foundation Study Group, "Hashish--Its Chemistryand Pharmacology," 1964, pp. 45, 49. 8. Cunningham, D. D.: Report by Brigade-Surgeon--Lieut. Col.D. D. Cunningham, F.R.S., C.I.E., on the nature of the effectsaccompanying the continued treatment of animals with hemp drugsand with dhatura; "from" "Report of the IndianHemp Drugs Commission," 1893-4, Government Central PrintingOffice, Simla, India, 1894, Vol. 3, pp. 192-96. 9. Davis, J. P., and Ramsey, H. H.: "Antiepileptic actionof marihuana-active substances," "Federat. Proc.,"8:284-85, Mar. 1949. 10. Dioscorides, Pedanius: "The Greek Herbal ofDioscorides," Edited by Robert T. Gunther, Hafner PublishingCo., New York, 1959, pp. 390- 91. 11. Eddy, N. B., Halbach, H., Isbell, H., and Seevers, M. H.:"Drug dependence: its significance and characteristics."Psychopharmacology Bull.," 3:1-12, July 1966. 12. "Effects of alcohol and cannabis during labor,""JAMA," 94:1165, 1930. 13. Goodman, L. S., and Gilman, A.: "The PharmacologicalBasic of Therapeutics," 2nd Edition, Macmillan, New York,1955. 14. Goodman, L. S., and Gilman, A.: "The PharmacologicalBasis of Therapeutics," 3rd Edition, Macmillan, New York,1965. 15. Hamilton, H. C., Lescohier, A. W., and Perkins, R. A.:"The physiological activity of cannabis sativa. Comparisonof extracts from Indian and American-grown drug upon humansubjects," "J. Amer. Pharm. Assoc.," 2:22-30,1913. 16. Hare, Hobart Amory: "Clinical and physiological noteson the action of cannabis indica," "Therap. Gaz.,"11:225-28, 1887. 17. Hare, H. A., and Chrystie, W.: "A System of PracticalTherapeutics," Lee Brothers and Co., Philadelphia, 1892,Vol. 3. 18. "Indian Materia Medica," edited by A. K.Nadkarni, Popular Book Depot, Bombay, 1954. 19. "Lilly's Hand Book of Pharmacy andTherapeutics," Eli Lilly and Co., Indianapolis, 1898, p. 32. 20. Loewe, S.: "The active principles of cannabis and thepharmacology of the cannabinols," "Archiv fur Experim.Pathologie und Pharmakologie," 211:175-93, 1950. 21. Loewe, S.: "Studies on the pharmacology and acutetoxicity of compounds with marihuana activity," "J.Pharmacol. and Experim. Therap.," 88:154-61, Oct. 1946. 22. Marshall, C. R.: "A contribution to the pharmacologyof cannabis indica," "JAMA," 31:882-91, 15 Oct.1898. 23. Mattison, J. B.: "Cannabis indica as an anodyne andhypnotic," "St. Louis Med. and Surg. J.,"61:265-71, Nov. 1891. 24. "Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The MarihuanaProblem in the City of New York," Jaques Cattell, Lancaster,Pa., 1944. 25. McMeens, R. R.: "Report of the committee on cannabisindica; from Transactions of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of theOhio State Medical Society," Follett, Foster and Co.,Columbus, Ohio, 1860, pp. 75-100. 26. Moon, J. B.: "Sir William Brooke O'Shaughnessy--thefoundations of fluid therapy and the Indian telegraphservice." "New Eng. J. of Med.," 276:283-84, 2Feb. 1967. 27. O'Shaughnessy, W. B.: "On the preparations of theIndian hemp, or gunjah," "Trans. Med. and Phy.Soc.," Bengal, 71-102, 1838-40; 421-61, 1842. 28. Osler, W., and McCrae, T.: "Principles and Practiceof Medicine," 8th Edition, D. Appleton and Co., New York,1916, p. 1089. 29. Parker, C. S., and Wrigley, F.: "Synthetic cannabispreparations in psychiatry: "(1) synhexyl," "J. ofMental Science," 96:176-79, 1950. 30. Pond, D. A.: "Psychological effects in depressivepatients of the marihuana homologue synhexyl," "J.Neurol. Neurosurg, Psychiat.," 11:271-79, 1948. 31. Ratnam, E. V.: "Cannabis indica," "J. ofthe Ceylon Branch of the Brit. Med. Assoc.," 13:30-34, 1916. 32. "Report of the Committee on LegislativeActivities," "JAMA," 108:2214-15, 1937. 33. Reynolds, J. Russell: "Therapeutical uses and toxiceffects of cannabis indica," "Lancet," 1:637-38,22 Mar. 1890. 34. Robinson, Victor: "An Essay on Hasheesh--Historicaland Experimental," L. H. Ringer, New York, 1912. 35. Rolls, E. J., and Stafford-Clark, D.:"Depersonalization treated by cannabis indica andpsychotherapy," "Guy's Hospital Report,"103:330-36, 1954. 36. Sasman, Marty: "Cannabis indica inpharmaceuticals," "J. of the N.J. Med Soc.,"35:51-52, Jan. 1938. 37. Shulgin, Alexander T.: personal communication, 1968. 38. Stevens, A. A.: "Modern Materia Medica andTherapeutics," W. B. Saunders and Co., Philadelphia, 1903,pp. 77-78. 39. Stockings, G. Taylor: "A new euphoriant fordepressive mental states," "Brit. Med J.,"1:918-22, 28 June 1947. 40. Suckling, C. W.: "On the therapeutic value of IndianHemp," "Brit. Med. J.," 2:12, 1881. 41. Terry, C. E., and Pellens, M.: "The OpiumProblem," Bureau of Social Hygiene, Inc., New York, 1928,pp. 53-93. 42. Thompson, L. J. and Proctor, R. C.: "The use ofpyrahexyl in the treatment of alcoholic and drug withdrawalconditions," "N. Carolina Med. J.," 14:520-23,Oct. 1953. 43. U.S. Treasury Dept., Bureau of Narcotics, "Traffic inOpium and Other Dangerous Drugs for the Year Ended Dec. 31,1965," U.S. Printing Office, Washington, 1966, pp. 55-56. 44. Walton, Robert P.: "Marihuana: America's New DrugProblem," J. B. Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1938, pp. 1-18,86-157. 45. Waring, Edward John: "Practical Therapeutics,"Lindsay and Blakiston, Philadelphia, 1874, pp. 157-61. 46. Wood, G. B., and Bache, F.: "The Dispensatory of theUnited States of America, 12th Edition," J. B. Lippincott,Philadelphia, 1866, pp. 379-82. 47. Domino, Edward F., "Neuropharmacological Studies ofMarijuana-- Some Synthetic and Natural THC Derivatives in Animalsand Man," 1971. Unpublished. 54 pp. 48. Hardman, Harold F., Domino, Edward F. and Seevers, MauriceT., "General Pharmacological Actions of SyntheticTetrahydrocannabinol Derivatives," 1971. Unpublished. 49. Berger, Alfred D., Marijuana. "Med. World News,"July 16, 1971, pp. 37-43. 50. Jones, Reese T., "Psychological Studies of Marijuanaand Alcohol in Man," "Psychopharmacologia," 18,108-117, 1970. 51. Jones, Reese T ., "Tetrahydrocannabinol and theMarijuana Induced Social `High' or the Effects of the Mind onMarijuana. Ann." "N.Y. Acad. Sci.," 1972. Inpress. 52. "Grants Active During Fiscal Years 1968 and 1969Center for Studies in Narcotics and Drug Abuse,""National Institute of Mental Health," 1969.Unpublished. 53. Ibid., 1970. 54. Bozetti, Louis: personal communication, January, 1972. 55. Arthur D. Little Company, "New Incapacitating AgentsQuarterly Report 15/16 Supplement." "PreclinicalPharmacology and Toxicology of Candidate Agent 226, 169.""Papers on Tetrahydrocannabinols Cleared for publicrelease." The National Technical Information Service,Department of Commerce, 1971. 56. Hepler, R. S. and Frank, I. R. "Marihuana Smoking andIntraocular Pressure," "JAMA," Sept. 6, 1971. Vol.217, no. 10. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-63IA087-000627-B019-213http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/aidscan.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052916 text/html 4874HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:29:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:11 GMTContent-length: 4657 Cannabis as AIDS Adjunctive Therapy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Cannabis as an Adjunctive Treatment for AIDS Related Illness. By Tod Mikuriya, M.D. Ken D. is in a protracted war. For the last nine years thisthirty eight year old married mainframe computer programmer witha degree in accounting has fought the human immunodefficiencyvirus in his body one skirmish, one battle at a time. He is along term survivor, beating the odds. A wiry intelligent man witha neatly trimmed beard to hide the lesions of Kaposi's Sarcoma,KS, a form of cancer with many small colonies growing slowly inhis skin and mouth with itching and discolored patches. His beardalso protects from irritating the inflammation of the skinerupting from the side effects of medications. Ken also holds a fungal pneumonia at bay. PneumocystisCarinii, a fungus that is found most everywhere, including normalhealthy lungs without causing symptoms, hecomes invasive andtoxic when the immune system is weakened. This is one of manyopportunistic infectious diseases taking advantage of a weakenedimmune system. He wishes he could work but the terms of his disability statuswould cost him his benefits that see him through his periods ofimmobilization. The chemotherapies are specific poisons to targetspecific enzyme systems of the cancer cells or the fungus but aredebilitating to the body. A major symptom is loss of appetite.Anorexia is a major threat to the body when fighting theseinvaders. In order to summon the strength to stimulate the immunesystem to resist, there must be nourishment. Otherwise, the bodymust consume itself to support the immune system. Ths loss ofappetite, and thus weight, represents a major threat to survival.The weakness from inadequate nutrition leads to immobilization,stasis, and other complications. Many of the therapeutic agents cause anorexia as a sideeffect, further suppressing an already poor appetite. Ken had used cannabis 20 years but only occasionally in socialsituations. Since then, he has come to rely on using it daily tomaintain his appetite while taking the various chemotherapeuticdrugs. Not one to run from a fight, he has been a "guineapig" in many therapeutic research trials that have hadvarying success in beating back the cancer or the fungalinfections. Despite the sensitivity of his lungs from the PCP infectionthat caused him to be hospitalized three years ago for four days,he prefers to smoke cannabis. Two or three puffs of high grade Northern Californiasinsemilla twice or three times a day is sufficient to maintainhis appetite and provide the antidote to the side effects of theantibiotic and other chemotherapeutic agents. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-64IA087-000627-B019-239http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/aidscan1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052947 text/html 11773HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:29:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:08 GMTContent-length: 11555 Cannabis as an Adjunctive Treatment for AIDS RelatedIllness. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Cannabis as an Adjunctive Treatment for AIDS Related Illness. Part 2 By Tod Mikuriya I interviewed Ken at the San Francisco Cannabis Buyers' Club,an illegal medical speakeasy where he comes to buy his marijuana. Ken D. is in a protracted war. For the last nine years thisthirty eight year old married mainframe computer programmer witha degree in accounting has fought the human immunodefficiencyvirus in his body one skirmish, one battle at a time. He is along term survivor, beating the odds. A wiry intelligent man witha neatly trimmed beard to hide the lesions of Kaposi's Sarcoma,KS, a form of cancer with many small colonies growing slowly inhis skin and mouth with itching and discolored patches. His beardalso protects from irritating the inflammation of the skinerupting from the side effects of medications. Mycosis Fungoides is another cancer that primarily affects theskin. Colonies of T lymphocyte type white blood cells turnedcancerous by viruses they ingested grow slowly causing intenseitching. They are killed off by low level localized radiation andchemotherapy. Ken also holds a fungal pneumonia at bay. PneumocystisCarinii, a fungus that is found most everywhere, including normalhealthy lungs without causing symptoms, becomes invasive andtoxic when the immune system is weakened. This is one of manyopportunistic infectious diseases taking advantage of a weakenedimmune system. Oral "thrush", another opportunistic infection fromthe yeast Monilia, causes recurrent sore throat which alsodecreases food intake. He wishes he could work but the terms of his disability statuswould cost him his benefits that see him through his periods ofimmobilization. The chemotherapies are specific designer poisonsto target specific enzyme systems of the cancer cells or thefungus but are debilitating to the body. A major symptom is lossof appetite. Anorexia is a major threat to the body when fightingthese invaders. In order to summon the strength to stimulate theimmune system to resist, there must be nourishment. Otherwise,the body must consume itself to support the immune system. Thusloss of appetite, and thus weight, represents a major threat tosurvival. The weakness from inadequate nutrition leads toimmobilization, stasis, and other complications. Ken, in hisfight against depression, a major component, finds cannabis to bean effective ally as both an appetite stimulant andantidepressant. The itching from the KS and MF, however, isintensified by cannabis, reports Ken, because it makes him moreaware of it. Many of the therapeutic agents cause anorexia as a sideeffect, further suppressing an already poor appetite. Ken had used cannabis 20 years but only occasionally in socialsituations. Since then, he has come to rely on using it daily tomaintain his appetite while taking the various chemotherapeuticdrugs. Not one to run from a fight, he has been a "guineapig" in many therapeutic research trials that have hadvarying success in beating back the cancer or the fungalinfections. Despite the sensitivity of his lungs from the PCP infectionthat caused him to be hospitalized three years ago for four days,he prefers to smoke cannabis. Two or three puffs of high grade Northern Californiasinsemilla using a water pipe twice or three times a day issufficient to maintain his appetite and provide the antidote tothe unwanted effects of the antibiotic and other chemotherapeuticagents. He has tried oral preparations including Marinol butfound that he had difficulty controlling the dose. He wasincapacitated by both cannabis baked in brownies or 10 milligramMarinol capsules. Ken describes himself as being sensitive tocannabis' effects as compared with other social users. For him,the effects of the brownie and Marinol were the same. Having had lengthy association with fellow cannabis users inhis twenty years of experience he acknowledged that it is anindividual thing; the impact of the drug on one's mental statefor some may be adverse. For him? Definitely salutary. The appetite stimulation and antidepressant effects help Kenmaintain his rational, if laconic, intelligent, I'll take it asit comes attitude in his continuing internal lethal war of immunesystem versus virus with opportunistic infectious invaders everseeking to gain advantage. The KS may be seen as a viral invadercausing a specific disseminated cancers that will slowly advanceunless poisoned or radiated. Despite different causes of infectious assault upon the immunesystem be it the Human Immunodefficiency Virus or other viral,parasitic, or bacterial agents, cannabis has a long history ofreputed efficacy in traditional medicine for increasingresistance to endemic infectious diseases in India. In its massive study performed a century ago the Indian HempDrugs Commission took note: "There is a large body of evidence showing that hempdrugs, both as smoked and as drunk, are used as a febrifuge orpreventive of diseases common in malarious tracts or arising frombad water. Cannabis continues to be used in contemporaryAyurvedic Medicine to treat malarial fever." The IHDC in its review of medicinal uses of cannabis discussedone possible mechanism as to utilizing it to ward off febrileillnesses in areas in India reputed to have high danger ofinfection. Cannabis was recommended to be used by manual laborersto promote appetite, enhance endurance, and protect againstillness. Again, the raising of the spirits, or inspiritingprovide a psychic component that accompanies the physical effectsof the drug. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission reviewed Other beneficialeffects: "The drugs are said to be cheering in their effects, andto be prized by many on this account. An interesting illustrationof this may perhaps be found in the popular belief existing inmany parts that these drugs protect against cholera and otherepidemic diseases. One very intelligent witness, who had seenmuch of this use, explains it to as due to the stimulating andinspiriting* nature of the drugs." Expectations and attributes in the language entwine with thepharmacology of the drug in producing its therapeutic (oradverse) effects. This affirmative "popular belief" maybe seen as a factor that favorably affects the physiology of theuser including the immune system in optimizing its resistance tostress. Psychogenic factors play a significant role in themediation of the immune response. Linguistically the Sanskrit and Hindi references are to theattributes of healing, strength, and success: Vijaya victorious Trailokyavijaya victorious in three worlds Indracana Indra's food Jaya victorious Virapattra leaf of heroes Capala the light hearted Ajaya the unconquered Ananda the joyful Harsini the rejoicer vakpradatava speech giving medhakaritva inspiring of mental power creshadipanatva a most excellent excitant These Indian cultural images from a century ago are in brightcontrast with the vulgarized and argot of code, intoxication andincapacitation where the drug is illegal. To a worshiper of Shiva, many of the contemporary terms forcannabis applied to this holy sacrament would be perceived asunintelligible blasphemy if not barbarous obscenity. Notwithstanding today's prohibition language of deviance andintoxication, individuals self-medicating for a variety ofconditions make independent discoveries that affirm attributesdescribed in the medicine of a different culture. Thisindependent discovery in a prohibitionist society seems tosupport pharmacology over placebo effect. Ken has always known his antidepressant and appetite stimulantas marijuana, becoming acquainted with it in a social rather thantherapeutic context. He didn't get to know it as a traditionalmedicine Vijaya or Capala but nevertheless obtains benefit fromcannabis. Postscript: Ken died peacefully ten months later at home withhis wife Mary in attendance who had helped him during his longfight. He began to significantly decline in his energy a monthafter the interview. His legs became increasingly weak andpainful. Morphine was begun six weeks later. Ken managed a tripto Florida but needed to to be in a wheelchair. A month after our interview his anorexia was so severe thatTotal Parenteral Nutrition (TPN) was begun. A permanent tube wasinserted into a large vein for injecting a mixture of nutrients. Six months after the interview the PCP worsened his conditionwith increasing weakness and fatigue. It was felt that the fungushad breached the blood-brain barrier and invaded Ken's brain. Mentally, Ken was free from dementia until six weeks beforehis death with intermittantly but increasingly severedisorientation and confusion. He would be clear for days at atime before becoming totally disoriented and confused. He wouldrecognize that someone was familiar but misidentify as someoneelse. Three weeks before he died he stopped smoking cannabis whichcontinued to ease his nausea and anorexia. Ken became tooconfused and disoriented to light his pipe. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-65IA087-000627-B019-264http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/cpsyrx.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053014 text/html 3558HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:30:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:43 GMTContent-length: 3341 Possible Therapeutic Cannabis Applications for PsychiatricDisor Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Possible Therapeutic Cannabis Applications for PsychiatricDisorders Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. DSM III-R Code Condition 314.01 Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder 312.00 Solitary aggressive type 312.00 Undifferentiated type 313.81 Oppositional defiant disorder 313.xx Anxiety Disorders of Childhood or Adolescence 307.xx Eating Disorders 307.xx Tic Disorders 307.xx Speech Disorders NEC 290.xx Dementias Arising in the Senium and Presenium Psychoactive Substance-Induced Organic Mental Disorders 291.xx Alcoholic withdrawal delirium, hallucinosis, amnestic,etc. 292.xx Other drug withdrawal, delirium, delusional disorder(except 292.11 cannabis delusional disorder) 293.xx, 294.xx, 310.10 Organic Mental Disorders associatedwith Axis III physical disorders or conditions, or whose etiologyis unknown. 304.xx, 305.xx Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders (exceptcannabis) 296.xx, 295.70, 300.40, 311.00 Mood Disorders 300.xx Anxiety Disorders, Somatiform Disorders, DissociativeDisorders 302.xx Sexual Disorders 307.xx Sleep Disorders 312.xx Impulse Control Disorders NEC 309.xx Adjustment Disorder 316.00 Psychological Factors Affecting Physical Condition 301.xx Personality Disorders (Axis II) 4/24/93 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-66IA087-000627-B019-287http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/safeuse.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053034 text/html 5307HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:30:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:45:55 GMTContent-length: 5090 Safe Use of Cannabis (Marijuana) Safe Use of Cannabis by Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. Cannabis, ingested safely, is one of the most useful ofmedicines for a variety of conditions. These include: pain,spasticity, anxiety, depression, headache, nausea, anorexia,epilepsy, asthma, dysmenorrhea, premenstrual tension, withdrawalfrom other drugs, and glaucoma. Ignorantly or imprudently used, cannabis can be harmful. Physical effects. Irritation of the throat and lungs is one of the most obviousadverse effects to the marijuana smoker as is the inevitablecough upon inhaling. The cough is the body's reaction to the irritation of thenumerous constituents of the smoke. Prolonged and repeatedexposure to these irritants can lower resistance to and aggravateinfections from viruses, bacteria, or fungi. The lesser the coughing, the safer the smoke. The fewer puffsthe better. For these reasons, and to reduce harm to the user; better awater pipe of the more potent flower tops of cannabis than ajoint of leaves. Even better: Vaporization. Delta 1,9 tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), psychoactive ingredientof cannabis, is a resin that vaporizes at 155 to 157 degreescentigrade (311-318 degrees Fahrenheit) which is lower than thecombustion point of cellulose: Fahrenheit 451. Any way todecrease exposure of the throat and lungs to products of burningreduces harm to the cannabis user. Dosage and Route of Administration Starting with a small amount and gradually increasing thedose is the key to avoiding unwanted mental side effects. This iscalled titration- self-titration if adjusted by the user. Mental Effects Impatience and overdosing with oral cannabis is the mostfrequent mention of the drug in medical literature of the 1800's.Oral cannabis overdoseage is much more intense and longer lastingthan from the inhaled route. Because of the two to three hoursbefore onset of effects, a common mistake of the inexperienced isto repeat the oral dose with the consequence of overdosing. Overdoseage Should you take too much cannabis you may expect the mentaleffects of time distortion, racing thoughts, disorientation,speeding heart rate, dry mouth, and reddened eyes. The greaterthe dose, the greater intensity and longer these stimulanteffects will last before sinking into a deep sleep. No lastingharm will result but the experience will not be forgotten. Other Adverse Effects Other adverse mental effects are a prolonged dullness afteruse or paranoia and a fear of loss of control. Cannabis, aneffective relaxant, can cause an alienation or detachment. Theprice of relief of tension may be a dulling or suppression offeelings. Insensitivity to feelings of others or situations mayresult. Set and Setting The result of the drug is a combination of set(expectations), setting, personality, and the drug. Best case: Enjoying a puff or two sitting at home with afriend at the end of the day. Worst case: Taking a puff driving down the freeway, thenlooking sideways into the eyes of a cop. Personality and Individual Difference Individuals with personalities that are prone to substanceabuse, allergy, sensitivity, or adverse reactions to othermedicines should exert greater caution and try the drug only ifabsolutely necessary. Dependence & Withdrawal Because cannabis is such an effective medicine for the reliefof many uncomfortable conditions, using the drug on a continuingbasis is not uncommon. One must decide issues of personalrisks/benefits of continuing using cannabis. Withdrawal from chronic cannabis use produces several nightsof more intense dreaming and possibly some slightly increasednervousness during the day. Some increase in exercise, ifpossible, and/or small amounts of other sedatives will ease thetransition from cannabis dependence. Cannabis- a Tool Cannabis is a tool like other drugs; useful for many peopleif informed of its effects. with realistic expectations,responsibility and common sense. There is a range of appropriateuse: from total avoidance to using cannabis several times a day. Because of current uncertainty of supply from it's illicitstatus there can be great variability in strength. Draft 5 11/24/93 Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-67IA087-000627-B020-11http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/csafety.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053046 text/html 4836HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:30:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:19 GMTContent-length: 4619 Consuming Cannabis (Marijuana) Safely ConsumingCannabis Safely Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D.* Oral vs Inhalation Cannabis may be ingested orally or inhaled. Users of cannabisusually inhale. Inhalation may be smoked or vaporized.Marinol'sfixed dose increment form is, for some patients, suboptimal forinduction Gradual upward adjustment from a minimal initial dose over aperiod of days was the standard of practice with cannabis extractprior to removal in 1940 from prescriptive availability. Anecdotal reports of users of both Marinol and cannabisdescribe enhancement or constructive supplementation. Others whohave tried both have described cannabis as superior to Marinol.The inhalation route is significantly more consistentlyeffective. Marinol (dronabinol) synthetic delta -9tetrahydrocannabinol dissolved in sesame oil. Supplied in fixeddoses of 2.5, 5.0 and 10.0 milligram soft gelatin capsules. Takenorally. Cannabis extract: 9 known delta -9 Tetrahydrocannabinols 2 known delta -8 Tetrahydrocannabinols 50 other cannabinoids that may interact with or modifyreactions with the Tetrahydrocannabinols, the primary activeprinciples. ( Source: Marijuana and Health Institute of Medicine,National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1982, P13-15) Oral ingestion of either cannabis or Marinol is characterizedby: delayed onset of effects variable level of effects prolonged effects Inhalation is characterized by: quick onset of effects consistent level of effects shorter lasting effects. Inhalation: Vaporization vs Smoke Significant irritants and toxic products of combustionaccompany smoking and can be minimized by vaporizing thecannabinoids contained within the plant materials.Tetrahydrocannabinols vaporize at 400 Fahrenheit while cellulosecombusts at 451 F. Two crude vaporizer prototypes have beensuccessfully demonstrated: a modified manually operated autocigarette lighter element, and a heat gun for electronic shrinktubing set at 400 F. Unfortunately, vaporizers are currentlydefined by law as illegal paraphernalia, a citable offense. Inhalation: Smoking: Harm Reduction Considerations Contrary to anti-marijuana statements that more potent orstronger material is more dangerous, the opposite is true.Admittedly cannabis smoke is irritating to the throat and lungs.The less exposure the better. The more potent, the less exposureis needed for effect. The potency before prohibition of medicinalcannabis was greater than any illicit cannabis available- so far. For those using the drug infrequently or are sensitive tocannabis, the lower potency of inexpensive illicit canabis may besuitable. The cooler, cleaner, and further the better. A bong or water pipe is the best, a long pipe better than ashort pipe, a long joint better than a roach. Not sharing a smoke is safer than passing it around andpossibly contracting infections diseases. Never had it before? Use it with a friend who has. Find asafe, quiet, and private place. Relax, and let the drug take itseffect. Never use cannabis before or during driving or otheractivities that need your full attention. Clinical Research Needed Only clinical research comparing Marinol to otherTetrahydrocannabinols and cannabinoids for therapeutic efficacycan clarify this controversy. Tentative and preliminary clinical findings indicate asignificant difference between Marinol and natural crude cannabispreparations in favor of the crude product. Route ofadministration and fixed incremental dosage may be factors incomparative efficacy and unwanted effects. April 13, 1994 Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-68IA087-000627-B020-40http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medhemp1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053114 text/html 5075HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:30:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:18 GMTContent-length: 4858 Medicinal Uses of Hemp Drugs (Marijuana) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Medicinal Uses of Hemp Drugs Tod Mikuriya, M.D. Introduced into western medicine in 1839 by WilliamO'Shaughnessey, M.D., hemp drugs attained wide uses. Sedative,analgesic, and antispasmodic therapeutic qualities of this uniquesubstances combine efficacy and low toxicity. Despite contemporary scientific protestations as to the lackof substantive knowledge, a background of substantive clinicaland scientific data remains largely forgotten. Because current drug laws preclude general clinical use,review of medicinal, pharmaceutical, and social pre-prohibitionis requisite to understanding its medicinal utility. Bereft ofactual clinical experience with the drug its understanding hasbecome largely retrograde and atrophic. Reefer madness signals were substituted for pharmacy. Cannabisbecame marihuana. The Drug Enforcement Agency has continued theofficial fictions, a side effect of national marijuanaprohibition of 1937. Despite official denial and statements to the contrary,significant evidence exists that hemp drugs are effective as: Relaxant/sedative Antidepressant Analgesic/antispasmodic Child birth aid Intraocular hypotensive Appetite stimulant Hypothermogenic Alcohol substitute Withdrawal agent for sedative dependence Topical antibiotic Clinical efficacy before its' removal from availability asreported in the literature is variable as with most medicationsused in many conditions. One of the most frequently mentioned inmedical texts of the 1900's was migraine headache. The effects of hemp drugs on the individual and society hasbeen one of the most extensively studied drugs in history. 1893-5 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission 1931 Panama Canal Military Study 1938-44 Mayors' Committee on Marihuana (New York) 1973 National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse 1980 National Academy of Science Study 1990 California Research Advisory Panel The effects of politics upon the findings of commissionstudies in the U.S. by presidents, prosecutors, and governmentattorneys has been devastating. All of the findings and thestudies themselves have been rejected, ignored, or suppressed. The latest disgraces in a public policy based upon resultantdebased information have been wrought by the recent federalpolicies of withholding hemp drugs from AIDS victims. The RESTORATION OF HEMP MEDICAL PREPARATIONS TO LIST OFAVAILABLE MEDICINES IN CALIFORNIA; DECLARATION OF POLICYinitiative seeks to correct this bad and harmful policy. Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. Psychiatrist Former Director Marijuana Research National Institute of Mental Health 7-14-91 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-69IA087-000627-B020-70http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mjmedhb.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053138 text/html 60657HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:31:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:11 GMTContent-length: 60439 Marijuana Medical Handbook Marijuana Medical Handbook by Tod Mikuriya, M.D. DRAFT Sedative Effects Continued Use exhibits a much more controlled pattern of moodmanagement through a mild stimulation with low repeated inhaleddoses. Modulation of emotional reactivity appears to be anothersignificant desired effect of cannabis. The net effects for thecontinuing moderate user are a unique combination of moodelevation with a decrease in anxiety that is easily controlled. Antidepressant The ancient Greek, Indian, Persian, writings are replete withdescriptions of antidepressant properties: Homer's Odyssey describes Helen using a potion obtained fromPolydamna that lifted the spirits at a morose gathering byslipping Nepenthe in the wine. Nepenthe means "againstsorrow" . Samscrit and Hindi writings characterize cannabis: Before the 8th century an anti phlegmatic, Circa 1050:victorious (Vijaya), and victorious in three worlds(Trailokyavijaya). 1300 A.D. in The Rajanighantu of Narahari Pandita: the lighthearted (Capala), the joyful (Ananda), the rejoicer (Harsini),speech giving (vakpradatva) inspiring of mental power(medhakaritva), and a most excellent excitant (cresthadipanatva). 17th Century Materia Medica The Rajavallabha: "Itcreates vital energy, the mental powers, and internal heat,corrects irregularities of the phlegmatic humour, and is anelixir vitae." In contemporary terms a case of severe and chronic depressionmay have been successfully treated through self medication withcannabis. The Persian physician Mirza Abdool Rhazes wrote:"Theoldest work in which Hemp is noticed is a treatise by Hasan, whostates that in the year 658 (Mahometan era)(1258), the SheikhDjafar Shirazi, a monk of the order of Haider, learnt from hismaster the history of the discovery of Hemp. Haider, the chief ofascetics and self-chasteners, lived in rigid privation on amountain between Nishabor and Romah, where he established amonastery of Fakirs. Ten years he had spent in his retreat,without leaving it for a moment, till one burning summer's day,when he departed alone to the fields. On his return an air of joyand gaiety was imprinted on his countenance; he received thevisits of his brethren, and encouraged their conversation. Onbeing questioned, he stated that: struck by the aspect of a plantwhich danced in the heat as if with joy, while all the rest ofthe vegetable creation was torpid, he had gathered and eaten ofit's leaves. He led his companions to the spot, all ate, and allwere similarly excited. A tincture of the Hemp leaf in wine orspirit seems to have been the favorite formula in which theSheikh Haider indulged himself. An Arab poet sings of Haider'semerald cup; an evident allusion to the rich green colour of thetincture of the drug. The Sheikh survived the discovery tenyears, subsisting chiefly on this herb, and on his death hisdisciples by his desire planted it in an arbour about his tomb.From this saintly sepulcher the knowledge of the effects of Hempis stated to have spread into Khorasan." In 1845 J.J. Moreau de Tours, a French psychiatrist utilizedcannabis in the treatment of depression described the drug'seffects: "It seems that nothing can hurt you in this peace ofmind, that you are inaccessible to sadness. I doubt that the mostunfortunate news could draw you out of that imaginary bliss,which can only be appreciated through experience. I have just attempted to give an idea of the delights thathashish produces. I hasten to add that I have presented them herein no more than raw form, as it were, and at their simplest. Itwill depend upon external circumstances to confer upon thesefeelings of happiness still greater intensity by directing themtoward a determined goal and by concentrating them on a singlepoint. One imagines what reality can add to this state of blissand how much the joys of hashish can be enhanced by externalimpressions, by direct sensory excitations, or by the stirring ofpassions through natural causes. At that time, the rapture ofhashish intoxication, taking shape and form, will assume thedimensions of delirium. This disposition of the mind, linked withanother which I will discuss later, was, I feel, the fertilesource from which the fanatic inhabitants of Lebanon derived thathappiness, those ineffable delights for which they gladlysacrificed their lives. It is necessary here to clarify what I have just said. It isreally happiness that hashish gives, and by that I mean mentaljoy, not sensual joy as one might be tempted to believe. This isindeed very curious, and one can draw strange conclusions- thisone among others, that all joy, all contentment, even though itscause is strictly mental, deeply spiritual, and highlyidealistic, could well be in reality a purely physical sensation,developed physiologically, exactly like those caused by hashish.At least, if one relies on inner feelings, there is nodistinction to be made between these two orders of sensations, inspite of the diversity of the causes to which they are relatedfor the hashish user is happy, not in the manner of the glutton,of the ravenous man who satisfies his appetite, or even of thehedonist who gratifies his desires, but in the manner, forexample, of the man who hears news that compounds his joys, ofthe miser counting his treasures, of the gambler whom luckfavors, or the ambitious man whom success intoxicates. However, the preceding remarks were not intended to raise apsychological question. I am merely recording observations, andhave no other pretension than that of being the faithful andexact historian of my sensations." This characterization ofthe antidepressant effects of the drug in contemporary contextswould be unthinkable pro drug sedition and would never be foundin any advertisement. Depression as one of the conditions listed for treatmentappeared in general Materia Medica, or medical texts , , , Subsequent clinical use in depression is described as havingvariable results. Clouston in 1871 from the Cumberland andWestmoreland asylum reported on five cases of melancholy withsome success in four and marked improvement in one. Villarddescribes similar variable results in melancholia by physiciansin France. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission in 1894 reviewedmedical literature, testimony by both indigenous medicalpractitioners and Western trained physicians and describedcannabis to be used as a tonic to increase stamina, Cannabis decreases emotional reactivity and intensity ofaffect while increasing introspection as evidenced by the slowingof the EEG after initial stimulation. The unique sedative effectsof cannabis then begin to prevail. Obsessive and pressuredthinking give way to introspective free associations when inrelaxed circumstances. Emotional reactivity is smoothed out,worries are less pressing. The alteration of time perceptionrelieves the "hurry sickness". Analgesic Effects Two thousand years ago Chinese used cannabis in high doses toinduce a state of altered consciousness to permit major surgery.The analgesic effects of cannabis, which are less potent than theopiates, appear in part to be from decreased affectivereactivity, which is modulated by altered time perception. "During the time that this remarkable drug is relievingpain a very curious psychical condition sometimes manifestsitself; namely, that the diminution of pain seems to be due toits fading into the distance, so that the pain in a delicate earwould grow less and less as a beaten drum was carried farther andfarther out of the range of hearing. This condition is probably associated with the other wellknown symptom produced by the drug, namely, the prolongation oftime." Cannabis was mentioned in most general medical textsas an analgesic but with lesser potency than the opiates. Different types of pain respond differently to cannabis.Review of clinical literature discloses two general categoriesthat respond affirmatively: Intermittent spasmodic pain andinflammation. (See table 1) Migraine Headache is a specific type of pain for whichcannabis was first described to be useful by J. Russell Reynolds. After some thirty years clinical experience after this initialobservation, he described "Migraine: very many victims havefor years kept their sufferings in abeyance by taking hemp at themoment of threatening, or onset of the attack." In Osler'smedical text it was the treatment of choice for migraineheadache. The most recent (and last) mention of cannabis for thetreatment of migraine was from Morris Fishbein, M.D., Editor ofthe Journal of the American Medical Association in 1942. Cannabis was compared with alcohol in cross-culturalcomparisons in India. Daru vs Bhang. G. Morris Carstairsdescribed differences in emotional reactivity: contrast ofcannabis comparable effects of alcohol intoxication thatincreases emotional reactivity. Cannabis cools the passions.Alcohol inflames them. I have never heard of a pot room brawl. Physical Effects: Reddened Eyes: Increased Blood Circulation to the Brain Moreau in his description of the clinical pharmacologicaleffects on the brain were to increase blood circulation duringeffects of the drug. The phenomenon of dilated eye blood vessels with cannabisintoxication has been described extensively in writings on thedrug. The meninges, the membrane covering the brain, covers theexternal eye. (except for the corneal area) The reddened eyesrepresent a general increase in cerebral blood flow (CBF). Thisincrease in blood circulation is due to decreased peripheralresistance from dilation of the capillaries in the cerebralcortex. CBF changes reflect mental effects; increased CBF:stimulation of cognition, decreasing CBF: sedation. Chronic heavyusers appear to have decreased CBF when deprived of the drug. Circulation and Heart Rate Increased heart rate is due to central nervous systemmodulation of the tenth cranial nerve (the vagus nerve). Thereare no direct effects on the heart's electrical conduction systemnor general peripheral vasodilation. Heart rate increase is doserelated but not greater than moderate exercise. Orthostatic hypotension which takes place with some cannabisusers is due to a transient lag in changes in the muscle tensionin artery walls when standing up after sitting or lying down. Itis a feeling of faintness or dizziness that is relieved bysitting or reclining. This phenomenon is due to effects ofinterfering with the reflex response readjusting the muscletension in arterial walls. Again, mediated through the vagusnerve. Glaucoma Hepler and Frank in 1971 serindipitously discovered thatMarijuana smoking significantly lowered pressure in the eyeballin 9 of 11 normal subjects. Frederick Blanton, M.D. , A Floridaophthalmologist in private practice read about Hepler and Frank'sfindings and tried cannabis in the form of marijuana spikedbrownies and marijuana cigarettes in 100 administrations withpositive results as compared to pilocarpine. In his series of 20glaucoma patients their intraocular pressure was dropped from anaverage of 25 to 18 mm Hg*. (Which is from the moderatelyelevated to a normal value) Rather than being greeted by hiscolleagues and the medical profession he was censured by hiscounty medical society and suspended for 6 months. The Hepler andFrank team in a legal controlled study at U.C.L.A. confirmed DrBlanton's findings. Robert Randall, a sufferer of glaucoma, after his arrest forcultivation for personal use, successfully sued the federalgovernment on the basis of medical necessity and is currentlymaintained on cannabis supplied by the National Institute on DrugAbuse. He continues to hold his symptoms at bay through smokingmarijuana but if he attempts to stop experiences characteristicsymptoms of "halo" effects around lights and eye pain.These symptoms cease when he starts inhaling marijuana smokeagain. Asthma The contradictory properties of irritation to the throat andlungs causing bronchitis and the antiasthmatic effectsacknowledged by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission: "In asthma and bronchitis inhalation of ganja smokeappears to be very frequently prescribed; while on the otherhand, there is evidence which tends to indicate that bothaffections may be induced by charas or ganja smoking indulged inas a habit." In Western medicine where the smoked route was rarelyemployed cannabis was described as effective in controllingasthma and cough. Since cannabis Prohibition the same seeminglyparadoxical properties have been confirmed. Topical Effects Cannabis resin, with the consistency of pine pitch, insolublein water is irritating to tissues although it has some topicalanesthetic properties. The crude plant also has bactericidalproperties. Tracheobronchial Tree and Lungs Because the most common route of administration is the smokedroute irritation to these organs is a safety concern. Theadditional products from burning are undeniably irritating.Animal experiments indicate that cannabis is different fromtobacco in its irritating effects on the lungs. The frequentlyheard coughing fits of the cannabis smoker give irrefutableinvoluntary vocal testimony to this undesirable side effect fromsmoking cannabis. Topical Applications Aside from contact dermatitis in hemp harvesters andprocessors at high levels of exposure, some allergenicindividuals react similarly to exposure to small amounts ofcannabis. The powdered crude plant is moistened and applied toarthritic joints. Concentrated cannabis resin is topical anesthetic. Applieddirectly to a nerve, the electrical impulses are inhibited. Itwas mentioned as used on dental caries for treatment of pain. Prior to removal from the market it was combined withsalicylic acid, a proteolytic agent, and collodion to keep it inplace for callus removal on feet. [insert Corn Remedy Advertisement] Although cannabis is water insoluble powdered cannabis hasbeen moistened and applied as a poultice to arthritic joints. Cannabis powder has also been used as a topical antisepticapplied to wounds to promote healing and prevent infection. The antibiotic properties of cannabis appears to be in thecannabidiolic acid and cannabidiol Increased Appetite Cannabis has been recognized as an appetite stimulant forhundreds of years in non-western medicine. Mirza Abdool Rhazes,"a most intelligent Persian physician...considers Hemp to bea powerful exciter of the flow of bile, and relates cases of itsefficacy in restoring appetite.." " "produces ahealthy appetite,..digestive, easy of digestion,..and thedigestive faculty" . During its' century long prescriptive availability beforebeing taken off the market, stimulation of appetite wasfrequently described, as a secondary effect during its use as ananalgesic or sedative in comparison with the opiates. McConnellin 1888 specifically described success in treating anorexia"One of the conditions in which the drug has proved usefulin his hands is anorexia- loss of appetite consequent uponexhausting diseases such as prolonged fevers, diarrhoea,dysentery, phthisis, etc." Appetite Stimulant Antidiarrheal Laxative Lees described the drug as a mild stimulant to overcomeconstipation and gastritis that is nervous in origin Antiemetic Anticonvulsant With the introduction of cannabis to Western medicine in 1838 Consroe and Sandyk 507 TABLE 1 Reported Effects of Marijuana Treatment on Features ofNeurological Disorders Described in the 19th Century and PossibleContemporary Analogies to These Neurological Disorders Disorders of the Contemporary Effect of 19th century disorders marijuana Convulsions: recurrent. Tonic-clonic seizures: Benefit general, tonic. clonic generalized epilepsy Convulsions: petit mal Absence seizures: generalized epilepsy No effect Spasms of torticollis torticollis; and Dystonic movements: spasmodic No effect writer's cramp writer`s cramp Rheumatic chorea: Choreic movements: Sydenham`s Benefit; generalized chorea chorea: Huntinpton`s chorea no effect Tremor of paralysis agitans Resting tremor: No effect Parkinson`s disrase I Tonic painful spasms; jerky Spasticity and Ataxia: Benefit movements of spinal sclerosis spinal cord injury: no effect multiple sclerosis Pain of neuropathy. Sustained pain: No effect e.g. sciatica neuropathic pain Pain of neuropathy Paroxysmal pain,trigeminal neuralgia neuropathic pain Benefit Migraine headache Migraine headache Benefit Analgesic ANTIINFLAMMATORY- Systemic First described by O'Shaughnessy in the treatment of acuteand chronic arthritis in 1839, Clendinning confirmed the findingsin 4 of his 18 patients in 1843. Acute rheumatism wassuccessfully treated by Buckingham in 1858 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug: Similar chemical structure to steroids [Insert chemical structure diagram] Lipid metabolic pathway of the Eicosanoids Release of Prostaglandin and decrease of PG production. Inhibition of healing of viral infection Antagonism of marihuana effects by indomethacin Post traumatic Arthritis Auto immune Diseases Nail Patellar Tooth Charcot Marie Tooth Drusen of Optic Nerve Cough Suppressant Clendinning in 1843 described 18 cases of whom 6 presentedwith cough- both acute and chronic that responded favorably tocannabis. In addition to mention in most Materia Medica andgeneral medical literature as an antitussive, cannabis wasincluded in proprietary cough medicine like Piso's cough curethat were available until 1937. Antiasthmatic effects are described with both oral and smokedroutes of administration although the bronchitis from chronic usewas recognized as an undesirable side effect. It was recognized to be useful "in some cases ofSpasmodic Asthma" Antipruritic Chronic and acute itching appear to respond well to cannabisand is mentioned in several general medical texts. Grinspoon andBaklar in Marijuana Forbidden Medicine reports a case ofself-medication with marijuana for intractable itching. Alcohol, Opioid, and Sedative Substitute Harm reduction through substitution Clendinning also must be credited with substituting cannabisfor opium dependence in 4 of the 18 cases reported. Mattison in1891 described cannabis as treatment of choice for the treatmentof opiate and alcohol dependence and cautioned the practitionerto think twice before resorting to prolonged opiate use for pain:"Would that the wisdom which has come to their professionalfathers through, it maybe, a hapless experience, might serve themto steer clear of narcotic shoals on which many a patient hasgone awreck. Indian hemp is not here lauded as a specific. It will attimes, fail. So do other drugs. But the many cases in which itacts well, entitle it to a large and lasting confidence." Withdrawal and Substitute For Alcohol, Opioids, Sedatives,and Nicotine Three of Clendinning's cases were withdrawal from alcoholdependence . Birch in 1889 and Mattison described cannabis asuseful in withdrawal from and substitute for chronic chloral andchronic opium dependence. Reed described cannabis for thetreatment of nicotinism Febrifuge The mention in the 17th century Persian medical textMakhzan-el-Adwiya as "imparting a gentle heat, and then aconsiderable refrigerant effect." The Indian Hemp DrugsCommission took note: There is a large body of evidence showingthat hemp drugs, both as smoked and as drunk, are used as afebrifuge or preventive of diseases common in malarious tracts orarising from bad water." Cannabis continues to be used incontemporary Ayurvedic Medicine to treat malarial fever. Clendinning in 1843 described effectiveness in the treatmentof four cases of febrile illness. While this property of cannabis went largely unnoticed byWestern medicine, it was rediscovered in the classified Armyresearch done from 1954 - 1959 reported by Van M. Sim, M.D.,chief of the Edgewood Arsenal research program in an interview:"The tetrahydrocannabinols also are capable of lowering thebody temperature three to four degrees centigrade underconditions of severe hyperpyrexia." While Dr Sim is creditedwith getting the findings declassified, at this writing there hasbeen no clinical follow-up. Sedative The sedative and sleep inducing properties of cannabis weredescribed in both general and medical literature as the end phaseafter an initial stimulation. Edes while unsuccessfully treating headache relieved apatient of nightmares. As late as 1937 it was officiallydescribed by the American Medical Association as being"...the average physician will readily admit that Indianhemp is employed in various preparations for internal use as asedative and antispasmodic" Hindu and Persian writings givemany different accounts of the biphasic effects of the drug. Thelegendary nepenthe in Greek mythology may have been cannabis. Uterine stimulant and contracting agent Hashish was discovered in an ancient tomb in Israel; a womanwho ha apparently died in chilbirth . Used in Africa by thesmoked route. Studied by Christison , Willis , Dey, Stille", Grigor , and Batho all reported help with uterine dysfunctionas well as stimulation of labor. Treatment of dysmenorrhea andpremenstrual syndrome (PMS) . Aphrodisiac and sexual aid While controversial, the alleged aphrodisiac properties arementioned frequently in the Indian literature, there have neverbeen any definitive studies. A book was devoted to the sexualpower of marijuana. Sex and drugs continue to have continuing andcomplex relationships. Psychological Research Tool With the development of the philosophy and psychology of theindividual with scientific methodology in the mid 19th century,the study of effects of cannabis on the mind were diverse.O'Shaughnessy's opening of a medical transcultural portal withhis 1838 monograph, On the Preparations of the Indian Hemp, orGunja (Cannabis Indica) Their Effects on the Animal Systems inHealth, and Their Utility in the Treatment of Tetanus and OtherConvulsive Diseases a timeless paradigm of modern scientificmethod. Review of the literature, social observation, animalstudies, healthy human studies, and effects with diseases.Psychotropic effects of cannabis were a salient aspect of thisdrug which was new to western medicine. This basic primaryknowledge disseminated throughout medical and lay literature sawa diverse application of cannabis' effects on the mind. John Stuart Mill suggested using cannabis for the recall offorgotten memories. Moreau de Tours described study of the effects to mimicmental illness, self administration to experientially understandpathologic mental states of dementia, mania, and delusionalconditions suffered by patients. He also recommended personallyexperiencing the effects of therapeutic drugs in order to be amore empathetic and effective clinician. Self-study through theeffects of cannabis was not only acceptable but necessary for aproper understanding of the drug. Bell proposed its use in the treatment of mania, dementia,and melancholia and cited Moreau's model of simulation ofdifferent forms of mental disorder. Kubie and Margolin described cannabis as useful in recoveringrepressed memories during dissociative mental states caused bythe drug. Rolls and Stafford-Clark described success with the useof a single session cannabis experience in the treatment of acase of depersonalization where pentobarbital and methamphetaminenarcosynthesis had failed. These properties of cannabis and the disruption of cognitionat higher dose were evaluated as chemical weapons by the secretgovernment research from 1947 through 1977 . It was an originalcandidate as an aid in interrogation designated the "TruthDrug" TD Therapeutic Power of Cannabis: A General Theory Effects of any drug are more than the pharmacology. Theeffects include the set (or expectations), setting, physical andpsychological makeup of the user. The set and setting includesthe culture which is expressed in its language. Semantics andpharmacology define the drug. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission reviewed Other beneficialeffects: "The drugs are said to be cheering in their effects, andto be prized by many on this account. An interesting illustrationof this may perhaps be found in the popular belief existing inmany parts that these drugs protect against cholera and otherepidemic diseases. One very intelligent witness, who had seenmuch of this use, explains it to as due to the stimulating andinspiriting* nature of the drugs." This semantic attitudinal component is synergistic with thepharmacology of the drug in producing its therapeutic effects.This affirmative "popular belief" may be seen as afactor that favorably affects the physiology of the userincluding the immune system in optimizing its resistance tostress. Psychogenic factors play a significant role in themediation of the immune response. Linguistically the Sanskrit and Hindi references are to theattributes of healing, strength, and success: Vijaya victorious Trailokyavijaya victorious in three worlds Indracana Indra's food Jaya victorious Virapattra leaf of heroes Capala the light hearted Ajaya the unconquered Ananda the joyful Harsini the rejoicer vakpradatava speech giving medhakaritva inspiring of mental power creshadipanatva a most excellent excitant With these product images of cannabis the set andexpectations are not of forbidden deviance or illicit sensualpleasure implicit in the contemporary argot- marijuana. The fact that medical marijuana was "discovered"despite the heavy prohibitionist censorship and pejorativesemantics in descriptions of characteristics of the drug atteststo the significant and strong pharmacological component of thetherapeutic effects of cannabis. I am left with the question as to the relationship betweensocial, psychological, and physical elements; the sequence, andeventual accomodation. At this writing the salient problem is ageneralized ignorance within the medical and scientificcommunities resulting from unavailability for clinical use- aserious case of disuse atrophy. The vaccuum of clinicalexperience with cannabis has been filled by poisonous fiction.Medline, the computer data base of medical and scientificabstracts and listings memorializes (if memorialize can be saidof volatile and evanescent data bases) the absence of therapeuticapplications. This temporocentric window of a decade or less onthe topic of cannabis is a poisonous memory hole. Drug policybased upon this structurally mandated ignorance is harmful andstupid. A social form of dementia. This ignorance is thendefended by the policy makers as they make wrongheaded andharmful decisions that perpetuate these policies. These arecollective delusional behaviors. The courts, prosecutors, andpolice play an excessively active role in facilitating andperpetuating- if not actively perpetrating this social illness.On the tricentennial of the Salem Witch Trials Satan is alive andwell; fed on the demonology of Prohibition. William Bennett,first recent Drug Czar designate of the United States, proclaimedSatan as etiology of drug woes. Marijuana, Hashish, Cannabis, or Hemp?: What's in a Name? Only with reluctance I have chosen to utilize the termmarijuana over cannabis or hemp drugs because of its contemporarymeanings. Etymologically, one sees this distinction in the 1839paper by O'Shaughessey "The term "marihuana" is a mongrel word thathas crept into this country over the Mexican border and has nogeneral meaning, except as it relates to Cannabis preparationsfor smoking. It is not recognized in medicine..." testifiedWilliam C. Woodward, M.D., lobbyist for the American MedicalAssociation before congress at hearings for the 1937 MarihuanaTax act that ended the medicinal use of cannabis after acentury's availability. But one finds this in medical and scientific literature notlisted under marijuana- but under cannabis or hemp drugs. Notwithstanding the availability of one of the activeprinciples, delta 1, 9 tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol)dissolved in sesame oil, (Marinol) since 1986 as a schedule IIdrug with approved applications as an antiemetic for side effectsof cancer chemotherapy and since 1993 for AIDS wasting syndrome.The numerous other medicinal uses of cannabis- or hemp drugsremain largely undocumented and unreported (including use ofMarinol for applications not authorized under federal law butpermitted under California law) The chilling effect of policiesof the federal Drug Enforcement Administration and its precursorssince the removal of cannabis from the U.S. Pharmacopeia andNational Formulary in 1940 continues to maintain the fiction thatcannabis drugs have no medicinal uses. Unfortunately this harmful fiction has devastatingconsequences for the many patients with serious painfuldebilitating and lethal conditions. The poisonous immoral,illicit and illegal image of marijuana has caused numeroussufferers to reject efficacious treatment with cannabinoids. When in consultations with elderly patients in profferingMarinol to patients for anorexia, nausea, and vomiting, anoccasional victim rejects the "pot" pill "becauseit is wrong", I curse the deluded ignorance of ourcontemporary medical and scientific realities distorted byputting prosecutors and police in charge of medical decisions.Sick? Call a cop. The Future of Marijuana lies in the Past Our contemporary font of knowledge of the therapeutic uses ofcannabis is poisoned by official moralistic lies and censorship.Besides the immediate toxicity of inappropriate withholding ofthe drug, the resulting loss of credibility of these statementsby those with personal experience diminishes trust and belief inthe sources. Thus the clinical research reported by medicinebefore marijuana prohibition in 1937 becomes even more important. Contemporary perseverative voices claiming "We don'tknow enough to proceed further!" merely articulate theirignorance of the existing clinical literature. Just below the layer of fouled and distorted information ofthe present lies a convincing body of objective clinicalinformation on therapeutic attributes of the drug. Cannabis in Western Medicine Introduced to Western medicine by Sir William B.O'Shaughnessey, M.D. in 1839 , he acknowledged both medical andnon-medical uses and confirmed previous observations cited inearlier literature: "...the kind of mental excitement itproduces depends on the temperament of the consumer." anobservation described in 1695 in Rumphius Herbarium Amboinense .O'Shaughnessy, not confining himself to the minimal informationin contemporary Western medical literature, turned to Ayurvedic,Persian, and Arabic systems for additional descriptions: The pre-synthetic era pharmaceutical industry confrontedproblems with wide variations in potency of differentpreparations of cannabis. The descriptions of inadvertentoverdose with the drug are the most numerous in medicalliterature of the 19th century. A clinical protocol whose applicability transcends time andtechnologic innovation is that of Sir J. Russell Reynolds, M.D.,F.R.S. in 1890: "The dose should be given in minimum quantity, repeatedin not less than four or six hours, and gradually increased byone drop every third or fourth day, until either relief isobtained, or the drug is proved, in such case, to beuseless." This patient, prudent, and cautious regimen by this physicianto Queen Victoria's court summarized his thirty years of clinicalexperience with the drug. The Reynolds Protocol should be usedwhenever possible. Patience is of prime importance since it compensates foridiosyncratic sensitivity, lengthy onset time when taken orally,and variability in potency of the preparation. In the 1800's, Transportation, storage, handling, shipping,and processing problems caused significant variation in potencyfrom one sample to another. Today, the illicit market forcannabis produces similar variability. Unlike a century ago, a salient issue is the availability ofthe crude drug in quantities adequate for continued personaltherapeutic trial. A Legal Cannabinoid: Marinol Marinol* Roxane Laboratories, Inc. , a synthetic singletetrahydrocannabinol dissolved in sesame oil (dronabinol) indoses of 2.5, 5.0, and 10.0 milligram soft gelatin capsules maybe quite useful in some cases. A schedule II drug requiring atriplicate prescription, it is restricted for use in nausea andvomiting for side effects in cancer chemotherapy, and (since12/93) AIDS wasting syndrome. In my clinical experience with Marinol it has been useful notonly in these indicated conditions and also in the treatment ofdepression, insomnia, agitation, muscle spasm, migraine headacheand pain. For others, Marinol is either ineffectual or producesundesirable side effects. With some who experience side effectsit is due to improper administration. Route of Administration: Inhalation vs Oral. If at all possible, the oral route is preferable since thethroat and lungs are not irritated by the drug. The clinicalmedical literature and pharmaceutical catalogs prior to theremoval of cannabis in 1937 indicates the oral route was themedicinal standard. While crude powdered cannabis was availablethrough pharmacies that could be smoked, it was apparentlyminimal compared with the use of tinctures (alcoholic solutionsof cannabis) and extracts (cannabis resin). In addition, cannabiswas added to sedative mixtures that would contain combinations ofother plant extracts and bromine salts. Advantages of the oral route * No irritation to throat and lungs * Stable levels of the drug * Lengthy period of action Disadvantages of the oral route * Difficult to estimate dosage with single doses * Once eaten, the dose cannot be adjusted * Slow onset of effects * Dependent on activity and content of stomach and smallintestines * Lengthy period of action * Slow wearing off of effects * Inefficient use of the drug With an empty stomach in a relaxed situation, effects maystart in a an hour or so. The length of action is related to thedosage or sensitivity. With a small dose some three or fourhours, with a large dose twelve or more hours. The intensity of mental effects is directly dose related. Inhalation: Smoking Smoking, while traditionally associated with social orrecreational use, may be desirable for certain users butunsuitable for others. The advantages to inhalation are: * Rapid onset of effects- a minute or less * Accurate adjustment of dose * Fast disappearance of effects * Efficient use of drug * Not effected by contents of stomach or intestines * Not impeded by liver * Difficult- if not impossible to overdose Smoking: Minimizing Harm Pharmacologically, as with most things there is no freelunch; smoked crude cannabis is undeniably irritating to thethroat and lungs. If the user opts for the smoked use of cannabisreducing harm is possible. The stronger, cooler and cleaner the better. The more potent the cannabis, the less the throat and lungsare exposed to irritating impurities as fewer puffs are neededfor the desired effects. The further away from the mouth andthroat, the cooler the smoke which decreases irritation both bythe heat, itself, and by the mix of compounds carried in thesmoke. Bubbled through water, water soluble irritants arelessened. Irritation from smoked cannabis can be minimized by using awater pipe which will absorb some of the unwanted impurities andcool the smoke. The cooler the smoke, the less irritation. Theuse of hand rolled cannabis cigarettes "joints" addadditional impurities from the burning paper. The small burntdown end of the joint, a "roach" has the hottest andmost irritating mix of impurities. Irritation from hot, impurity laden smoke from the roach canbe diminished by holding the stub away from the lips with a tubemade from a rolled up paper. Better yet; use a pipe instead. Pipes The further from the throat and lungs, the cooler. A pipewith a long stem is better than a short stem. Water Pipes Water pipes (and bongs) must provide adequate scrubbing ofthe smoke with a minimum of "dead space" inside thevessel. Smoking techniques In countries where cannabis is inexpensive and available likeMorocco and Nepal the cannabis smoker lights a pipe and smokes itmuch like a tobacco pipe with a medium sized breath withimmediate exhaling. (and in Morocco tobacco is added) Coping withscarce and expensive cannabis, the United States and Europeancannabis smokers learn techniques to maximize the efficiency ofusing the drug. The smoker exhales as much as possible beforetaking in the puff of carbureted smoke with a puff of airfollowing to push it past the "dead space" of thethroat, trachea, and bronchi. The breath is then held for somefive seconds before exhaling. Irritation from low grade cannabis is felt immediately butirritation from high resin cannabis has a delay of a few secondsbefore the irritation is felt. The user thinks "this wasn'tso harsh" before the fit of coughing begins as the receptorsin the lungs respond to the irritation by the resin. (This delaymay be from topical anesthetic properties of cannabis resinslowing the transmission of signals from receptors to the nervoussystem.) The user then adjusts by increasing the dilution of thesmoke with air on subsequent puffs. Continuing adjustment isneeded because of the variability of the quality and potency ofthe illicit plant. Even long time experienced users still may beseen with fits of coughing from inhaling too concentrated puffsof smoke. Heavy cannabis smokers suffer a chronic bronchitis fromthis irritation. "As in long-continued and excessivecigarette smoking considerable bronchial irritation and chroniccatarrhal laryngitis may be induced, so to may a similarcondition be caused by excessive ganja (buds of the female plantwithout seeds) or charas (hashish) smoking..." Variable Potency Unless there is access properly stored large supplies thatwill last for long periods, the chronic cannabis user can expectthis variability. While the medicinal cannabis user of a centuryago may have had to put up with variability, under cannabisprohibition today must cope with variability in addition toexpense and scarcity. Because of the rapid onset of effects through the inhaledroute self adjustment of dose (autotitration) is easy. The userstops when the desired state is attained and waits until theeffect starts to wear off before taking another puff. Smoking Behavior: Set and Setting Expectations and circumstance are important in the effects ofcannabis. The effect of the drug will be different in differentsituations. Sitting alone or with friends in a safe and privateplace versus speeding down the highway at the wheel of a car witha police cruiser pulling up from behind, lights flashing, wouldproduce different effects. Since we are not islands unto ourselves one must consider theeffects of smoking upon others which are not withoutconsequences. Putting oneself and others at risk are notresponsible behavior. Operation of any complicated machinery likedriving a car under the influence of cannabis is a poor idea. Detection and capture As long as cannabis is illegal being caught and punished isfar more dangerous to one's well-being than any of the effects ofthe drug. Depending on one's circumstance, it may be the end to acareer path, employment, or reputation. The poisonous personaleffects from social sanctions should not be minimized. Cannabisusers must be discreet to avoid these most harmful of sideeffects of ignorance and viciousness that will befall if foundout. Knowledge of cannabis use can easily be used for blackmailin a Prohibition society. Side stream Exposure Your throat and lung irritation is undesirable. Exposingothers to these effects without agreement is even less desirable.If you didn't like or were allergic to the smoke you wouldn'twant it inflicted upon you. Cannabis smoke tends to be lessnoxious than tobacco smoke because there is less of it. Ten timesas expensive, the cannabis smokers take fewer puffs and holdtheir breath for better absorption. Smokers of high potencycannabis take even fewer puffs with less resultant exhaled smoke.Avoid smoking in a closed or poorly ventilated space. Passing the Pipe, Joint- and Maybe Disease While passing the joint or pipe may be a primal socialbehavior that add to feelings of acceptance and help the relaxingeffects of the drug, the user is exposed to all saliva borneinfectious diseases in the group. How can one minimize this not so obvious but real risk incannabis use? Don't share with others. Either smoke solo or pass up thepipe or joint when it is passed your way. "No thanks, I havea cold and don't want to give it to you" should be anacceptable reason. Don't let the pipe or joint touch your lips. Hold it so as toinhale in such a way as not to let it touch. This may take somepractice. Others may think you are a bit strange. If you must usea joint, put it in your own personal holder that is not shared. [insert picture of hand with joint or holder] Sterilize the mouthpiece of the pipe for a second with flameor wipe it with an alcohol pad. Vaporization; Safer Inhalation of Cannabinoids The unique physical property of consistency like pine pitchand lack of water solubility of the active principles of cannabispose unique problems for administration. Heating cannabis to a temperature where the drug portion ofthe plant turns into a vapor which can be inhaled without burningis safer than smoking. Vaporization avoids exposing the throatand lungs to the irritating and toxic products of combustion ofthe crude plant. In the 5th century BC, Herodotus' description ofthe Scythians throwing cannabis atop a fire in an enclosure andinhaling the vapors may be a an early description ofvaporization- or an inexact translation confusing smoke forvapor. Tetrahydrocannabinols, Cannabidiols, and cannabinols vaporizein the range of 400* Fahrenheit; below their ignition point.These resinous portions come to a boil and condense into tinyparticles which are dispersed in a fine air emulsion that is theninhaled. Vaporization devices have been around since the sixtiesbut, because of their inefficiency (and illegality as drugparaphernalia), have never become popular. Prototype Vaporizers Cigarette lighter element & chamber Powdered cannabis is placed in a thin layer on the heatingelement which is heated until white vapor appears in the chamber.The vapor is inhaled through a tube in the floor of the chamber(made from a small glass jar or bowl). Shrink tubing heater Powdered cannabis is placed on a small mesh brass screen inglass funnel with rubber or plastic tubing for inhalation. A handheld electric heater with a small fan used for heating shrinktubing on electronic parts is calibrated with a thermometer heldin the stream of hot air. (400 degrees Fahrenheit). Heated wire and extracted resin Cannabis resin with the consistency of pine pitch is placeddropwise on the end of an iron or steel wire which is thenapplied to a hot soldering iron or glowing charcoal. The ensuingpuff of vapor is captured by a large drinking straw placed closeabove the point where the droplet is applied inhaled through thestraw. The application is timed with the beginning of the takingin of a breath. Charcoal pellet and heat exchange chamber Utilized by the Premier cigarette by the Phillip Morris Co.developed and test marketed in 1989 before dropped after protestsfrom nicotine prohibitionists and poor sales. This device it wasclaimed could be converted from using enclosed the nicotinepellet to other drugs- namely crack cocaine. Effects: Physical and Mental The Bell shaped curve Reactions to cannabis products vary from totally beneficialand necessary for life, to harmful, dangerous, and to be avoided.They can be life saving to life threatening. An AIDS wastingpatient whose appetite is restored or a person violently allergicor sensitive to smoke Dose Relationships The combination of individual sensitivity with amount takenadd up to the effects experienced. Route of administration alsoaffects the results. Effects both in terms of intensity andlength are directly related. Dose and Route of Administration The inhaled route avoids overdose since the rapid onset ofeffects permits the user to cease intake of the drug when thelevel of drug effect is reached. The oral route with it's slowonset and variable absorption after eating does not allow thisfine degree of control in the case of a single dose. Site of action Unlike other sedative compounds, cannabinoids have theireffect in the upper portions of the brain with physical effectsmediated downward, rather than affecting lower centers of thebrain as with alcohol, barbiturates, or benzodiazepines. While the existence of receptor sites have been identified inhomogenates of rat brains using radioisotopes, precise anatomicsites have not been located in humans. The limbic system is a prime candidate as an area that liesbelow the cerebral cortex and plays a significant role inmediating connections with upper and lower centers within thecentral nervous system. [insert diagram of limbic system] Effects on the central nervous system Brain Wave Effects Cannabis' effects on the electroencephalogram (EEG) are abiphasic stimulation and sedation that are mediated by dose, set,setting, physiology, and personality. Initially, there is aspeeding up of brain wave activity and a reactive slowing as thedrug effects wear off. The higher the dosage, the more intensethe effects and longer the experience. As the effects wear off,the stimulation gives way to sedation. The buzzing ideation ofthe beta state gives way to introspection, then dream imagery ofalpha and theta frequencies moving towards sleep. With continuinglow level use, the effects are less intense but more frequent inneed to take inhaled drug. Stimulation of both beta and theta frequencies. Beta waves, high frequency (>14 Hz) reflect the increasedcognitive activity subjectively experienced as a "flow ofideas" that characterize the onset of cannabis mentaleffect. The distortion of time with this "speeding up ofthoughts" causes subjective perception that there is aslowing of time. Theta waves, low frequency (4-7 Hz) are seen with visualimagery. These images break through a background of thinking anddisrupt the train of thought. The thinking is distracted by theseintrusions which then modify thought content to varying degrees,depending on dose, expectations, setting, and personality. Adverse Effects of Cannabis As with any drug, cannabis is a tool. There will always beindividuals that experience adverse consequences from any druguse. The abuse of cannabis has been recognized for millennia.These problems were described by O'Shaughnessey during hisobservations in India in 1839 which included references in thePersian medical literature. With widespread non medical use ofthe drug for the past thirty years, psychiatrists have developedclassifications of cannabis presented in the latest Diagnosticand Statistical Manual, Revision IV (DSM-IV) Intoxication/Overdose Overdose is most common by the oral route since the time fromtaking the drug until the experience of effects begin is from oneto three or more hours. Inexperienced and ignorant first timeusers will have an unforgettable experience. The effects of overdose have been numerously described ingeneral, clinical, and scientific literature. Cannabis overdosecomprises the majority of listings in the Surgeon General's List,19th century precursor of the Indicus Medicus. American literaryaccounts in books: FizHugh Ludlow's Hasheesh Eater and An Essayon Hasheesh by Victor Robinson M.D. are expressly devoted tocannabis. Descriptions of experience with the drug as part oftravel to areas of indigenous use may be found in English andEuropean literature over the past three centuries. Scientific andmedical descriptions of effects of cannabis overdose have beennumerous extensive. Before and after its removal in 1937. The effects of overdose are from the stimulation and sedationof the central nervous system. Stimulation with a flooding ofideas and images that are vivid and rapidly changing. Attentionand concentration are markedly impaired. Time perception issignificantly altered with minutes seeming like hours. There maybe distortion of spatial perception. Secondary physical effects, aside from a speeding up of theheart rate from the central nervous system stimulation, areremarkable in their absence. The acceleration of the heart rateis generally no more than that associated with mild to moderateexercise. Cannabis-Induced Disorders 292.89 Cannabis Intoxication A. Recent use of cannabis. B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral orpsychological changes (e.g., impaired motor coordination,euphoria, anxiety, sensation of slowed time, impaired judgment,social withdrawal) that developed during, or shortly after,cannabis use. C. Two (or more) of the following signs, developing within 2 hours of cannabis use: (1) conjunctival injection (2)increased appetite (3) dry mouth (4) tachycardia D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical conditionand are not better accounted for by another mental disorder. Specify if: With Perceptual Disturbances: This specifier may be notedwhen hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory,visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.Intact reality testing means that the person knows that thehallucinations are induced by the substance and do not representexternal reality. When hallucinations occur in the absence ofintact reality testing, a diagnosis of Substance-InducedPsychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations should be considered. 292.81 Cannabis Intoxication Delirium 292.11 Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With DelusionsSpecify if With Onset During Intoxication 292.12 Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder, WithHallucinations Specify if With Onset During Intoxication 292.89 Cannabis-Induced Anxiety Disorder Specify if: WithOnset During Intoxication Continuing or chronic use. Use or abuse? Cannabis, like any other drug, is a tool.Properly utilized with realistic expectations and awareness ofits properties, cannabis is a safe and effective medicine.Improperly used with unrealistic expectations and ignorance,adverse effects may result. The onset of unwanted effects may beobvious or insidious. The general etiology is some emotionaldiscomfort for which cannabis is taken to relieve producingundesirable consequences from using the drug itself. Paranoia and delusional thinking are not uncommon effects ofcannabis both acute and chronically. In the acute experience itappears to be from the perceptual distortions of space, time andfeelings of detachment. In chronic use paranoid and delusional thinking appear to bethe consequences of the suppression of feelings, The dulling offeelings may alienate the cannabis users from others bydiminishing empathetic capabilities. This emotional insensitivitythen results in conflict through misperception. Misperceptionresults from the dulling of affect that is important contextualcollateral information source. An effective relief of emotionaldistress then becomes an impediment to relationships with thecannabis user. Feelings are an integral dimension of socialperception that convey important contextual information.Cannabis, as an effective sedative and antidepressant, has thisundesirable side effect when misused. The relief afforded by thedrug may be paid for by complications caused by avoiding dealingwith the causes of the emotional pain as well as diminishedfunctioning while under its influence. Cognitive impairment by continuing or overuse of cannabiscreates a form of mild dementia that may persist for up toseveral weeks after discontinuing the drug. Individuals sensitiveto the drug report a persistent "hangover" thatdiminishes the ability to pay attention and concentrate. Theonset may be insidious, subtle, and gradual. This condition isreversible with abstinence from cannabis. 304.30 Cannabis Dependence A maladaptive pattern of cannabis use, leading to clinicallysignificant impairment or distress, as manifested by three (ormore) of the following, occurring at any time in the same12-month period: (1) tolerance, as defined by either of the following: (a) a need for markedly increased amounts of the substance toachieve intoxication or desired effect (b) markedly diminished effect with continued use of the sameamount of the substance (2) withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: (a) the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the substance (b) the same (or a closely related) substance is taken torelieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms (3) cannabis is often taken in larger amounts or over alonger period than was intended (4) there is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts tocut down or control cannabis use (5) a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary toobtain cannabis (e.g., visiting multiple dealers or driving longdistances), use the substance (e.g., chain-smoking), or recoverfrom its effects (6) important social, occupational, or recreationalactivities are given up or reduced because of cannabis use (7) cannabis use is continued despite knowledge of having apersistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that islikely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance 305.20 Cannabis Abuse A. A maladaptive pattern of cannabis use leading toclinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested byone (or more) of the following, occurring within a 12-monthperiod: (1) recurrent cannabis use resulting in a failure to fulfillmajor role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeatedabsences or poor work performance related to substance use;cannabis-related absences, suspensions, or expulsions fromschool; neglect of children or household) (2) recurrent cannabis use in situations in which it isphysically hazardous (e.g., driving an automobile or operating amachine when impaired by cannabis use) (3) recurrent cannabis-rclatcd legal problems (e.g., arrestsfor cannabis-related disorderly conduct) (4) continued cannabis use despite having persistent orrecurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbatedby the effects of the substance (e.g., arguments with spouseabout consequences of intoxication, forgotten promises) B. The symptoms have never met the criteria for CannabisDependence for this class of substance. 232.9 Cannabis-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified The Cannabis-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specifiedcategory is for disorders associated with the use of cannabisthat are not classifiable as one of the disorders listed above. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page. WT01-B21-70IA087-000627-B020-97http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/maa1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053213 text/html 10067HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:31:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:15 GMTContent-length: 9850 Marijuana Addicts Anonymous Marijuana Addicts Anonymous by Lance B. An article in the June 23, 1987 Oakland Tribune caught myeye: "Grass not always green for long term marijuanausers" described the formation of Marijuana AddictsAnonymous on the Alcoholics Anonymous' 12 step model. I put a quarter in the can and poured myself a cup of Peet'sespresso and was shown the stash of real half-and-half in therefridge instead of the simulated dairy creamer out on thecounter. Flavoured mineral waters and juices for reasonabledonations gave the scene a definite Berkeley ambience. After overcoming my behavioural denial "mistake" ofgoing to the wrong address and leaving the newspaper article withthe correct address at home that set my visit back by a week Ifinally arrived at the meeting place. Housed in a defunct computer software house's office buildingnow dedicated to drug treatment. I had to rehearse it numerous times before going in."Hi, I'm Lance and I'm a marijuana addict", smile, andseem sincere. The words choked in my throat at first but becameeasier as I set the script in place to be recited. A room in theback was populated with angular chrome/naugahyde stacking chairs,a heterogeneous grouping of 20 to 30 men and women from early20's to late 40's sat down in a circle and recited the"serenity prayer". I studied the handouts I collected from the table. Blurrygray but readable copies of the lists of the 12 steps, serenityprayer, 12 questions. There was an undated hit piece by DarylInaba, recent convert to the NEW STRONGER DANGEROUS marijuanafederal mythology that enumerated the usual litany of braindamage, immune system suppression, higher addictive potential,lung cancer liability, and harm to sexual functioning. While allof these claimed adverse effects are still problematic andindelibly tainted by the current policy of "its the signalwe send them" school of psychopharmacology, the significantrole of marijuana in facilitating other drug dependencies Inabacites appears to have merit. Fred, an extroverted unemployed mid-thirtyish balding manwith workingman plaid cotton flannel shirt and thick glasses whogiggled nervously, fidgeting, was chosen to read the"Questions" The following questions may help youdetermine whether marijuana is a problem in your life:"(insert 12 questions) He later went onto describe his otherdifficulties with paranoid schizophrenia and alcoholism. Hismonologue became disjointed and he would laugh an inappropriatelaugh that sounded mighty stoned- the way weed made me feel 20years ago. For a few moments when different members of the groupresponded with the same laughs I felt the dry contact high. Fred also attended AA meetings as did over half the group todeal with concurrent problems with alcohol. The protocol androutines of AA were easily modified to center on difficultieswith marijuana abuse and dependence. "Hi! I'm Cindy. I'm a marijuana addict." Thetemporary chair, Cindy, a slender woman in her mid 20's with abroad-jawed attractive face with aquiline nose described how itdulled her ability to do her ceramics and caused her to becomewithdrawn and shut down. Helen, a short tense voluptuous woman in her late 20'sdescribed difficulties dealing with the feelings of anger she nowattempts to cope with by working through instead of usingmarijuana to suppress her feelings. She described confronting herneed to quit when her therapist refused to see her if she didn't.The group applauded her staying straight for the last month. Bob, a rather overweight man in his mid twenties describedundergoing a brush with temptation and death over the weekendwhen out hiking in the Mt Shasta area he stumbled into amarijuana patch and was confronted by the armed growers. Hemanaged to talk his way out of the situation but was sorelytempted to buy some. He obsessed about it all the way back to SanFrancisco and has memorized the way to find the patch should heplan to go back up. He still might. Rick, a fourth year law student at Hastings in San Franciscodescribed his need to give up cannabis after having detoxed andstayed clean from alcohol for the past six weeks. If he lethimself go to pot it set him up to fall of the wagon and takethat critical drink that would end in an uncontrollable binge. Grace, a hefty dark hispanic in her 30's, brought along hertwo preadolescent daughters who sat quietly on the chairs or onthe floor listening. A single parent divorcee grappling with herother main addiction of overeating to cope with her bad feelingsas an adult child of an alcoholic family. Many who attended AA or NA meetings complained that neithergroup would give appropriate support to participants concernedwith kicking the cannabis habit. The AA groups, of course, werecentered around alcohol. The NA groups were dominated by theheroinists and cocaine compulsives that discounted the concernwith cannabis dependence. The topic of the evening was denial. The moderator of themeeting after giving his potalog of his difficulties caused byhis cannabis habit and then called for a volunteer to speak out.The substance may be different from alcohol but the addictionprocess is the same. Denial springs like crab grass on the lawn needingextirpation all the time. "Im ____ and I'm a marijuana addict" "Hi_____" the group choruses in response. Avoiding the weed is a preoccupation that brings as aconsequence the dealing with emotional issues nakedly instead ofwith the help of that mild sedative that cuts down the fear andanger reactions. Everything goes along OK until something goeswrong and then without thinking a joint is rolled and smoked.Back to square one. Trying to interpose the detached less reactivemarijuana-stoned self unfortunately has the consequence ofemotionally distancing one from others with resulting problemswith family and friends. Additionally, the sedation and spacinessfrom the weed cuts into concentration that causes problems on thejob with the secondary worries from the impaired performance. There were no horror stories of broken homes, violence,writhing-on-the-floor withdrawal but minor irritability,nightmares during the first week and then the yearnings for theherb in a social situation when it was offered by friends. Thebiggest factor in relapse was some stressful event. As the hour and a half drew to a close the secretary of themeeting called for business announcements before all joined handsin a circle and recited the closing prayer. After the meeting outside the back door many of the memberscarried on conversations in small knots- lighting up and oftenpassing around nicotine cigarettes. Overcoming addictions is astep-by-step, drug-by-drug process for the afflicted is alife-long personal struggle. Three members were looking over hand drawn tentative designsfor a logo for the first chapter of Marijuana Addicts Anonymousin the world here in Berkeley with gossip about some proprietarymarijuana dependence treatment groups. One of these for profitgroups back on the east coast have already laid claim to amarijuana leaf with a red slashed circle superimposed. There was clearly group pride and cohesiveness. This wasindeed a group of self-helpers that are there to help its membershang on from week to week without the heavy exploitive hand ofgovernment agencies. Telephone numbers are exchanged so that amember in danger of relapse can reach out in his or her time ofneed. MAA now meets in Berkeley and Oakland in two differentlocations three times a week. A new chapter will probably startup soon in San Francisco. I admitted after the meeting to a fewpeople that I was active with NORML which didn't seem to put themoff. I suggested that MAA solicit support from NORML since we allagreed the criminalization of marijuana didn't help anything...at least these individuals didn't. When I told NORML's west coastcoordinator he liked the idea and will attend MAA with me in twoweeks. Who knows? Lance B. Berkeley, California August 12, 1987 Meeting number two was dominated by the potalog of Sheila anattractive blonde female physician in her early thirties who wasrecovering from alcohol and then finally kicking the pot habitdescribed her feelings of loss of control as she found herselfscreaming at her patients. Speaking in a barely audible voice shedescribed her success in dealing with the emotions she oncesuppressed with cannabis and other chemicals. The number in attendance was pushing 30 and many were eagerto share their stories of temptation and travail. The speakerswould make efforts to refer to the previous offerings givingliberal strokes of acknowledgment of similarity or pertinence tohis or her situation. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-71IA087-000627-B020-118http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/marinol.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053243 text/html 4477HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:32:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:21 GMTContent-length: 4260 Marinol and Cannabis (Marijuana) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Marinol and Cannabis Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D.* Marinol (dronabinol) delta -9 tetrahydrocannabinoldissolved in sesame oil. Supplied in fixed doses of 2.5, 5, and10 milligram soft gelatin capsules. Taken orally. Cannabis extract: 9 known delta -9Tetrahydrocannabinols 2 known delta -8 Tetrahydrocannabinols 50 other cannabinoids that may interact with or modifyreactions with the Tetrahydrocannabinols, the primary activeprinciples. Source: Marijuana and Health Institute ofMedicine, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1982, P13-15 Cannabis may be ingested orally or inhaled. Inhalation may besmoked or vaporized. Anecdotal reports of users of both Marinol and cannabisdescribe enhancement or constructive supplementation. Others whohave tried both have described cannabis as superior to Marinol.Users of cannabis usually inhale. Oral vs Inhalation: Oral ingestion of either cannabisor Marinol is characterized by: delayed onset of effects, variable level of effects, andprolonged effects. Inhalation provides quick onset of effects,consistent level of effects, and shorter lasting effects. The inhalation route is significantly more consistentlyeffective. Inhalation: Vaporization vs Smoke Significant irritants and toxic products are produced bycombustion which can be minimized by vaporizingTetrahydrocannabinols and other cannabinoids.Tetrahydrocannabinols vaporize at 400 Fahrenheit. Two crudeprototypes have been successfully demonstrated: a modifiedmanually operated auto cigarette lighter element, and a heat gunfor electronic shrink tubing set at 400 F. Unfortunately,vaporizers are currently defined by law as illegal paraphernalia. Clinical Research Needed Only clinical research comparing Marinol to otherTetrahydrocannabinols and cannabinoids for therapeutic efficacycan clarify this controversy. Tentative and preliminary clinical findings indicate asignificant difference between Marinol and natural crude cannabispreparations in favor of the crude product. Route ofadministration and fixed incremental dosage may be factors incomparative efficacy and unwanted effects. *Medical Co-ordinator Americans for Compassionate Use March 24, 1994 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-72IA087-000627-B020-139http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/migrn1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053252 text/html 7079HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:32:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:14 GMTContent-length: 6862 Chronic Migraine Headache: Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Chronic Migraine Headache: five cases successfully treated with Marinol and/or illicitcannabis. Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. Case 1 A thirty eight year old white female stock broker supervisorwith a twenty-six year history of unilateral vascular headachesescalating to generalized headache with tension headache overlay.The severity and frequency of episodes responded only toparenteral dihydroergotamine, meperidine, and trimethobenzamideHCl with sedation and further immobilization. Marinol (delta 1-9 tetrahydrocannabinol dissolved in sesameoil) was begun with gradual upward titration dropwise to avoidundesirable mental side effects. She experienced a significantdecrease in the frequency of attacks except when she ran out ofmedication. She tolerated 40 mg daily (10 mg QID) without side effects butexperienced an attack after running out of the THC capsules.Because of financial straits secondary to her disability statusand the high expense of Marinol she has partially substitutedillicitly obtained marijuana which she has ingested orally withsimilar relief. Over the past four years she has maintained better controlover the attacks with only one trip to the emergency room for ameperidine treatment in the past two years. She continues toutilize illicit cannabis because of the high cost of Marinol buthas difficulty with irregular dosage with either too little ortoo much. Case 2 Her mother, a 58 year old hospital ward clerk who hasexperienced migraine headaches with similar symptoms but lessprofoundly debilitating than those of her daughter.Likewise, shewas treated with a gradually increasing dosageof Marinol withstabilization at a 10 mg daily dose (5 mg BID).Notwithstandingher undergoing stressful conditions on the job she experiencedsuccessful stopping of episodes in prodromal stage. Left neck numbness, anorexia, water retention and leftdiplopia were reversed with normalization of gastric motility,diuresis,and peripheral vasodilation. She subjectively felt arelief of affectual pressure. She experienced no debilitatingside effects as with other antimigraine agents and sedatives.Perceptually she described a "shift of vision"-slightly out of focus. This effect was transient. Case 3 A 44 year old female teacher has a thirty year history offamilial unilateral severe vascular headaches with antecedentvisual scotomata. She switched to self-medication with marijuanaafter 9 years of meperidine/sedative treatments with their impairing effects. Cases 4 & 5 She taught her daughters ages 21 and 17 to self-medicate withmarijuana with similar success in aborting migraine headaches inthe prodromal phase with scotomata. Discussion While hemp drugs (cannabis) were introduced to westernmedicine by O'Shaughnessy in 1839 and attained wide usage untilthe turn of the century with the development of synthetic andsemisynthetic analgesics.Their use declined though maintainingmention in medical texts until removal from the formulary in1940. Reclassified as a schedule I drug in 1970 alleged to havingno medicinal redeeming importance, the synthetic THC created bygovernment sponsored research contractors was downscheduled to IIin 1986, the same as non-combination opiates requiring triplicateprescription. Grinspoon has recently described use of cannabinoidstherapeutically for migraine. It would appear that further clinical trial of both Marinoland cannabis for the treatment of migraine headache would bedesirable. References Fishbein, M Queries and Minor Notes: Migraine Associated WithMenstruation JAMA Vol 120:4 Sept 26, 1942 p 326 Grinspoon L and Baklar Marijuana Forbidden Medicine Mackenzie, S. Indian hemp in persistent headache. JAMA 18879:732. O'Shaughnessy, W.B.: On the preparations of the Indian Hemp orgunjah; their effects on the animal system in health and theirutility in the treatment of tetanus and other convulsivediseases. Trans. Med. and Phys. Soc., Bengal, 1838-40; 71-102,421-461. Osler, W., and McCrae: Principles and Practice of Medicine.8th ed., D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1916, p. 1809 Reynolds JR On Some Therapeutical Uses of Indian Hemp. ArchMed London 1859 Vol 2 154 - 160 Reynolds, JR: Therapeutical uses and toxic effects of cannabisindica. Lancet 1890 1; March 22: 637-638 Solis-Cohen, S. and Githens, T.S.: Pharmacotherapeutics,Materia Medica and Drug Action. D. Appleton and Co. New York,1928. Volfe, Z, Dvilansky, A, Nathan, I, Cannabinoids block releaseof serotonin from platelets induced by plasma from migrainepatients. Int. J Clin Pharmacol. Res, 1985; 5(4): 243-6 September 12, 1991 Berkeley, CA Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-73IA087-000627-B020-166http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/migrn2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053316 text/html 6223HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:33:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:10 GMTContent-length: 6006 Cannabis and Marinol in the Treatment of Migraine Headache Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information CANNABIS AND MARINOL IN THE TREATMENT OF MIGRAINE HEADACHE by Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. Edie L., a thirty eight year old pert, intense, intelligent,articulate stock broker and former law student suffers fromsevere one-sided headaches that started when she was eleven yearsold. Aggravated by bacon, wines, monosodium glutamate, soy sauce,and complicated by severe menstrual cramping, she had beenvirtually house bound for weeks at a time. If the immobilizingpain, nausea, and depression from the attacks weren't bad enough,the side effects from conventional pharmacotherapy wroughtfurther dysfunction. Sedatives like phenobarbital and minor tranquilizers likeValium and Ativan left her sleepy and oversedated. Trips to theemergency room were frequent where Demerol (meperidine) andergotamine (up to 3 injections in 24 hours) would bring theattack under control. She had been to numerous specialists and underwent extensiveworkups including spinal taps, brain wave studies, xrays, allergytests, and psychiatric interviews. She made the observation that if she smoked marijuana just asthe symptoms of an attack were starting that the attack could bekept at bay or stopped. She told this to several specialists whowere treating her but this was either ignored or dismissed. Because I could not prescribe marijuana Marinol wasprescribed. Starting dropwise from puncturing a 10 milligramcapsule using a method described by Dr. J. Russell Reynolds in1890:"The dose should be given in minimum quantity, repeatedin not less than four or six hours, and gradually increased byone drop every third or fourth day, until either relief isobtained, or the drug is proved, in such case, to beuseless." Actually, the adjustment of the dose came more easily. Shefound that her response to Marinol was not exquisitely sensitiveand within several days she found that 10 milligrams two or threetimes a day was sufficient. The migraine attacks ceased.Subjectively, the Marinol did not cause sedation or immobility aswith the other drugs but produced a feeling of well-being andrelieved feelings of depression. The other medications worsenedfeelings of depression and immobility. The expense of Marinol was, unfortunately prohibitive, causingher to have to resort to illicit cannabis of varying potency.Because of her continuing intermittantly severe recurrentdepression and premigraine anxiety, she has been unable to returnto work. On follow-up four years later she has had "..onlyone meperidine trip to the emergency room in the past twoyears." She makes oral preparations using inexpensiveMexican marijuana. She complains of not being able to optimizethe potency of her confections because of the varying potenciesand small quantities she must prepare. She also must resort tosmoking marijuana which is her route of least preference.Notwithstanding, the use of cannabis for the treatment ofmigraine headache and depression has proven to be better than anyof the previous conventional drug treatments she has beenprescribed. Edie's case is not without precedent. A physician of a centuryago would have prescribed cannabis in one of the many purifiedpreparations that were available. Today, most physicians,including headache specialists, are unaware of this and or thatMarinol is one of the active principles of cannabis. Migraine Headache is a specific type of pain for whichcannabis was first described to be useful by J. Russell Reynolds. After some thirty years clinical experience after this initialobservation, he described "Migraine: very many victims havefor years kept their sufferings in abeyance by taking hemp at themoment of threatening, or onset of the attack." In Osler'smedical text it was the treatment of choice for migraineheadache. The most recent (and last) mention of cannabis for thetreatment of migraine was from Morris Fishbein, M.D., Editor ofthe Journal of the American Medical Association in 1942. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-74IA087-000627-B021-20http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mtox.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053331 text/html 4409HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:33:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:06 GMTContent-length: 4192 Toxic Effects of Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information Toxic Effects of Marijuana Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. Individual Toxicity The smoked use of cannabis is not without hazards which shouldbe clearly recognized so as to permit appropriate action to avoidor minimize these untoward effects. Physical Effects The smoke of cannabis is irritating to the mouth, throat,trachea, bronchii, and lungs. The level of irritation iscomparable to that of tobacco with the level of irritationdependent upon the amount of exposure, heat of the smoke anddegree of impurity. Because of it's illegality it is not yetpossible to scientifically document the possible connection withactual lung disease. For similar reasons it is not possible to determine possibleadverse effects upon passive exposure to marijuana smoke. There are some people that are allergic to marijuana smoke anddevelop hives or asthmatic symptoms when exposed to it. Mental Effects Cannabis when smoked may cause confusion and disorientation inthe inexperienced or sensitive user. Dr. Mikuriya's Credentials For the past twenty five years Dr. Mikuriya studied theeffects of marijuana professionally in capacities of drug abusetreatment program director, research psychiatrist for the federalgovernment, visitor to endemic areas of use, general cliniciantreating acute psychiatric in-patients and outpatients. Politically, he was on the board of directors of theCalifornia Marijuana Initiatives of 1972 - 74, Amorphia and anadvisor to its successor, the National Organization to Reform theMarijuana Laws (NORML). A graduate of Reed College, Mikuriya completed his medicaleducation at Temple University Medical School, Philadelphia. Hereceived his psychiatric specialty training at Oregon StateHospital in Salem and Mendocino State Hospital in northernCalifornia. After serving at the New Jersey NeuropsychiatricInstitute at Princeton, Mikuriya was appointed first director ofmarijuana research at the National Institute of Mental Health,Chevy Chase, Maryland in 1967. Since then he has been in privatepsychiatric practice in San Francisco, Oakland and Berkeley.Mikuriya has published numerous papers on marijuana and is theeditor and publisher of Marijuana Medical Papers. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B21-75IA087-000627-B021-41http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/reynold.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053340 text/html 1599HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:33:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:45:58 GMTContent-length: 1382 For New Users of Cannabis: The Reynolds Protocol: For New Users of Cannabis: The Reynolds Protocol: "The dose should be given in minimum quantity, repeatedin not less than four or six hours, and gradually increased byone drop every third or fourth day, until either relief isobtained, or the drug is proved, in such case, to beuseless." Wrote Sir J. Russell Reynolds, M.D., F.R.S. in 1890. Thispatient, prudent, and cautious regimen by this physician to QueenVictoria's court summarized his thirty years of clinicalexperience with the drug. The Reynolds Protocol should be usedwhenever possible when initiating oral cannabis treatment. Patience is of prime importance as it compensates foridiosyncratic sensitivity, lengthy onset time when eaten, andvariability in potency of the preparation. Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. April 1994 Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-76IA087-000627-B021-71http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/sfbc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053408 text/html 12990HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:33:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:45:51 GMTContent-length: 12772 CANNABIS MEDICINAL USES AT A "BUYERS'" CLUB Abstract CANNABIS MEDICINAL USES AT A "BUYERS'" CLUB Mikuriya, T.H. Medicinal uses of cannabis at a buyers' club ___:_____________ 1995 Background. A century ago, cannabis was regarded as thesecond most important analgesic after the opiates for the controlof chronic pain. At the time of its removal from prescriptiveavailability in 1938 it was recognized as a sedative andantispasmodic. Methods. 57 buyers of cannabis for self-medication wereinterviewed by the author at the Cannabis Buyers' Club of SanFrancisco utilizing a structured medical interview outline. Results. 51 were male, 6 female, ranging in age from 18 to 69with the median of 38 years. Race: 50 were white, 3 Hispanic, 2Black, 1 Oriental, and 1 Samoan. Education ranged from 7th gradeto post doctoral study. Medical characteristics of the populationwere 41 HIV+ and 16 Presumed HIV-. Time since HIV+ diagnosisranged from 1 month to 10 years with a median of 40 months.Medicinal purposes reported were:anorexia/nausea/vomiting/diarrhea 39, anxiety/panicattacks/depression 39, AIDS related illness 35, arthritis andother pain 22, muscle spasm 19, harm reduction: alcoholsubstitution 12, opiod substitution 6, amphetamine substitution1, followed by migraine/vascular headache 11, cancer/cancerchemotherapy 10, asthma/cough 9, itching/hiccough 8, epilepsy 5,glaucoma 4, drusen of the optic chiasm 1, psychiatric posttraumatic stress disorder 1, and pre menstrual syndrome 1. Of the19 who tried Marinol* none experienced equipotent effects, 7experienced partial relief without adverse side effects, 5experienced no effects, and 7 experienced adverse side effects. Conclusions. Cannabis is not a new drug. Medicinalapplications reported by self-medicating buyers would appear toreconfirm descriptions in clinical literature before the drug wasremoved from prescriptive availability. Further clinical study iswarranted. Restoration of cannabis to prescriptive availabilityis indicated. MEDICINAL USES OF CANNABIS AT A BUYERS' CLUB: A PILOT STUDY by Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. Background From 1839 to 1938 cannabis was available by prescription andutilized for a variety of conditions before removal after thepassage of the 1937 Marihuana Tax Act at which time it was aninfrequently used sedative and antispasmodic . Since then it hasbeen legally defined as having no medicinal redeeming virtuehaving high potential for abuse by the Controlled Substances Actof 1970 as a Schedule I drug. Recent History Compassionate clinical investigative new drug (IND)applications for marijuana were suspended in 1991 by then chiefof the Public Health Service James O. Mason, M.D. Starting with a coalition of marijuana law reform and AIDStreatment/prevention activists in the San Francisco gay communitya proposition was put on the ballot later that year to restorehemp medical preparations for prescribing. The measure passed bya 4:1 margin that resulted in passage of a supportive resolutionby the San Francisco Board of Supervisors that urged the DistrictAttorney to allow a letter from a treating physician to beevidence of medical use. In December, 1993 the San Francisco Cannabis Buyers Clubbegan to sell illicit cannabis to patients with a referral notefrom their physician or health facility. Interviews at the site by the author with 57 of the buyersusing a structured questionnaire (attached) provided thefollowing data regarding medical conditions and drug use. Setting. Several doors away from a busy street corner is anondescript door with a peep lens. Pressing the doorbell betweenthe hours of 10 AM to 7 PM weekdays, the door is opened by adoorman who asks to see the numbered club card. At the top of ashort flight of stairs, a second hall person of hefty staturescrutinizes and greets the visitor. Entering midway in a largeold former dime-a-dance hall above the bar below, the room iswell lit from clerestory windows. The ceiling is covered by ahuge rainbow flag. The walls are covered with local artists' workand political posters. Two small rooms to the right are a kitchenwith sink and refrigerator with access to the roof and aninterview room. A sink and toilet are off the short hallway tothe interview room. The well ventilated rooms with open windows and a corner15" exhaust fan left from the dance hall era are needed tocope with the clouds of cannabis (and some tobacco) smoke fromthe patrons. A large old dining room table dominates the centerof the room, a semicircle of sofas at the left, and smallertables against the wall on the right accommodate the buyers.Joints are rolled, pipes and water pipes are filled and sharedfrom medium grade cannabis furnished by the house on small trays.The dealers measure out the cannabis from behind a"bar" where buyers inspect and purchase cannabis.Grades, types and prices are posted behind the bar on an erasableboard with samples of each available for inspection and trial.Pipes, cigarette lighters, and rolling papers are also sold atthe counter. In addition to smoked cannabis baked goods for oraluse are sold. Cookies and brownies made from the lower gradecannabis are bioassayed by the bakers and staff with roughestimates of strength provided for each batch. On the periphery,tables with diverse health and informational literature providesreading materials for the buyers. Stationary, postage, and listsof politicians provide other activities for buyers, staff, andvisitors. Demographics There were 51 men and 6 women. Their ages ranged from 18 to69, with the median of 38 years. Education was from 7th grade topost doctoral professionals. Racially, 50 were white, 3 hispanic,2 black, 1 oriental, and 1 samoan. Medical Characteristics 41 were HIV+ with 35 seeking treatment of AIDS relatedillness. The shortest time since diagnosis 1 month, the longesttime was 10 years with 40 months the median, and 53.8 months theaverage. The 16 presumed HIV- were 13 males and 3 females ages 23 to69 years with a median of 36 with an average of 45.5 years ofage. The racial composition was 13 white, 1 Hispanic 1 Black and1 Oriental. Symptoms and Conditions Gastrointestinal and affective conditions were the mostfrequent with anorexia/nausea/vomiting/diarrhea, anxiety/panicattacks, and insomnia/depression (39 each). The second mostnumerous category was the musculoskeletal with Arthritis andother pain (22). The third most frequently mentioned targetsymptom was muscle spasm (19) Harm reduction through substitution of cannabis for moretoxic drugs: alcohol (12), sedative/opiates (6), amphetamine (1)was the fourth most mentioned category. Migraine/vascularheadache (11) was the fifth largest category followed by:asthma/cough (9), Itching/hiccough (8) Epilepsy (5) Glaucoma (4)Post traumatic stress disorder (1) drusen of the optic chiasm (1) Table 1 Conditions Treated With Self Administered Cannabis Condition HIV+ HIV- Total Anorexia/Nausea/Vomiting/Diarrhea 32 7 39 Insomnia/Depression 30 9 39 Anxiety/Panic Attacks 31 8 39 AIDS related illness 35 0 35 Arthritis/Other Pain 14 8 22 Muscle Spasm 16 3 19 Alcoholism/Alcohol Abuse 9 3 12 Migraine/vascular headache 10 1 11 Cancer/Cancer Chemotherapy 8 2 10 Asthma/Cough 8 1 9 Itching/Hiccough 8 1 9 Sedative/Opiate Dependence 6 0 6 Epilepsy 4 1 5 Glaucoma 2 2 4 Amphetamine Dependence 0 1 1 Post traumatic Stress Disorder 1 0 1 Drusen of Optic Nerve 0 1 1 Allergic rhinitis 0 1 1 Pre Menstrual Syndrome 0 1 1 Past experience with cannabis All had used the drug recreationally prior to selfmedication. The shortest length of time since first use was 4months, the longest was 48 years with the median of 14 years ofusing cannabis. Dosage and Frequency of Use of Cannabis The range of dose varied from two puffs on a pipe every twoweeks to more than one cannabis cigarettes 6 times a day. Themodal frequency was one or less cigarette or equivalent daily. Route of Administration Fifty smoked cannabis. Three ate cannabis only. The marijuanacigarette or "joint" was the most frequently used with38, a pipe was second most popular with 27, water pipe third with11. Three inhaled but did not smoke. They utilized a vaporizerthat permits delivery of cannabinoids at temperatures below theflash or burning point. Twenty three both ate and smoked the drug. Of the three cases who only ate the drug, all had significantpulmonary pathology. One suffered recurrent fungal infections:aspergillosis and cryptococcus, one had pneumocystis carinii(PCP), and the third, recurrent bacterial pneumonitis and AIDSencephalopathy. Marinol, a legally available monocannabinoid, has beenpromoted as a viable alternative to crude polycannabinoids. Of the 19 who described experience with Marinol, only 3 knewwhat dose they had taken. 5 experienced no effects or sideeffects, 7 felt it was somewhat helpful without adverse sideeffects. The symptoms for which Marinol was somewhat helpful were: 5Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting, 4 Depression and 1 with posttraumatic injury pain. All of the dose levels were unknown. Of the 7 who experienced adverse effects from Marinol, 5complained of lethargy, tiredness and over sedation, 2 ofconfusion, (one with a 30 milligram dose, the other of an unknowndose), three described a worsening of the target symptoms ofnausea (all at unknown dosage), one experienced a transientdiploplia at an unknown dose, and one of a generalized headachefrom 10 milligrams. Discussion It would appear that naturally occurring polycannabinoidcannabis is superior to monocannabinoid dronabinol but thatdronabinol gives partial relief for some. Supplementing Marinolwith crude cannabis appears to decrease the intake of crudecannabis. Cannabis has been described as having therapeutic propertiesin a variety of conditions in clinical literature prior to itsremoval from prescriptive availability in 1938. Interviews with astatus criminalized population of 57 individuals with seriousillness self-medicating at a "medical speakeasy",confirm many of the pre prohibition therapeutic uses of cannabis. The wide variety of conditions appear to have some commonelements of affective, autonomic, and anti-inflammatory effectsthat warrant further systematic clinical study. Burstine suggeststhe inhibition of prostaglandin secretions modulated byeicosanoids, complex fatty acids, caused by certaintetrahydrocannabinols may be one of the mechanisms of action.Indications of NSAID activity appear in the inhibition ofmarihuana effects by premedication with indomethacin. William B. O'Shaughnessy, M.D., who in 1839 introducedcannabis to western medicine, acknowledged its non-medical usebut was able to recognize and study its therapeutic potentialdespite the drug's adverse reputation. While much has beenlearned scientifically of mechanisms of actions, adverse socialattitudes continue to prevent clinical study for therapeuticpotential. The existence of this "buyers' club, per se, (some 2,000members) appears to functionally contradict officialpronouncements denying the therapeutic uses of cannabis and is acompensatory social excrescence of Prohibition as a publicpolicy. THM 12-4-94 References Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-77IA087-000627-B021-94http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/songs95.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053440 text/html 4438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:34:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:45:46 GMTContent-length: 4221 songs for medical mj initiative 1995 Songs by Tod Mikuriya I'm Glad I'm not an Okie from Muskogee They rot their minds and bodies with white lightning Strewing highways with slaughters of the drunks. While the cops are busy raiding bedrooms Of the marijuana smoking leftist punks. Chorus: I'm glad I'm not an Okie from Muskogee Where the mind and the conscience are asleep. Frightened and kept ignorant from childhood, Is it any wonder that they act like sheep. The local campus hero is the jock strap Scholarship and brand new shiny car. Making business good for the abortionist Who pays the sheriff who owns the local bar. (chorus) Sex education was sent her by the devil. We hear a pious aging preacher bray. Keep our children just as ignorant as we were, As the welfare roles keep growing day by day. (chorus) American Legion and VFW Veterans March down a flag- draped main street twice a year. Then sit around swilling beer and watching pornies, Just in case you'd wonder if they're queer. (chorus) Nixon, Mitchell, Agnew were their heroes, And the indo china war's a holy cause The widow's flags draped on our sons' pine boxes Repay us for a war outside the laws. (chorus) This Land is Their Land Chorus: This land is their land. It is not our land. From Sacramento To the Federal wasteland. Bought and paid for by special interests. This land is not for you and me. 1) They keep on censoring, They go on lying While friends are sick Loved ones lay dying. Depression and pain leave us all sighing. This land is not for you and me. (chorus) (2) The years go by with each commission. Deaf ears to truth And we keep wishin' For common sense and abolition. Change the laws and make us free. (chorus) California Pandering (to the tune of "Wandering") (1) They`ve been pandering early They`ve been pandering late. FromSan Diego up to Humboldt State. And it don`t look like they`re ever going to cease theirpanderin`. (2) We can`t be too careful. That`s an easy thing to say. If we`re ignorant and stupid Facts can`t get in the way. And it don`t look like they`re ever going to cease theirpanderin`. (3) What is this wrong signal They might have to send? For some the herb is medicine, An old and useful friend. And it don`t look like they`re ever going to cease theirpanderin`. (4) Our great prevention governor Assassin of our youth Lock em up and keep em dumb Don't let them know the truth Believe me, he's never gonna quit his pandering (5) Our pudgy White House waffler Who never did inhale The deaf and blinded congress Wants to put us all in jail And it don't look like they're ever going to cease theirpanderin (6) So keep on with the struggle For compassion, love, and trust. California needs drug laws That protect, and are just But it looks like they're never gonna cease their panderin. 03/17/95 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-78IA087-000627-B021-112http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/vaporize.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053449 text/html 3929HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:34:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:45:39 GMTContent-length: 3712 Vaporization of Cannabinoids: a Preferable Drug DeliveryRoute Vaporization of Cannabinoids: a Preferable Drug DeliveryRoute Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. Oral vs Inhaled While cannabis used medicinally has generally utilized theoral route, certain difficulties have been recognized since itsintroduction to western medicine by O'Shaughnessey in 1839. Themost common entry in the Surgeon General's List, 19th centuryprecursor to the Indicus Medicus described overdose. While notphysically harmful, the mental effects were alarming. While the oral cannabis ingestion using gradual upwardtitration may take days, oral cannabis' absorbtion rates vary,depending on motility and contents of the gastrointestinal tract.Inhaled cannabis by contrast produces much more rapid onset ofeffect (within minutes compared with hours), reliable effect, andaccurate autotitration. The current use of cigarette or pipe for the inhaling ofcannabinoids is recognized as delivering numerous irritants andpossible carcinogens along with the desired active principles tothe tracheobronchial tree and oral cavity. Vaporization separatesout the more therapeutic chemical components from the crude plantor resin impurities and breakdown products of pyrrolysis. The vaporization temperature range is significantly below theflash point and pyrrolytic temperature of cannabinoids andnon-cannabinoid components of crude cannabis. Table 1 Some Chemical Constituents of Cannabis and theirVaporization Temperatures* Compound Boiling Point Degrees Centigrade Degrees FahrenheitTetrahydrocannabinols 155-157 311-314.6Cannabinols 185 365Cannabidiols 187-190 368.6-374.0 There are some 421 identified compounds in cannabis, 61 ofwhich are cannabinoids. All of these compounds are pyrrolyzedinto numerous degradation products which are delivered to therespiratory tract through the process of smoking.** Any mitigation of irritation to the oral cavity andtracheobroncheal tree in the delivery of active principles ofcannabis- especially in the chronic marijuana user would beinherently safer. For the immunocompromised, debilitated, or inrespiratory distress possibly life saving. A program to study the physical and therapeutic propertiesincluding asthma which would utilize the therapeutic propertiesof the drug without the drawback of the irritation to the lungs. Systematic evaluation of specific vaporization temperatureranges is required to better differentiate and characterize theoptimal combinations of cannabinoids for different symptoms andconditions. Draft 4 12/16/93 *Merck Index Eighth Edition 1968 **Turner, Marijuana and Health Report of a Study by aCommittee of the Institute of Medicine National Academy Press,Washington DC 1982 page 14 Addendum: the latest edition of the Merck Index 1989lists the boiling point of delta 1,9 Tetrahydrocannabinol as 200degrees centigrade. ReturnTo Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B21-79IA087-000625-B018-131http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mjtaxact.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044350 text/html 41153HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:43:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:34 GMTContent-length: 40935 The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 - Full Text of the Act Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 Full Text of the Marihuana Tax Act as passed in 1937 Introduction (in italics) by David Solomon The popular and therapeutic uses of hemp preparations arenot categorically prohibited by the provisions of the MarihuanaTax Act of 1937. The apparent purpose of the Act is to levy atoken tax of approximately one dollar on all buyers, sellers,importers, growers, physicians, veterinarians, and any otherpersons who deal in marijuana commercially, prescribe itprofessionally, or possess it. The deceptive nature of that apparent purpose begins tocome into focus when the reader reaches the penalty provisions ofthe Act: five years' imprisonment, a $2,000 fine, or both seemrather excessive for evading a sum (provided for by the purchaseof a Treasury Department tax stamp) that, even if collected,would produce only a minute amount of government revenue. (Finesand jail sentences were f urther increased to the point of thecruel and unusual in subsequent federal drug legislation thatincorporated the Marijuana Tax Act. It is now possible under thelater version of the Act to draw a life sentence for selling justone marihuana cigarette to a minor.) One might wonder, too, why asmall clause, amounting to an open-ended catchall provision, wasinserted into the Act, authorizing the Secretary of the Treasuryto grant the Commissioner (then Harry Anslinger) and agents ofthe Treasury Department's Bureau of Narcotics absoluteadministrative regulatory, and police powers in the enforcementof the law. The message becomes entirely clear when, havingfinished the short text of the Act itself, one proceeds to thesixty-odd pages of administrative and enforcement proceduresestablished by the infamous Regulations No. 1. That regulation,not fully reproduced here, calls for a maze of affidavits,depositions, sworn statements, and constant Treasury Departmentpolice inspection in every instance that marijuana is bought,sold, used, raised, distributed, given away, and so on.Physicians who wish to purchase the one-dollar tax stamp so thatthey might prescribe it for their patients are forced to reportsuch use to the Federal Bureau of Narcotics in sworn and attesteddetail, revealing the name and address of the patient, the natureof his ailment, the dates and amounts prescribed, and so on. If aphysician for any reason fails to do so immediately, both he andhis patient are liable to imprisonment-and a heavy fine.Obviously, the details of that regulation make it far too riskyfor anyone to have anything to do with marijuana in any waywhatsoever. Regulations No. 1 was more than an invasion of thetraditional right of privacy between patient and physician; itwas a hopelessly involved set of rules that were obviouslydesigned not merely to discourage but to prohibit the medical andpopular use of marijuana. In addition to the Marihuana Tax Actand Regulations No. 1, the Bureau of Narcotics prepared astandard bill for marihuana that more than forty statelegislatures enacted. This bill made possession and use ofmarihuana illegal per se, and so reinforced the federal act. U. S. TREASURY DEPARTMENT BUREAU OF NARCOTICS REGULATIONS No. 1 RELATING TO THE IMPORTATION, MANUFACTURE, PRODUCTION COMPOUNDING, SALE, DEALING IN, DISPENSING PRESCRIBING, ADMINISTERING, AND GIVING AWAY OF MARIHUANA UNDER THE ACT OF AUGUST 2, 1937 PUBLIC, No. 238, 75TH CONGRESS NARCOTIC-INTERNAL REVENUE REGULATIONS JOINT MARIHUANA REGULATIONS MADE BY THE COMMISSIONER OF NARCOTICS AND THE COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE WITH THE APPROVAL OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY EFFECTIVE DATE, OCTOBER 1, 1937 LAW AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO THE IMPORTATION, MANUFACTURE,PRODUCTION, COMPOUNDING, SALE, DEALING IN, DISPENSING,PRESCRIBING, ADMINISTERING, AND GIVING AWAY OF MARIHUANA THE LAW (Act of Aug. 2, 1937, Public 238, 75th Congress) Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives ofthe United States of America in Congress assembled, That whenused in this Act, (a) The term "person" means an individual, apartnership, trust, association, company, or corporation andincludes an officer or employee of a trust, association, company,or corporation, or a member or employee of a partnership, who, assuch officer, employee, or member, is under a duty to perform anyact in respect of which any violation of this Act occurs. (b) The term "marihuana" means all parts of theplant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seedsthereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; andevery compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, orpreparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin- but shall notinclude the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from suchstalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any othercompound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparationof such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant whichis incapable of germination. (c) The term "producer" means any person who (1)plants, cultivates, or in any way facilitates the natural growthof marihuana; or (2) harvests and transfers or makes use ofmarihuana. (d) The term "Secretary" means the Secretary of theTreasury and the term "collector means collector of internalrevenue. (e) The term "transfer" or "transferred"means any type of disposition resulting in a change of possessionbut shall not indude a transfer to a common carrier for thepurpose of transporting marihuana. SEC. 2. (a) Every person who imports, manufactures, produces,compounds, sells, deals in, dispenses, prescribes, administers,or gives away marihuana shall ( 1 ) within fifteen days after theeffective date of this Act, or (2) before engaging after theexpiration of such fifteen-day period in any of the abovementioned activities, and (3) thereafter, on or before July 1 ofeach year, pay the following special taxes respectively: (1) Importers, manufacturers, and compounders of marihuana,$24 per year. (2) Producers of marihuana (except those included withinsubdivision (4) of this subsection), $1 per year, or fractionthereof, during which they engage in such activity. (3) Physicians, dentists, veterinary surgeons, and otherpractitioners who distribute, dispense, give away, administer, orprescribe marihuana to patients upon whom they in the course oftheir professional practice are in attendance, $1 per year orfraction thereof during which they engage in any of suchactivities. (4) Any person not registered as an importer, manufacturer,producer, or compounder who obtains and uses marihuana in alaboratory for the purpose of research, instruction, or analysis,or who produces marihuana for any such purpose, $1 per year, orfraction thereof, during which he engages in such activities. (5) Any person who is not a physician, dentist, veterinarysurgeon, or other practitioner and who deals in, dispenses, orgives away marihuana, $3 per year: Provided, That any person whohas registered and paid the special tax as an importer,manufacturer, compounder, or producer, as required bysubdivisions ( 1 ) and (2) of this subsection, may deal in,dispense, or give away marihuana imported, manufactured,compounded, or produced by him without further payment of the taximposed by this section. (b) Where a tax under subdivision (1) or (5) is payable onJuly 1 of any year it shall be computed for one year; where anysuch tax is payable on any other day it shall be computedproportionately from the first day of the month in which theliability for the tax accrued to the following July 1. (c) In the event that any person subject to a tax imposed bythis section engages in any of the activities enumerated insubsection (a) of this section at more than one place, suchperson shall pay the tax with respect to each such place. (d) Except as otherwise provided, whenever more than one ofthe activities enumerated in subsection (a) of this section iscarried on by the same person at the same time, such person shallpay the tax for each such activity, according to the respectiverates prescribed. (e) Any person subject to the tax imposed by this sectionshall, upon payment of such tax, register his name or style andhis place or places of business with the collector of thedistrict in which such place or places of business are located. (f) Collectors are authorized to furnish, upon writtenrequest, to any person a certified copy of the names of any orall persons who may be listed in their respective collectiondistricts as special taxpayers under this section, upon paymentof a fee of $1 for each one hundred of such names or fractionthereof upon such copy so requested. SEC. 3. (a) No employee of any person who has paid the specialtax and registered, as required by section 2 of this Act, actingwithin the scope of his employment, shall be required to registerand pay such special tax. (b) An officer or employee of the United States, any State,Territory, the District of Columbia, or insular possession, orpolitical subdivision, who, in the exercise of his officialduties, engages in any of the activities enumerated in section 2of this Act, shall not be required to register or pay the specialtax, but his right to this exemption shall be evidenced in suchmanner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe. SEC. 4. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person required toregister and pay the special tax under the provisions of section2 to import, manufacture, produce, compound, sell, deal in,dispense, distribute, prescribe, administer, or give awaymarihuana without having so registered and paid such tax. (b) In any suit or proceeding to enforce the liability imposedby this section or section 2, if proof is made that marihuana wasat any time growing upon land under the control of the defendant,such proof shall be presumptive evidence that at such time thedefendant was a producer and liable under this section as well asunder section 2. SEC. 5. It shall be unlawful for any person who shall not havepaid the special tax and registered, as required by section 2, tosend, ship, carry, transport, or deliver any marihuana within anyTerritory, the District of Columbia, or any insular possession,or from any State, Territory, the District of Columbia, anyinsular possession of the United States, or the Canal Zone, intoany other State, Territory, the District of Columbia, or insularpossession of the United States: Provided, That nothing containedin this section shall apply to any common carrier engaged intransporting marihuana; or to any employee of any person whoshall have registered and paid the special tax as required bysection 2 while acting within the scope of his employment; or toany person who shall deliver marihuana which has been prescribedor dispensed by a physician, dentist, veterinary surgeon, orother practitioner registered under section 2, who has beenemployed to prescribe for the particular patient receiving suchmarihuana; or to any United States, State, county, municipal,District, Territorial, or insular officer or official actingwithin the scope of his official duties. SEC. 6. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person, whether ornot required to pay a special tax and register under section 2,to transfer marihuana, except in pursuance of a written order ofthe person to whom such marihuana is transferred, on a form to beissued in blank for that purpose by the Secretary. (b) Subject to such regulations as the Secretary mayprescribe, nothing contained in this section shall apply: ( 1 ) To a transfer of marihuana to a patient by a physician,dentist, veterinary surgeon, or other practitioner registeredunder section 2, in the course of his professional practice only:Provided, That such physician, dentist, veterinary surgeon, orother practitioner shall keep a record of all such marihuanatransferred, showing the amount transferred and the name andaddress of the patient to whom such marihuana is transferred, andsuch record shall be kept for a period of two years from the dateof the transfer of such marihuana, and subject to inspection asprovided in section 11. (2) To a transfer of marihuana, made in good faith by a dealerto a consumer under and in pursuance of a written prescriptionissued by a physician, dentist, veterinary surgeon, or otherpractitioner registered under section 2: Provided, That suchprescription shall be dated as of the day on which signed andshall be signed by the physician, dentist, veterinary surgeon, orother practitioner who issues the same; Provided further, Thatsuch dealer shall preserve such prescription for a period of twoyears from the day on which such prescription is filled so as tobe readily accessible for inspection by the officers, agents,employees, and officials mentioned in section 11. (3) To the sale, exportation, shipment, or delivery ofmarihuana by any person within the United States, any Territory,the District of Columbia, or any of the insular possessions ofthe United States, to any person in any foreign countryregulating the entry of marihuana, if such sale, shipment, ordelivery of marihuana is made in accordance with such regulationsfor importation into such foreign country as are prescribed bysuch foreign country, such regulations to be promulgated fromtime to time by the Secretary of State of the United States. (4) To a transfer of marihuana to any officer or employee ofthe United States Government or of any State, Territorial,District, county, or municipal or insular government lawfullyengaged in making purchases thereof for the various departmentsof the Army and Navy, the Public Health Service, and forGovernment, State, Territorial, District, county, or municipal orinsular hospitals or prisons (S) To a transfer of any seeds of the plant Cannabis sativa L.to any person registered under section 2. (c) The Secretary shall cause suitable forms to be preparedfor the purposes before mentioned and shall cause them to bedistributed to collectors for sale. The price at which such formsshall be sold by said collectors shall be fixed by the Secretarybut shall not exceed 2 cents each. Whenever any collector shallsell any of such forms he shall cause the date of sale, the nameand address of the proposed vendor, the name and address of thepurchaser, and the amount of marihuana ordered to be plainlywritten or stamped thereon before delivering the same. (d) Each such order form sold by a collector shall be preparedby him and shall include an original and two copies, any one ofwhich shall be admissible in evidence as an original. Theoriginal and one copy shall be given by the collector to thepurchaser thereof. The original shall in turn be given by thepurchaser thereof to any person who shall, in pursuance thereof,transfer marihuana to him and shall be preserved by such personfor a period of two years so as to be readily accessible forinspection by any officer, agent, or employee mentioned insection 11. The copy given to the purchaser by the collectorshall be retained by the purchaser and preserved for a period oftwo years so as to be readily accessible to inspection by anyofficer, agent, or employee mentioned in section 11. The secondcopy shall be preserved in the records of the collector. SEC. 7. (a) There shall be levied, collected, and paid uponall transfers of marihuana which are required by section 6 to becarried out in pursuance of written order forms taxes at thefollowing rates: (1) Upon each transfer to any person who has paid the specialtax and registered under section 2 of this Act, $1 per ounce ofmarihuana or fraction thereof (2) Upon each transfer to any person who has not paid thespecial tax and registered under section 2 of this Act, $100 perounce of marihuana or fraction thereof. (b) Such tax shall be paid by the transferee at the time ofsecuring each order form and shall be in addition to the price ofsuch form. Such transferee shall be liable for the tax imposed bythis section but in the event that the transfer is made inviolation of section 6 without an order form and without paymentof the transfer tax imposed by this section, the transferor shallalso be liable for such tax. (c) Payment of the tax herein provided shall be represented byappropriate stamps to be provided by the Secretary and saidstamps shall be affixed by the collector or his representative tothe original order form. (d) All provisions of law relating to the engraving, issuance,sale, accountability, cancelation, and destruction of tax-paidstamps provided for in the internal-revenue laws shall, insofaras applicable and not inconsistent with this Act, be extended andmade to apply to stamps provided for in this section. (e) All provisions of law (including penalties) applicable inrespect of the taxes imposed by the Act of December 17, 1914 (38Stat. 785; U. S. C., 1934 ed., title 26, secs. 1040-- 1061,1383-1391), as amended, shall, insofar as not inconsistent withthis Act, be applicable in respect of the taxes imposed by thisAct. SEC. 8. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person who is atransferee required to pay the transfer tax imposed by section 7to acquire or otherwise obtain any marihuana without having paidsuch tax; and proof that any person shall have had in hispossession any marihuana and shall have failed, after reasonablenotice and demand by the collector, to produce the order formrequired by section 6 to be retained by him, shall be presumptiveevidence of guilt under this section and of liability for the taximposed by section 7. (b) No liability shall be imposed by virtue of this sectionupon any duly authorized officer of the Treasury Departmentengaged in the enforcement of this Act or upon any dulyauthorized officer of any State, or Territory, or of anypolitical subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, or ofany insular possession of the United States, who shall be engagedin the enforcement of any law or municipal ordinance dealing withthe production, sale, prescribing, dispensing, dealing in, ordistributing of marihuana. SEC. 9. (a) Any marihuana which has been imported,manufactured, compounded, transferred, or produced in violationof any of the provisions of this Act shall be subject to seizureand forfeiture and, except as inconsistent with the provisions ofthis Act, all the provisions of internal-revenue laws relating tosearches, seizures, and forfeitures are extended to includemarihuana. (b) Any marihuana which may be seized by the United StatesGovernment from any person or persons charged with any violationof this Act shall upon conviction of the person or persons fromwhom seized be confiscated by and forfeited to the United States. (c) Any marihuana seized or coming into the possession of theUnited States in the enforcement of this Act, the owner or ownersof which are unknown, shall be confiscated by and forfeited tothe United States. (d) The Secretary is hereby directed to destroy any marihuanaconfiscated by and forfeited to the United States under thissection or to deliver such marihuana to any department, bureau,or other agency of the United States Government, upon properapplication therefor under such regulations as may be prescribedby the Secretary. SEC. 10. (a) Every person liable to any tax imposed by thisact shall keep such books and records, render under oath suchstatements, make such returns, and comply with such rules andregulations as the Secretary may from time to time prescribe. (b) Any person who shall be registered under the provisions ofsection 2 in any internal- revenue district shall, wheneverrequired so to do by the collector of the district, render to thecollector a true and correct statement or return, verified byaffidavits, setting forth the quantity of marihuana received orharvested by him during such period immediately preceding thedemand of the collector, not exceeding three months, as the saidcollector may fix and determine. If such person is not solely aproducer, he shall set forth in such statement or return thenames of the persons from which said marihuana was received, thequantity in each instance received from such persons, and thedate when received. SEC. 11. The order forms and copies thereof and theprescriptions and records required to be preserved under theprovisions of section 6, and the statements or returns filed inthe office of the collector of the district under the provisionsof section 10 (b) shall be open to inspection by officers,agents, and employees of the Treasury Department duly authorizedfor that purpose, and such officers of any State, or Territory,or of any political subdivision thereof, or the District ofColumbia, or of any insular possession of the United States asshall be charged with the enforcement of any law or municipalordinance regulating the production, sale, prescribing,dispensing, dealing in, or distributing of marihuana. Eachcollector shall be authorized to furnish, upon written request,copies of any of the said statements or returns filed in hisoffice to any of such officials of any State or Territory, orpolitical subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, orany insular possession of the United States as shall be entitledto inspect the said statements or returns filed in the office ofthe.said collector, upon the payment of a fee of $1 for each 100words or fraction thereof in the copy or copies so requested. SEC. 12. Any person who is convicted of a violation of anyprovision of this Act shall be fined not more than $2,000 orimprisoned not more than five years, or both, in the discretionof the court. SEC. 13. It shall not be necessary to negative any exemptionsset forth in this Act in any complaint, information, indictment,or other writ or proceeding laid or brought under this Act andthe burden of proof of any such exemption shall be upon thedefendant. In the absence of the production of evidence by thedefendant that he has complied with the provisions of section 6relating to order forms, he shall be presumed not to havecomplied with such provisions of such sections, as the case maybe. SEC. 14. The Secretary is authorized to make, prescribe, andpublish all necessary rules and regulations for carrying out theprovisions of this Act and to confer or impose any of the rights,privileges, powers, and duties conferred or imposed upon him bythis Act upon such officers or employees of the TreasuryDepartment as he shall designate or appoint. SEC. 15. The provisions of this Act shall apply to the severalStates, the District of Columbia, the Territory of Alaska, theTerritory of Hawaii, and the insular possessions of the UnitedStates, except the Philippine Islands. In Puerto Rico theadministration of this Act, the collection of the special taxesand transfer taxes, and the issuance of the order forms providedfor in section 6 shall be performed by the appropriate internalrevenue officers of that government, and all revenues collectedunder this Act in Puerto Rico shall accrue intact to the generalgovernment thereof. The President is hereby authorized anddirected to issue such Executive orders as will carry into effectin the Virgin Islands the intent and purpose of this Act byproviding for the registration with appropriate officers and theimposition of the special and transfer taxes upon all persons inthe Virgin Islands who import, manufacture, produce, compound,sell, deal in, dispense, prescribe, administer, or give awaymarihuana. SEC. 16. If any provision of this Act or the applicationthereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, theremainder of the Act and the application of such provision toother persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. SEC. 17. This Act shall take effect on the first day of thesecond month during which it is enacted. SEC. 18. This Act may be cited as the "Marihuana Tax Actof 1937." (T. D. 28) Order of the Secretary of the Treasury Relating to theEnforcement of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 September 1, 1937 Section 14 of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 (act of Congressapproved August 2, 1937, Public, No. 238), provides as follows: The Secretary is authorized to make, prescribe, and publishall necessary rules and regulations for carrying out theprovisions of this Act and to confer or impose any of the rights,privileges, powers, and duties conferred or imposed upon him bythis Act upon such officers or employees of the TreasuryDepartment as he shall designate or appoint. In pursuance of the authority thus conferred upon theSecretary of the Treasury, it is hereby ordered: 1. Rights, Privileges, Powers, and Duties Conferred andimposed Upon the Commissioner of Narcotics 1. There are hereby conferred and imposed upon theCommissioner of Narcotics, subject to the general supervision anddirection of the Secretary of the Treasury, all the rights,privileges, powers, and duties conferred or imposed upon saidSecretary by the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937, so far as such rightsprivileges, powers, and duties relate to: (a) Prescribing regulations, with the approval of theSecretary, as to the manner in which the right of public officersto exemption from registration and payment of special tax may beevidenced, in accordance with section 3 (b) of the act. (b) Prescribing the form of written order required by section6 (a) of the act, said form to be prepared and issued in blank bythe Commissioner of Internal Revenue as hereinafter provided. (c) Prescribing regulations, with the approval of theSecretary, giving effect to the exceptions, specified insubsection (b), from the operation of subsection (a) of section 6of the act. (d) The destruction of marihuana confiscated by and forfeitedto the United States, or delivery of such marihuana to anydepartment, bureau, or other agency of the United StatesGovernment, and prescribing regulations, with the approval of theSecretary, governing the manner of application for, and deliveryof such marihuana. (e) Prescribing rules and regulations, with the approval ofthe Secretary, as to books and records to be kept, and statementsand information returns to be rendered under oath, as required bysection 10 (a) of the act. (f) The compromise of any criminal liability (except asrelates to delinquency in registration and delinquency in paymentof tax) arising under the act, in accordance with section 3229 ofthe Revised Statutes of the United States (U. S. Code (1934 ed.)title 26, sec. 1661), and the recommendation for assessment ofcivil liability for internal- revenue taxes and ad valorempenalties under the act. II. Rights, Privileges, Powers, and Duties Conferred andImposed upon the Commissioner of Internal Revenue 1. There are hereby conferred and imposed upon theCommissioner of Internal Revenue, subject to the generalsupervision and direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, therights, privileges, powers, and duties conferred or imposed uponsaid Secretary of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937, not otherwiseassigned herein, so far as such rights, privileges, powers, andduties relate to (a) Preparation and issuance in blank to collectors ofinternal revenue of the written orders, in the form prescribed bythe Commissioner of Narcotics, required by section 6 (a) of theact. The price of the order form, as sold by the collector undersection 6 (c) of the act shall be two cents for the original andone copy. (b) Providing appropriate stamps to represent payment oftransfer tax levied by section 7, and prescribing and providingappropriate stamps for issuance of special tax payers registeringunder section 2 of the act. (c) The compromise of any civil liability involvingdelinquency in registration, delinquency in payment of tax, andad valorem penalties, and of any criminal liability incurredthrough delinquency in registration and delinquency in payment oftax, in connection with the act and in accordance with Section3229 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (U. S. Code(1934 ed.), title 26, sec. 1661)- the determination of liabilityfor and the assessment and collection of special and transfertaxes imposed by the act; the determination of liability for andthe assessment and collection of the ad valorem penalties imposedby Section 3176 of the Revised Statutes, as modified by Section406 of the Revenue Act of 1935 (U. S. Code (1934 ed.) title 26,secs. 1512-1525), for delinquency in registration; and thedetermination of liability for and the assertion of the specificpenalty imposed by the act, for delinquency in registration andpayment of tax. General Provisions The investigation and the detection, and presentation toprosecuting officers of evidence, of violations of the MarihuanaTax Act of 1937, shall be the duty of the Commissioner ofNarcotics and the assistants, agents, inspectors, or employeesunder his direction. Except as specifically inconsistent with theterms of said act and of this order, the Commissioner ofNarcotics and the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and theassistants, agents, inspectors, or employees of the Bureau ofNarcotics and the Bureau of Internal Revenue, respectively, shallhave the same powers and duties in safeguarding the revenuethereunder as they now have with respect to the enforcement of,and collection of the revenue under, the act of December 17,1914, as amended (U. S. Code (1934 ed.), title 26, sec. 1049). In any case where a general offer is made in compromise ofcivil and criminal liability ordinarily compromisable hereunderby the Commissioner of Internal Revenue and of criminal liabilityordinarily compromisable hereunder by the Commissioner ofNarcotics, the case may be jointly compromisable by thoseofficers, in accordance with Section 3229 of the Revised Statutesof the United States (U. S. Code (1934 ed.), title 26, sec.1661). Power is hereby conferred upon the Commissioner of Narcoticsto prescribe such regulations as he may deem necessary for theexecution of the functions imposed upon him or upon the officersor employees of the Bureau of Narcotics, but all regulations andchanges in regulations shall be subject to the approval of theSecretary of the Treasury. The Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the Commissioner ofNarcotics may, if they are of the opinion that the good of theservice will be promoted thereby, prescribe regulations relatingto internal revenue taxes where no violation of the Marihuana TaxAct of 1937 is involved, jointly, subject to the approval of theSecretary of the Treasury. The right to amend or supplement this order or any provisionthereof from time to time, or to revoke this order or anyprovision thereof at any time, is hereby reserved. The effective date of this order shall be October 1, 1937,which is the effective date of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. STEPHEN B. GIBBONS, Acting Secretary of the Treasury. REGULATIONS Introductory The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937, imposes special (occupational)taxes upon persons engaging in activities involving articles ormaterial within the definition of "marihuana" containedin the act, and also taxes the transfer of such articles ormaterial. These regulations deal with details as to tax computation,procedure, the forms of records and returns, and similar matters.These matters in some degree are controlled by certain sectionsof the United States Revised Statutes and other statutes ofgeneral application. Provisions of these statutes, as well as ofthe Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 are quoted, in whole or in part, asthe immediate or general basis for the regulatory provisions setforth. The quoted provisions are from the Marihuana Tax Act of1937 unless otherwise indicated. Provisions of the statutes upon which the various articles ofthe regulations are based generally have not been repeated in thearticles. Therefore, the statutory excerpts preceding the severalarticles should be examined to obtain complete information. Chapter I Laws Applicable SEC. 7 (e) All provisions of law (including penalties)applicable in respect of the taxes imposed by the Act of December17, 1914 (38 Stat. 785; U. S. C., 1934 ed., title 26, secs. 1040-1061, 1383-1391), as amended, shall, insofar as not inconsistentwith this Act, be applicable in respect of the taxes imposed bythis Act. ART. 1. Statutes applicable. All general provisions of theinternal revenue laws, not inconsistent with the Marihuana TaxAct, are applicable in the enforcement of the latter. Chapter II Definitions SEC. 1. That when used in this Act: (a) The term "person" means an individual, apartnership, trust, association, company, or corporation andincludes an officer or employee of a trust, association, company,or corporation, or a member or employee of a partnership, who assuch officer, employee, or member is under a duty to perform .any act in respect of which any violation of this Act occurs. (b) The term "marihuana" means all parts of theplant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seedsthereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; andevery compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, orpreparation of such plant, its seeds, or resins; but shall notinclude the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from suchstalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any othercompound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparationof such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant whichis incapable of germination. (c) The term "producer" means any person who ( 1 )plants, cultivates, or in any way facilitates the natural growthof marihuana; or (2) harvests and transfers or makes use ofmarihuana. (d) The term "Secretary" means the Secretary of theTreasury and the term "collector" means collector ofinternal revenue. (e) The term "transfer" or "transferred"means any type of disposition resulting in a change of possessionbut shall not include a transfer to a common carrier for thepurpose of transporting marihuana ART. 2. As used in these regulations: (a) The term "act" or "this act" shallmean the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937, unless otherwise indicated. (b) The term "United States" shall include theseveral States, the District of Columbia, the Territory ofAlaska, the Territory of Hawaii, and the insular possessions ofthe United States except Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. Itdoes not include the Canal Zone or the Philippine Islands. (c) The terms "manufacturer" and"compounder" shall include any person who subjectsmarihuana to any process of separation, extraction, mixing,compounding, or other manufacturing operation. They shall notinclude one who merely gathers and destroys the plant, one whomerely threshes out the seeds on the premises where produced, orone who in the conduct of a legitimate business merely subjectsseeds to a cleaning process. (d) The term "producer" means any person who inducesin any way the growth of marihuana, and any person who harvestsit, either in a cultivated or wild state, from his own or anyother land, and transfers or makes use of it, including one whosubjects the marihuana which he harvests to any processesrendering him liable also as a manufacturer or compounder.Generally all persons are included who gather marihuana for anypurpose other than to destroy it. The term does not include onewho merely plows under or otherwise destroys marihuana with orwithout harvesting. It does not include one who grows marihuanafor use in his own laboratory for the purpose of research,instruction, or analysis and who does not use it for any otherpurpose or transfer it. (e) The term "special tax" is used to include any ofthe taxes, pertaining to the several occupations or activitiescovered by the act, imposed upon persons who import, manufacture,produce, compound, sell, deal in, dispense, prescribe,administer, or give away marihuana. (f ) The term "person" occurring in theseregulations is used to include individual, partnership, trust,association, company, or corporation; also a hospital, college ofpharmacy, medical or dental clinic, sanatorium, or otherinstitution or entity. (g) Words importing the singular may include the plural; wordsimporting the masculine gender may be applied to the feminine orthe neuter. The definitions contained herein shall not be deemed exclusive. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-80IA087-000625-B018-159http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/canncon.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044404 text/html 63400HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:43:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:51 GMTContent-length: 63182 Conference on Cannabis Sativa L. January 14, 1937 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Conference on Cannabis Sativa L. January 14, 1937 -- Room 81 Treasury Building, 10:30 AM Present: Dr. Lyster F. Dewey (retired) Department of Agriculture. Dr. James C. Munch, Professor of Pharmacology, TempleUniversity Dr. Herny C. Fuller Dr. Carl Voegtlin, Chief, Division of Pharmacology, NationalInstitute of Health Mr. Arthur F. Sievers, Division of Drug and Related Plants,Department of Agriculture Mr. Peter Valaer, Alcohol Tax Unit Washington Laboratory Dr. John Matchett, Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics Mr. P. W. Simonds, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory Mr. John F.; Williams, Chief, Division of Laboratories, Bureauof Customs Mr. H. J. Wollner, Consulting Chemist to the Secretary of theTreasury. M. H. J. Anslinger, Commissioner of Narcotics Mr. A. L. Tennyson, Legal Division, Bureau of Narcotics Mr. S. G. Tipton, General Counsel's Office Mr. R. L. Pierce, General Counsel's Office Mr. Wollner: As I understand the problem we've gothere, and according to Commissioner Anslinger, it is a questionof trying to set up a definition of terms with reference to whatwe generically refer to as the marihuana problem, in asufficiently clear style and sufficiently competent as to besignificant from an enforcement point of view. Is that as you seeit, Mr. Tennyson? Mr. Tennyson: Yes. Mr. Wollner: And at the same time be mindful of thelegitimate uses of the product. In going through the literatureon marihuana in pursuit of an answer to this general problem ofdefining terms, you get very little satisfaction. For everynegative statement made there is a positive one made tocounteract it. One reference will tell you definitely there is noactive principle in the seed -- a dozen will -- and one will casta shadow of doubt. Dr. Munch is rather certain there is an activeprinciple in the seed. I spoke to Dr. Munch in Philadelphia thisweek, and put this question to him this way: "Can you takethe position that there is no resin in the male plant?" Hesaid, "No, because I have found some in the small glandsthat secrete the resin so copiously on the leaves of the femaleand are found in the male plant, though not to so large anextent." Cannabis, in the Uniform Narcotic State Act, isdefined as follows: (reading from the Act) "Cannabisincludes the following substances under whatever names they maybe designated: (a) The dried flowering or fruiting tops of thepistillate plant Cannabis Sativa L., from which the resin has notbeen extracted, (b) the resin extracted from such tops, and (c)every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, orpreparation of such resin, or of such tops from which the resinhas not been extracted." That obviously doesn't meet ourrequirements. In an effort to clarify the situation in anticipation of apossible attempt to set up a more satisfactory legal program, thetechnical division in the Treasury, the Narcotics Bureau, and theLegal Division, have gotten together and asked themselves somequestions, which were distributed. I dare say that a duplicate ortriplicate set of questions might have been asked with equaleffect. We haven't a problem akin to the morphine or opium problem. Weknew the chemical reactions of morphine and its behavior beforelaws were passed. That state of definitive knowledge does notobtain with regard to cannabinol, which, again, some peopledispute the existence of. In trying to define these terms we arenot privileged, I am afraid, to be too emphatic about thiscompound known as cannabinol, especially since there may becontributive active ingredients in the plant. It has been anaccepted situation in the past that all trouble derives from thefemale plant. That has been thrown over. First of all it wasthought to be only the flowering tops; then, later, the leaves,but that is questioned at the present time. There isn't very muchwe can hang our hats on to. The problem is her of defining thisfor purposes of legislation. I wonder whether we can take each ofthese questions in turn and discuss them, in an attempt toclarify the picture somewhat. (Reading first question):"What is the constituent in Cannabis Sativa which isdefinitely know to produce deleterious physiological effects uponthe human body?" We, I think, can assume for the moment we refer to thoseeffects which are recognized as being the concomitant off smokingthe substance. How do you feel about that, Dr. Voegtlin? Dr. Voegtlin: I think we can say that the substancecalled cannabinol contains the chief specific pharmacologicalprinciple or principles of the plant. Mr. Wollner: Is that a fact? Dr. Voegtlin: As far as we can tell. Recently acrystalline substance has been isolated from the oil. Mr. Wollner: It is active in that form? Dr. Voegtlin: As far as I know the pharmacologicalactivity has not been tested. Mr. Wollner: We separate cannabinol from the plant andcrystallize it. If we give an animal an injection from that, willwe get the same sort of reaction as it if were smoked? Dr. Voegtlin: The work of Cahn on the crystallinesubstance was published in 1932, but apparently it has not beeninvestigated as to its pharmacological action. Straub has madepartially purified preparations -- not crystalline -- and hasstudied their pharmacological action on animals and humans. Hecome to the conclusion that the products give essentially thesame response in humans as does the crude drug. Mr. Wollner: Could we have that reference, Doctor,again? Dr. Voegtlin: Professor Walter Straub, University ofMunich, on "Bavarian Hashisch". They tested Cannabisgrown locally and found it contained a much mower percentage ofresin -- about one-tenth, if I am right -- as compared with thePersian product. The crude resin was partially purified. Aftercalling attention to the lack of reliability of the bio-assay ofCannabis, they tested their products on rabbits and determinedthe dose which was just sufficient to produce anesthesia taken byhuman volunteers was found to produce definite symptomscharacteristic of Cannabis. Two doses produced more markedsymptoms. These are described in detail, especially from thepsychiatric standpoint. This is the first careful psychiatricstudy of Cannabis. The doses used in terms of weight were verysmall. Whether to toxic symptoms were due to one substance ormore than one, it is hard to say. Is it essential to attributethe action to one definite constituent? Mr. Wollner: It would be preferable. We might be ableto exempt certain parts definitely as coming within the purviewof the law. If you can't do that you have to include everything.What do you think, Mr. Tennyson? Mr. Tennyson: That's the way I feel. Mr. Wollner: What do you think, Mr. Anslinger? Mr. Anslinger: I think so to. Mr. Wollner: If it weren't used sometimes in legitimateindustry we wouldn't care. Dr. Voegtlin: May I ask whether you have carried outany tests here on the presence of active principles in thedifferent parts of the plant? Mr. Wollner: No. Dr. Voegtlin: Testing say, the leaves, the seeds etc.? Mr. Wollner: Matchett and Valaer: Have you tried these? Negative response. Mr. Wollner: The only one who has done work of that kind is Dr. Munch. Hewill be here shortly. His results, working with the seed, showedtwo principles, one excitant and one depressive. Of course, thework has not been confirmed yet. If you accept the possibility ofthat, that is what you run into. That is why I asked thatquestion. Is it possible that you have here the same situation asin opium, where you have a series of bi-alkaloids? Mr. Tennyson: Just to clarify the situation, I wouldlike to ask, from the standpoint of the layman, the differencebetween cannabin, cannabinol, and resin? Mr. Wollner: Dr. Voegtlin, can you clarify that point? Dr. Voegtlin: The resin is the crude secretionexpressed from the plant. Cannabinol is a partially purifiedpreparation of the resin. Resin and cannabinol are usuallyconsidered as containing the specific principles of Cannabis. AsI said before, Cahn has applied the name Cannabinol to hiscrystalline substance, but this has not as yet been shown to bephysiologically active. The word Cannabin is loosely used bydifferent authors for impure products obtained from the resin. Mr. Tennyson: Is the drug principle only from theresin? Mr. Williams: I believe Cannaben is the name applied tothe alkaloid. Mr. Wollner: Isn't it true, that on the nether side ofthe leaves there are long hairs among which are sacs whichsecrete this resin analogous to opium? Mr. Tennyson: Can that be obtained from the seed or thestalk? Mr. Wollner: That is the question. It can be obtainedfrom the flowering tops like opium. Can we define it as comingfrom the leaves and the flowering tops, when later we may find itcomes also from the seeds and the stalk? Mr. Tennyson: Can you identify it? If a substancecontains cannabinol, can you by some process tell it is there? Mr. Wollner: If it is present in certain quantities andin a certain state. That to a layman is no answer at all. If itexists in the form Dr. Voegtlin has mentioned, we can identify itif tit is there in sensible quantities. We do not know whether wecan identify it if it were in a form generically on either sideof it. We do not know what it is converted into if it stays inthe open. Specifically, from your point of view, we do not knowwhether if you dehydrated the flowering tops for two years youcould reactivate it. Mr. Tennyson: As I understand it, Dr. Voegtlin, theresin is not designated as cannabinol. Dr. Voegtlin: Cannabinol is an extract made from theresin. Mr. Tennyson: The point is, we could not start withcannabinol as the fundamental of this drug for purposes oflegislation, could we? Mr. Wollner: No, you could not. Mr. Valaer: I would like to make a practical suggestion. Ingrowing the two kinds, male and female plants, in my back yard, Iextracted a green resin from both plants. It looked exactlyalike. There was not enough material to make fine extractions furthey appeared to be the same. There are more leaves on the femaleplant. In the male, there is hardly anything to really make acigarette out of, but those leaves had the same sort of greenresin that was described by various authors as being found in thefemale plant. Whether the physiological characteristics might bedifferent or not, I do not know, but they certainly look the sameand both gave the same Beam reaction. Mr. Wollner: To confirm your work, Dr. Munch has done amicroscopic examination of the male plant and found exactly thesame sacs there as in the female, though many less of them. Dr. Dewey: As a matter of fact the cannabis from Indianseed grown in this country 35 or 40 years ago produced a plantwith both male and female flowers on the same plant. That's notuncommon with plants taken out of their ordinary habitat. Mr. Valaer: The seeds in my little investigation werefurnished by Dr. Dewey, and it seemed there were as many male asfemale seeds. Dr. Dewey: You never can tell by the seeds which theyare. They range from 60 percent to 40 percent always. Mr. Anslinger: Did the male plant mature earlier thanthe female? Mr. Valaer: Yes. I brought specimens of both kindsover. The male plant was dry while the female plant was stillgreen and pliable. Some of the green pollen formed early in themale plant, and in order to get some seeds with it I shook someonto the female plants. Evidently I did fertilize them, becausethis is the third year, and I had volunteers this spring. It wasthree years ago I made the test, and last year and this year theyshowed up again. Mr. Wollner: Do you see what we are up against, Mr.Tennyson? Mr. Tennyson: Yes. I would like to ask Dr. Dewey aquestion if I may, to bring out the possibility off varieties inthis plant. A question has been raised as to the differencebetween Cannabis Americana and Cannabis Indica. My impression,according to past talks over the telephone with Dr. Dewey, wasthat they are all the same. Dr. Dewey: Three are many forms or types which arequite different, but the differences are only in degree. Thereare no distinct differences permitting a specific description Ibrought an illustration of the plants as they grow. There is theCannabis Indica described by La Marsh in 1788, and in 1901; if hehad my own plants he could not have made a more accuratedescription. Mr. Wollner: What can we be sure of? Mr. Anslinger: The danger in a definition would be todescribe one species like Indian hemp or Cannabis Sativa L. orCannabis Indica. We've got to be all-inclusive. Mr. Wollner: Is there a generic title? Dr. Dewey: There is only one species, but differentforms. Mr. Wollner: What would be the term under which wewould be certain of including all forms? Dr. Dewey: Cannabis Sativa L. Dr. Sievers: Unless you want to say Cannabis Sativa andall varieties, if that would help any. Mr. Tennyson: We discovered a field in Massachusetts,which has a law prohibiting the raising of Indian hemp, and theman said he was raising Cannabis Americana. It raised a nicequestion and might have availed him something in court if thereis any distinction between Indian hemp and American. Mr. Wollner: This is a basis we can all agree upon,then, that the designation be Cannabis Sativa L. That wouldinclude the plant in any stage off growth or development from theseed onward. Or would we have to further define that, Dr. Dewey? Dr. Dewey: I don't think so. Cannabis will cover theplant in all forms. Mr. Wollner: Is there any question as to identificationof the seed? Suppose the possession of the seed were proscribedby law and a man were found with a parcel of it. Is there anypossibility of error? Dr. Dewey: I don't think so. The seed is verycharacteristic. there are varieties in size ranging from 50 to75% in different forms. I don't know of any seed that can bemistaken for it though. Mr. Wollner: Would we have to actually plant the seedand see what happens to definitely establish that this is theseed? Mr. Valaer: I would like to quote Dr. George L. Keenan:"The most characteristic seed that I have ever examined isthe cannabis seed." It is the easiest part of the plant toidentify. I don't believe that difficulty will ever come up. Mr. Wollner: Have you had any experience, Mr. Tennyson? Mr. Tennyson: Not in seed. From what I can learn fromMr. Valaer and Mr. Simonds, it occurred to us that some one mighttake this abstract and impregnate tobacco, and we wonder whetherit would be possible to identify that? Mr. Wollner: I think that is an enforcement problemwhich would have to be predicated on present methods ofidentification and what can be developed. My thought was to firstdefine the subject we are dealing with. Let's agree on theterminology with reference to this plant marihuana, CannabisIndica, or Cannabis American. There seems to be no question thatif we call it Cannabis Sativa we include all forms of the plant.The question is this: Can the plant in any of its forms bemistaken for any other plant? Dr. Dewey: I don't know of any other plant. The leaf isvery characteristic. Mr. Wollner: Dr. Sievers, how do you feel? Dr. Sievers: I want to confirm what Mr. Valaer said; itis very easy to identify and there is no other seed known thatcould be mistaken for it. Some of the nettles come the closest, Ibelieve. As to the character of the seed, Mr. Keenan told me justthe other day that there was no other seed known that would bemistaken for it. Mr. Wollner: Dr. Munch, we are at the present time onthe question of defining terms in reference to this problem. Wehave reached the point where all of us agree that if we refer tothis species as Cannabis Sativa L. we refer to it in all stagesof growth and development, and all the related members of thesame family. The question has come up as to whether there is anypossibility of confounding the seeds or the leaves separated fromthe stalks, or the flowering tops of any of the plantsgenerically listed under this title, with any other type ofplant. Dr. Munch: In our experience, as far as the microscopicexamination goes, we think we can distinguish Cannabis Sativafrom any other plant that has been submitted. Mr. Wollner: What is the reason for the doubt impliedby your statement? Dr. Munch: We have only examined about fifty differentspecies of plants. There might be something we don't know about.Thus far, we have not had any difficulty in distinguishingCannabis. Mr. Wollner: Regardless of the state of dehydration? Dr. Munch: Regardless. Mr. Wollner: Is that purely visual, or is a chemicaltest included? Dr. Munch: Only microscopic tests have been conductedin detail. Mr. Wollner: In aging the plant, is there anylikelihood of what you refer to as the source of the resin beingdestroyed or in any way hidden or assimilated in the body of theleaf in such a manner you could not recognize it? Dr. Munch: I would have to qualify my answer to that. Ihaven't examined material less than three or four months old, andthe literature states that these glandular cells do not appearuntil the plant is at least two months old. Under a variety ofconditions, our microscopic examinations have always shown thepresence of the typical glandular cells. The microscope seems towork under all conditions. Mr. Wollner: Could we add to our definition that,regardless of the state of the plant, we could always identifyany portion as belonging to this family? I was just wonderingwhether we could back up anything we could say. Could we doanything to the plant which would prevent us from identifying it?Let's say it had the age of about one year. Dr. Munch: You are thinking about the leaf of theplant? Mr. Wollner: Yes. Dr. Munch: I think we can answer that in theaffirmative. I think that under ordinary conceivable conditionswe could identify it. Mr. Wollner: Dr. Voegtlin, how do you react? Dr. Voegtlin: I'm not a botanist. Suppose you only hadfragments or leaves or seeds, could you identify them? Dr. Munch: You could microscopically. Dr. Dewey: That's right. Mr. Valaer: At one time I had to examine a cigarettewhich was a mixture of tobacco and marijuana. It did not seemdifficult at all to distinguish between ordinary tobaccostructure and the other. It was a coarse yellow structure. It wasjust like picking out a pea from a bean, almost, under themicroscope. In this first experience it seemed a very simplematter. Dr. Fuller: There are other characteristics of theleaves besides the glands. I was looking at the pictorialmicroscopic fragments of Karma yesterday, and there are twentythings that might be concerned in distinguishing them. Cannabisis easy in one way, because there is only one species for thewhole family. No other plant answers that description. Dr. Dewey: It was the oldest plant described -- atleast 2700 BC. That description has come down without question tothe present time. Dr. Fuller: They have references of its use in Indiafor the purposes we are discussing. Mr. Wollner: Is there any part of the plant we canexempt from any official cognizance? Dr. Sievers: I could suggest something, but in view ofDr. Munich's work I am not so sure. It was always myunderstanding that the mature seed was harmless, but I would liketo hear what Dr. Munch says. Mr. Wollner: Would you mind telling us, Dr. Munch, whatyour recent experience has been? Dr. Munch: I would be very glad to. We becameinterested in connection with the study of the possibility ofdeveloping biochemical methods for detecting materials in thesaliva of animals, particularly men and horses. We studied twolots of hemp seed bought from feed stores, and a third lot whichI separate by have from Cannabis Sativa plants grown under mypersonal observation in Glenolden, Pennsylvania. All three lotsbehaved in the same way. Ether removed the fat. Alcohol extractsof the de-fatted material had either a depressive or stimulatingeffect on mice, cats, dogs, and horses. We went a step furtherand added norite to the alcohol solution. After norite treatmentthe solution was lighter in color and contained the principlegiving the stimulating reaction. We next eluted with chloroform,which gave us a cheesy-like material soluble in alcohol, andproducing only a depressant effect. When we took extracts ofcommercial material (consisting of the leaves and fruit) andtried them on our mice they showed either a depressive orstimulating reaction; when we carefully removed all the fruits,then the extracts of the leaves had a depressant effect only. Oursuggestion is that the stimulating principle of the fruit may goin with the depressant of the leaves and the resultant extractmay show either stimulating or depressing effects, or nothing. Dr. Voegtlin: Did you try it on dogs? Dr. Munch: No. Dr. Voegtlin: There was no ataxia? Dr. Munch: No. The extracts of the fruit do not produceataxia. In fact, they do not produce a typical cannabis reaction. Dr. Fuller: I think the depressing effect would besimilar to that of the barbiturates. Dr. Voegtlin: In terms of seed used, what is the doseas compared with the flowering tops? Dr. Munch: For the depressive type of effect? Dr. Voegtlin: Yes. Dr. Munch: Approximately ten times as large as theleaves, on mice. Dr. Matchett: Isn't it true that the extract from theleaves would be different from cannabinol in this case? Dr. Munch: We did not do any chemical work, but Iexpect they would differ. Mr. Tipton: It would appear there are at least threeprinciples we have to deal with. Mr. Wollner: There is this to be said. We know that theprinciple won't stand rigorous treatment. Is it definitely knownthat cannabis does the job? Dr. Munch: I evade answering that by saying I havenever seen cannabinol. I have attempted to duplicate some of thework reported in the literature, but have not gotten satisfactoryresults. Dr. Wollner: I would like to see reference to this:where a man has taken cannabinol, purified it and found it to beactive. Did Fraenkel do any tests? Dr. Munch: Yes. His work was with a certain product"Cannabinol" -- an oil -- which he found to be active.The work of Straub and the more recent chemical work of Cahn andCasparis shows that his suggested chemical constitution was notright. Dr. Voegtlin: The doses Straub used were small, gettingpowerful effects in man, which would indicate that he dealt witha highly potent material. Mr. Wollner: Dr. Fuller, I think you have something tosay. Dr. Fuller: I think I can add one or two points, fromthe experimental work I did covering about four years, some timeago, working with the plant on a rather extensive scale. We grewit by the acre -- fifteen or twenty acres at a time -- andconcentrated on the bushy plant and from seed selection we gotplants that would not grow over eight feet tall but were verybushy. That is, in the female. The male is more scraggly. In the work I was doing we attempted to root up the maleplants as fast as the blossoms became apparent so there would beno fertilization. I think, in planting as we used to, ten to ahill, we never get less than eight plants to come up and untilthe reached a certain stage we could not tell them apart. Some ofthese groups --- I don't know whether it is atmosphericconditions, soil conditions, or what -- seemed to develop moreresin than others. One year we might get tops and leaves verysticky, and again they did not seem to be so much so. After it is harvested and dried all you have to do is cut andshuck it like corn. There are always a certain number of seedsthat will remain on the tops, especially where the plants arequite resinous. Whether they can be gotten off by some process not known tothe seed men I don't know, but it appears to me that the effectDr. Munch has described probably came from a lack of thoroughnessin removing that last portion of the resin, rather than anyinherent substance in the interior of the seed itself. I am notsaying that is the case, and don't want to cast any doubt on Dr.Munch's work, but am giving it as a suggestion. The plants Iworked with were carried down to as ultimate a point as possiblein the experiments that were conducted . This was done during thewar. We were working with Dr. Sievers' office and trying todevelop a drug industry. I found it was a very simple matter toconcentrate the active principle, and I believe there is morethan one as we got more than one effect-- depression,uncoordination, and a narcosis on dogs. The experiment I carried out was done with an extract from theleaf and the seed and tops down to a point where we had a verysticky deep green extract, soluble in petroleum either and that,in turn, was treated with alkali which removed a great deal ofresinous material which I assumed was inert and, carrying downfurther, we found this oily residue which was extremely active.The fact that the product had been obtained using a strongalkali, say 10 percent, would indicate to me that this substancecannabinol is not very phenolic in character. If it had been, itwas my opinion it would have stayed in the alkali and not goneinto the petroleum either. All this petroleum either extract wasextremely active, and I was very anxious to go on with that tosee if I could not get out some things to which activity could beactually ascribed, but, unfortunately, the people backing thework died and my experiments ended at that point. The points Iwant to make are these: You will get drugs, cannabis, off probable different strength,depending on the season, and the development of this resinousmatter. It is possible that what we consider as an activeprinciple in the seeds is due to the adherent resinous matterwhich is difficult to abrade. I believe nobody knows definitelywhat, in a chemical way, the active principle of cannabis is, andI am almost of the opinion that there is more than one. I workedwith the leaves from the male tops before being dried, and theyare active, containing some resin. There is an active constituentthere, and there is no reason why, if anybody wanted to raise acrop of cannabis they could not gather the male tops for thatpurpose. The female contains more because of the bunchyconditions of the tops. In other words, I believe both plantscontain active material but, of course, the female is the morelucrative source. Mr. Wollner: This confirms a lot you have said, Dr.Munch. You confirmed that fact with the male plant. Dr. Munch: Yes. Exception is taken to only one point ofDr. Fuller's discussion. I set my hard-working assistants to workpicking off the shells, and we still got both the reactions fromthe decorticated plants. Mr. Wollner: Mr. Anslinger, I think that answers somedoubts in your mind as to the Uniform State Act. Mr. Anslinger: Yes. At this point, with regard to whatDr. Fuller had to say about several constituents, I think wemight consider the experiments made by the Medical Division ofthe War Department in Panama. They took ten or twenty soldiers,gave them cigarettes to smoke and observed them over a givenperiod. It seems every man got a different reaction. Some weredepressed, some stimulated, some morose, some hysterical, someslept, and some became wild. It bears out what Dr. Fuller had tosay about the possibility of there being a number of activeprinciples. Dr. Voegtlin: I don't know whether that necessarilyfollows. The way I understand the action of cannabis is that itdoes away with cerebral inhibitions. Now, that might produce anysort of reaction, according to the individual who is exposed tothe drug. I think that's the reason we get these differentmanifestations. For instance, in this paper, (referring toBavaran Haschish by Straub.) scientific people would have a verykeen perception of their scientific problems, but they did notdevelop mania as some people do. It s the psychologicalconstitution of the individual which determines the response. Iagree there is a good chance we are dealing with differentprinciples, though this has not be proven or disproven. Dr. Wollner: I think I am inclined to agree with Dr.Voegtlin. The thing has not been sufficiently investigated to saydefinitely that there is only one or that there is more than one.From the legal point of view we cannot tie up any legislationwith the term cannabinol. I am afraid that has to be out until weknow more, and that may take thirty or forty years. There is aconcomitant to that, since we do not know the active ingredientor ingredients, we are not in a position to say one chemicaltreatment or another might not produce those active ingredientsfrom that portion of the plant which at the present time isbelieved to be totally innocuous. We might be able to take thestalk which is today a harmless part of the plant and generate itfrom copious quantities of the active ingredient. Mr. Tennyson: That bears directly on the discussion wehad on limiting this for the purpose of a workable piece oflegislation to flowering tops, seeds, and leaves of the plant.Our idea was to attempt to help the hemp industry if we could doit. Mr. Wollner: We might, among ourselves, compromise thesituation. That situation must be acknowledged in the same wayyou have to accept the fact that morphine can be extracted fromthe stalk of the opium plant. Mr. Anslinger: We might be in a bad position if weeliminated the stalks and later found it to be present in them. Dr. Fuller: My experience with it was that the activeprinciple was tied up in the resin -- whether this was gatheredup and held there mechanically and did not exist in the morecellular portions of the plant I do not know. That was my onlyexperience. I made no tests on the stems. Mr. Anslinger: We could make those tests, couldn't we? Mr. Wollner: I wonder whether our botanist friendscould help us? What is the history of plants of this type? Are welikely to have them behaving as morphine and present in all partsof the plants? Dr. Fuller: I can tell you our experience withbelladonna, which is easily identified. The succulent parts, thatis, the leaves toward the ends of the lateral stems and tops werealways the most potent. We grew some that were over 2 percentalkaloid. As you come down to the big leaves which grew tomaturity early and were beginning to disappear, there was verylittle alkaloid. The main stem and lateral stems that were woodywere devoid of alkaloid. Toward the ends -- in the top stems --we got alkaloid. Where they were more or less woody there wasnone. Mr. Wollner: Wouldn't that be predicated on thesensitivity of your tests? Wouldn't it be reasonable to assumethat at any one time you would find it in the pipe lines? Dr. Fuller: Yes, the pipe lines contained it all theway through as long as they were succulent. The root as well asthe leaves of the belladonna contains the alkaloid. The woodystem did not contain it. Dr. Sievers: The resin is probably parallel toessential oils which are present in leaves or flowers more thanin the woody part. The stems as a rules contain a great dealless. Occasionally you will find it in the root. I hardly thinkthe seed would contain much resin and at this time I would liketo be put clear on what Dr. Munch has developed -- whether hereally thinks the seed will produce any effects as the resindoes. Dr. Munch: The active material from the fruits does notproduce the same type of pharmacological response as the activematerial from the leaves. We have instances recorded in theliterature of narcotic effects on children from the fruits. Mr. Tennyson: When you speak of fruits, do you includeseed? Dr. Munch: Technically this is a fruit and not seed. Dr. Fuller: The words are more or less synonymous inthe way they are used. Mr. Anslinger: There is a case on record, I believe, ofa prisoner who had a canary bird in the cell and the warden foundhe was taking the seed brought in to the bird. Dr. Munch: May I offer for the record several lines ofFrench? In a publication by Dardanane, on page 20, he isreferring to some work done by Bouquet. The essence of it is thatphysiological tests upon the twigs of Indian hemp showed 0.40percent, whereas the inflorescences showed 7.20 percent of resin. Dr. Fuller: That sounds to me as if it was an immatureplant. Mr. Anslinger. Bouquet is working on this now. Dr. Dewey: It says the young shoots here showed a veryhigh percentage in comparison with the old shoots. Mr. Sievers: The old stems would still contain less. Dr. Munch: Yes. Mr. Tennyson: It occurs to me, Dr. Wollner, that if weget a law we have to support it and everything in it when we gobefore the committee. We have here some other uses -- I don'tknow whether I am anticipating one of these questions or not.There is a use for fiber, for bird-seed, and for oil in thevarnish industry. Those people will probably come in and complainabout what they consider a foolish attempted control if we try tomake this all-inclusive. If we are going to cast suspicion onevery part of the plant we certainly will have to be fortified. Mr. Wollner: I would offer this question to that,although we think it is well taken. It does not follow thatbecause the seeds or the stalks are potential sources that wewish legislation to control their use. I do feel that we shouldbe in a position to know what the situation is. I think thatwould be a preferred position to be in -- to be able to say thatthere is a possibility, but if it is existing, it is in amountsnot sufficient to warrant its inclusion. Mr. Tennyson: We had a complaint from theSherwin-Williams Company who wanted to start a farm. We tried todiscourage that. The point was raised in connection with thistentative act we have drafted. We are faced, on account ofconstitutional limitations, with the necessity of drafting thisas a tax measure, with lessening of application of the tax to thelegitimate articles of commerce which are innocent. In that phaseof the situation we have quite a problem to qualify theexemptions, say seed, where there is apparently such a use forit. Mr. Wollner: One thing would help us a great deal. Itwould be relatively simple, I imagine, to delete certain portionsof the plant if we could say how much of the active principle wasavailable in those parts of the plant. I turn to Dr. Voegtlin onthis. Is it possible to use a bio-assay? Dr. Voegtlin: No, I don't think it is characteristicenough. We are interested in the psychic manifestations which areproduce by this product. These are, of course, not recognized indogs or rabbits. Mr. Wollner: Dr. Voegtlin, you mentioned that articleby Straub in which he created this active principle in terms ofthe corneal effect. Dr. Voegtlin: The criticism of the bio-assay on dogsholds also for the bio-assay on rabbits. both methods are basedon the degree of cerebral depression produced. The symptoms indogs and rabbits are not specific for cannabis, but occur alsoafter alcohol and other drugs having a similar pharmacologicalaction. Mr. Wollner: Cannabis Sativa is included in the U.S.Pharmacopoeia in unit doses? Dr. Voegtlin: Yes. Mr. Wollner: How are they measured? Dr. Voegtlin: By the bio-assay method. I was a memberof the Standardization Committee of the League of Nations andthat is one thing we discussed and we came to the conclusion itwas not reliable. Most pharmacopoeias do not contain a bio-assayfor cannabis, although the American one does. Dr. Munch: If I may intrude, that bio-assay was in the10th, but is not in the 11th edition of the U.S. Pharmacopoeia.When the American Drug Manufacturers Association submittedsamples they obtained such inconsistent results that thebio-assay was deleted from U.S.P. XI. Qualitatively, theprocedure was all right. We found, in our dog tests, that onlyabout one dog in a hundred had a sufficiently developed brain tobe useful. I made a detailed study of the rabbits cornealanesthesia method. We were unable to obtain any quantitativeresults with fluid extract. We do think it is qualitativelyvaluable. Mr. Wollner: Could you answer this question: Has anactive principle ever been separated from Cannabis Sativa, whichwas not associated with cannabinol? Dr. Munch: If, by cannabinol, you refer to a particularproduct mentioned in the literature by Fraenkel, then I cananswer the question. I believe that if the material reported byFraenkel is considered as an entity, there may be anotherconstituent in the leaf of Cannabis. Subsequent work has notconfirmed the original cannabinol, and there are possibly threeor four active principles at the present time, depending on theauthor. Mr. Wollner: We are after limiting specifications. Itis not necessary that the active principle be cannabinol or thatit be the one and only, but if we could definitely establish thatthe active principle has been found then we could say "asubstance which contains less than a certain amount of cannabinolis exempt." Do you see what I mean? How do you feel,Commissioner? Mr. Anslinger: I would like to ask Dr. Munch aquestion. I thought you had found one other principle? Dr. Munch: I believe there are at least three activeprinciples. Mr. Wollner: What would the legal aspect of this be,Mr. Tennyson? Would it be legally sound to measure the activityof the product by the amount of a material which is present andalways associated with the material? Mr. Tennyson: This is a taxing measure, you know. Welike to think of it as some standard definite term that can bereferred to that everybody knows about. If you are going to taxsomething on the basis of its strength, you have a lot oftrouble. Mr. Wollner: You tax liquors by nature of their contentand material. Mr. Anslinger: Wouldn't that place a colossal burden onyour division, Dr. Wollner, when we get these cases into court? Mr. Wollner: I think the Beams reaction would giveevidence of cannabinol. Mr. Tipton: If the Commissioner finds a field offifteen acres growing will it be necessary to test ever plant todetermine that, or can you, when you have tested one strain, saythe rest of the field is the same? Mr. Wollner: That would not be necessary, would it? Ifyou find a man with one hundred heroin pills it is not necessaryto test the hundred. We are trying to exempt the usable parts ofthe plant. Mr. Valaer: At the present time the chemist has an easytime identifying. I would rather see us go further and say,identify a green resin which is apparently in both male andfemale plants. If you have to find a definite crystallinesubstance it is going to put a burden on the chemist. I believewe are going far enough to keep within practical grounds. If itis not a definite structure we could say it is a green resin. Wehave been very successful in court. I don't know of any casewhere anybody has fallen down. If we go too far I am afraid weare going to get into trouble. On this data here of the League ofNations on which some of the best minds in Europe have expressedthemselves one man calls Cannabis one thing and one anotherthing. They all agree that there is a crude green substance. Ifyou want to get into effect within the next year or so, if we getas far as a green resin characteristic of the plant, we willaccomplish something. Mr. Anslinger: I am afraid of making it toocomplicated. The agents out in the sticks would be confused. Mr. Wollner: What's wrong with Mr. Valaer's approach? Mr. Pierce: That would make the question easierconstitutionally to defend I think, than if you were to link itwith some constituent part. Mr. Wollner: Suppose Dr. Matchett, as a result of hisinvestigations in the laboratory, finds he is able to recover acertain amount of this green resin from the stalks, what isCommissioner Anslinger supposed to do then? For the purpose ofthis act could we define the substance first as a resin,secondly, as the leaves of the male and female plant, third, asthe tops of the plants? Mr. Pierce: Would that include bird seed? Mr. Tennyson: No. Mr. Wollner: If Sherwin-Williams wants to put in anacreage then they could do it. Mr. Fuller: They can winnow the seeds out of the floweringtops. Mr. Anslinger: The reason I am after the seed is thepreventive measure. Getting the seed out will make our troubledisappear. Mr. Sievers: Isn't that the same situation you have withregard to poppy? You can grow them in this country for seedlegally, can't you? Mr. Tennyson: What you say is probably true, but welike to discourage that as far as possible. Mr. Sievers: There is no law at present that wouldprohibit me from growing poppy as a seed poppy. Mr. Anslinger: In every case I know of where it wasdone we got the defendant. Mr. Sievers: We had a project years ago where the scheme wasto grow the poppy and let it mature and have the seed as a sidecrop, and we extracted morphine and other products. We did not gofar with it because the Secretary did not approve. Dr. Fuller: Can't you have some provision in yourlegislation for destroying the seed after the oil has been takenout? Mr. Tipton: I would like to pursue this definitionfurther. That sounds pretty good if you can define this greenishsubstance. Mr. Wollner: I don't know whether it would be necessaryto define it beyond stating its generic state: "The resinwhich is derived from this plant." Mr. Tipton: Given a batch of greenish resin, you candetermine that? Mr. Wollner: Yes, I think that can be done. That is aquestion of laboratory technique. Mr. Tipton: Can you say that the active principle is inthe resin? Mr. Wollner: Yes, we can definitely say that the activeprinciple is in the resin. Mr. Tipton: Your suggested definition is the floweringtops, the leaves, and the greenish resin? Mr. Wollner: But that doesn't satisfy CommissionAnslinger because potentially every seed is harmful. Mr. Anslinger: Our experience has been that in almostevery large seizure made we got a large quantity of the seed fromthe defendant for growing purposes. Mr. Wollner: What would happen if we proscribed the useof seed for bird seed? Mr. Anslinger: Dr. Munch told me it would stop thebirds from singing. Dr. Munch: The difficulty in Philadelphia now may beillustrated by one of these photographs. The individualstestified that this crop had been grown from bird seed scatteredon the ground. Mr. Wollner: If we proscribe the use of this stuff asbird seed we could eliminate that. Mr. Pierce: Does ordinary commercial bird seed have anyparticular effect on its use? Mr. Wollner: Bird seed only in part contains theCannabis Sativa seed. I do not think our state of knowledge onthat is sufficient. Not enough work has been done to say that itis detrimental tot the birds. The idea would be to license thegrowing of this stuff and to rule out the use of it for birdseed. If anybody else had it after that they would be guilty of aviolation. Mr. Tennyson: The tentative idea was to place atransfer tax on whatever we should cover, for instance,marihuana, or a general term which would be recognized -- amoderate tax for recognized purposes and a prohibitive transfertax for any other purpose. What was the first amount? Mr. Tipton: $1.00 to register. Dr. Dewey: The use of hemp seed for bird seed costsabout $1.00 per hundred pounds. Mr. Wollner: I don't see that it would present anydifficulties from the point of view of our technical side toinclude all the parts of the plants we know to contribute to thedrug. Mr. Pierce: We have excluded transfers to certainusers. We would like to know if it would be safe to excludetransfers to persons just selling bird seed and who do not planttit? Can any ill effect come from this? Mr. Wollner: Suppose a man said he just discarded somebird seed and threw it out his window? Mr. Pierce: If it is growing he is liable for the tax. Mr. Wollner: Suppose he plants it on someone else'sproperty? Dr. Dewey: Practically all of our wild hemp is frombird seed. I don't know of a single instance in America where thefiber type has become wildly grown. Mr. Tipton: Is hemp seed indispensable from bird seed?If Commissioner Anslinger would agree to cut out bird seed itwould certainly help the bill and enforcement. Mr. Anslinger: Can they prove that the birds need thisfood? Dr. Matchett: Two people told me the hemp seed hadpotentialities for evil for the bird if the husks were notremoved; furthermore, that the seed is an oily seed and isdangerous especially if the oil is rancid. I gathered that thehemp would not be indispensable, but did not ask it directly. Mr. Wollner: Can we start setting up a definition forthe purposes of the legal division? We include in that the resinderived from the plant Cannabis Sativa. Dr. Fuller: Would you want to include the solid extracttoo? Mr. Wollner: Any extract or derivative thereof. Mr. Tennyson: You would not need to do that. Mr. Wollner: In other words, the usual terminologywould obtain with reference to this. Can't we get away from theuse of the term marihuana? Mr. Tennyson: We just happened to mention it as ageneral term. Mr. Wollner: I think we would be on sounder ground ifwe left t in the scientific name Cannabis Sativa Linne. Mr. Tipton: In a statute you can pick a term and defineit as you please. Marihuana struck us as a good short form. Itsmeaning in any other regard would be of no consequence. Mr. Tennyson: But don't you think, in order to be alittle more scientific, we might call it Cannabis? Dr. Munch: Certain state laws prohibit the use ofmarihuana. If your Federal law defines marihuana, will thatstrengthen your state laws? Mr. Tennyson: One of the purpose of the conference isto give the States a better definition. Mr. Wollner: We can say that Cannabis Sativa meansCannabis Sativa Linne. Mr. Pierce: Isn't there some advantage in using thepopular term marihuana? Mr. Wollner: It is technically unsound and wrong, butthat's up to you men to decide. Whatever you call it, it meansCannabis Sativa L, and any preparations, derivatives, etc. --what else should there be? Mr. Tennyson: "The salts, derivatives andpreparations" or "any resin, salt, derivative andpreparation thereof." Do you want to give that? Marihuanameans Cannabis Sativa L. and any resin, compound, mixture, salt,preparation, etc." Would that mean everything? Dr. Dewey: Yes. Mr. Wollner: Cannabis means the flowering tops, theleaves and any resin, compound, mixture, salt, derivative orpreparation of the plant Cannabis Sativa L. Dr. Munch: That will include the fiber, won't it? Mr. Pierce: We can exclude the fiber. Dr. Munch: In the Mexican Pharmacopoeia it says thatmarihuana refers to the feminine inflorescence of CannabisSativa. Mr. Wollner: Can we deliberately exempt the stalks? Mr. Tipton: I think it would be better to say"Marihuana is the resin, and the flowering tops and leavesof the plant Cannabis Sativa L., the preparations, etc."That will eliminate the stalks yet include the resin. Mr. Tennyson: Is the "flowering top"sufficient to include the seed. Mr. Wollner: It is not quite specific: Mr. Valaer: Let me give you a rough idea of what I havein mind. For the purposes of this act marihuana shall include allof the species of Cannabis Sativa Lynne, Noraceae and itssynonyms: Cannabis eradica paludosa endrs; Cannabis indicaLamarck; Cannabis macoosperma stokes; Cannabis chinensis, delile;Cannabis giganta, delile; and by all other designations known.The provisions of this act shall pertain to all parts of thepistillate (female plant) and all parts of the staminate (maleplant) and all parts that have been found to secrete thecharacteristic resin of Cannabis Sativa L. Mr. Wollner: That throws it wide open again. We wouldhave you out in the field looking for secretions. I don't thinkyou give us enough leeway for exempting the stalks. Thesuggestion of Mr. Tipton fortifies us in this respect. The stalksas such cannot be smoked. Dr. Matchett: Could it be possible that the youngplants might have the resin in their stalks? Dr. Fuller: Put in the word mature. Mr. Wollner: I think that's a good point. The onlything you want to exclude are the mature stalks. I don't see anyreason why that should not be done. Mr. Tipton: I can't think of any. Mr. Wollner: Would you be authorized to issue specificregulations interpreting this? Mr. Tipton: You have to be pretty definite in your act. Mr. Wollner: Would you be undertaking too much if youexempted the oil? Mr. Pierce: In ou transfer tax we could make exceptionsfor the paint companies. Mr. Wollner: If you are going to take care of thesethings in your transfer tax why not take care of your stalk theretoo? Mr. Pierce: We could. We are attempting to thrust themarihuana traffic into legal channels where it could be taxedsome. Mr. Wollner: What is that predicated on? Mr. Tennyson: Physical transfer: Mr. Wollner: Suppose I grew the stuff myself. Mr. Tipton: You are taxed as a producer. Mr. Wollner: Would the tax on that be prohibitive? Mr. Tipton: No, by paying $25.00 I think you can growand smoke all the marihuana you like, yourself. Mr. Wollner: Is it incumbent upon you to see that noone else smokes it? Mr. Pierce: There is a transfer tax which isprohibitive, and, of course, criminal penalties. Mr. Wollner: And the responsibility rests on theenforcement officer to show that there was a transfer? Mr. Pierce: yes. Mr. Wollner: Mr. Pierce, would you try to re-word thatdefinition? Mr. Pierce: How would it be if you let us work out thedefinition. We have pretty well in mind what you wish to haveexempted. Mr. Wollner: Commissioner Anslinger, have you anysuggestions? Mr. Anslinger: No, I think that's going to be a greatimprovement over the definition we started with. I wanted to showthe extent of the traffic and give some of the gentleman an ideaof this problem to show we are not on a fishing expedition. Lastyear there were 296 seizures we know about. The illicit traffichas shown up in almost every state. There was a question about the forms of Cannabis derivativesemployed medicinally. This will take care of that trade, won'tit? Is the tax to be prohibitive as to the trade? We prepared forthe legal division a statement as to what was used. We had a listof about three hundred compounds. Mr. Pierce: We have allowed exemptions in another partof the law for medical or veterinary uses. Mr. Tennyson: Even that's going to be awfullyexpensive, Mr. Pierce: Mr. Anslinger: I was surprised to hear some medicalexperts at Geneva recently say that is has absolutely no medicaluse. I think that the Indian delegate wanted to know what he wasgoing to do for his corn plaster, and one of the medicos said itwasn't the cannabis, but something else, that had the analgesiceffect. Dr. Munch: We have shown that Cannabis has no localanalgesic effect. Mr. Anslinger: (Reading the 14th question.) "Whatare the proofs that the use of marihuana in any of its forms, arehabit-forming or addicted, and what are the indications andpositive proofs that such addiction develops socially undesirablecharacteristics in the user?" We have a lot of cases showingthat it certainly develops undesirable characteristics. We have acase of a boy, about 15, (reads from report of case). This tookplace in a community playground in Finely, Ohio. The playgroundsupervisors were the men who were selling the stuff. It alldeveloped from the case of this youngster who was evidently goingcrazy. That's only one of the many cases we have. Mr. Tipton: Have you a lot of cases on this--horrorstories -- that's what we want. Mr. Tennyson: Isn't there some literature on theeffects, Dr. Voegtlin? Dr. Voegtlin: Oh, yes. Mr. Anslinger: And it leads to insanity? Dr. Voegtlin: I think it is an established fact thatprolonged use leads to insanity in certain cases, depending uponthe amount taken, of course. Many people take it and do not goinsane, but many do. Mr. Wollner: At the League of Nations they whitewashedthe whole thing. Dr. Dewey: Colonel Crane wrote me it did cause troubleover there. Mr. Tipton: the Commission inquired into the fact andsaid there was no more reason to control the hashish than tocontrol alcohol. If it leads to insanity, and we have a lot ofhorror stories, we can build it up. Mr. Wollner: There was a report given out by Wilbert in1910 in which he claimed, as one of his conclusions, that therewas no evidence of a habit-forming nature from the use ofCannabis by the Anglo-Saxon race. I just mention that because itmay be pulled on you in opposition some time. Dr. Dewey: Dr. Patrick, of the Bureau of Chemistry,definitely stated it was the most dangerous habit-forming drug hehad taken, and he tried all of them. Mr. Wollner: Are there any other questions? Mr. Sievers: I would like to ask what the situation is withregard to the seed. What about a person who wants to import theseed for bird seed or hemp oil? Mr. Tennyson: That's something still to be determinedwhen we consider this new definition. I am not quite sure myselfjust how that will be handled. Mr. Tipton: The only thing I had in mind was that wewould endeavor, by the use of exemptions, to protect the use foroil-producing hemp, and to discourage the use of bird seed,because bird seed, as the Commissioner remarks, results to agreat extent in illicit usage. Mr. Seivers: Will there be a tax on the seed when used for oilpurposes? Mr. Tipton: The transfer tax will be exempted there. Mr. Pierce: I think we can work out the tax onmedicinal uses so that it won't be prohibitive. The bird seedindustry will be wiped out probably as far as hemp seed isconcerned. Mr. Tennyson: Dr. Munch, you are quite familiar withSharpe & Dohme's method of manufacture, aren't you? I wasthinking that this transfer tax would have to be appreciable atleast, and if it were at the rate of $1.00 an ounce on the rawmaterial and another dollar an ounce on the transfer of extract,it would be rather expensive. Dr. Fuller: I think you will find that, while a greatmany preparations may use a small quantity, there won't be agreat deal of it used medicinally. Bauer and Black, in Chicago,used a great deal in making a plaster at one time. the rest of itmight use a few pounds a year and, perhaps, somebody making cornplaster would use some. Mr. Tennyson: Veterinarians use a great deal, don'tthey? Dr. Fuller: I don't think you will find the volume isvery great. I think the ue of Cannabis is diminishing as alegitimate use. that is just my opinion. from the point of viewof one who has studied the situation for a good many years. Mr. Wollner: Gentlemen, I want to thank Dr. Fuller, Dr.Dewey, Dr. Veogtlin, Mr. Sievers, and Dr. Munch for their verykind assistance. I wonder if you gentlemen would be in a positionto confer with us further after this have been given moreconsideration? Assent. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-81IA087-000625-B018-181http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044442 text/html 37768HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:44:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:34 GMTContent-length: 37550 Statement of Clinton M. Hester Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 TAXATION OF MARIHUANA HEARINGS BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SEVENTY-FIFTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION ON H.R. 6385 APRIL 27, 28, 29, 30, AND MAY 4, 1937 STATEMENT OF CLINTON M. HESTER, ASSISTANT GENERAL COUNSEL FORTHE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY; AND S.G TIPTON, OFFICE OF GENERALCOUNSEL MR. HESTER: Mr. Chairman and members of the Ways and MeansCommittee, for the past two years the Treasury Department hasbeen making a study of the subject of marihuana, a drug which isfound in the flowering tops, seeds, and leaves of Indian hemp andis now being used extensively by high-school children incigarettes. Its effect is deadly. I would like to say at this point that we have with us thismorning Commissioner Anslinger, of the Bureau of Narcotics, whohas had charge of the enforcement of the Harrison Narcotics Act,and who will have charge of the enforcement of this act, if thisbill is enacted into law. We also have with use a pharmacologistwho is prepared to testify as to the effect of the drug on humanbeings. We also have an expert chemist, and one of theoutstanding botanists in the country, who are prepared to testifywith reference to the bill, if you desire to hear them. The leading newspapers of the United States have recognizedthe seriousness of this problem and many of them have advocatedFederal legislation to control the traffic in marihuana. In fact,several newspapers in the city of Washington have advocated suchlegislation. In a recent editorial, the Washington Times stated: The marihuana cigarette is one of the most insidious of allforms of dope, largely because of he failure of the public tounderstand its fatal qualities. The Nation is almost defenseless against it, having no Federallaws to cope with it and virtually no organized campaign forcombating it. The result is tragic. School children are the prey of peddlers who infest schoolneighborhoods. High-school boys and girls buy the destructive weed withoutknowledge of it capacity for harm, and conscienceless dealerssell it with impunity. This is a national problem and it must have nationalattention. The fatal marihuana cigarette must be recognized as a deadlydrug and American children must be protected against it. As recently as the 17th of this month, there appeared in theeditorial columns of the Washington Post and editorial on thissubject, advocating the speedy enactment by Congress of this verybill introduced by Chairman Doughton, and now before thiscommittee for consideration. In its concluding paragraph, theeditorial stated: With a Federal law on the books a more ambitious attack can belaunched. It is time to wipe out the evil before itspotentialities for national degeneracy become more apparent. Thelegislation just introduced in Congress by RepresentativeDoughton would further this end. Its speedy passage is desirable. In an editorial on this subject appearing in its editorialcolumns on April 10, 1937, the Washington Herald quoted theJournal of the American Medical Association, in part, as follows: The problems of greatest menace in the United States seem tobe the rise in use of Indian hemp (marihuana) with inadequatecontrol laws. A cartoon unusually illustrative of the insidiousness of theillicit traffic in marihuana appeared in the Washington Herald ofApril 15, under the title "Another Pied Piper". Thecartoon pictured the Pied Piper in the form of a marihuanacigarette, marching down a road described as "The DopeHabit", playing his pipe and being followed by a group ofchildren portrayed as "Our High School Youth". Apropos the seriousness of the problem which H.R. 6385 isdesigned to correct, is a statement made by CommissionerAnslinger of the Bureau of Narcotics, before a House judiciarysubcommittee on Friday of last week. In the course of histestimony in support of two bills, which, like H.R. 6385 aredesigned to aid the Federal Government in its fight to stamp outthe illicit traffic in narcotic drugs, Mr. Anslinger made thestatement, supported by statistics of the Department of Justice,that the major criminal in the United States is the drug addict;that of all the offenses committed against the laws of thiscountry, the narcotic addict is the most frequent offender. The purpose of H.R. 6385 is to employ the Federal taxing powernot only to raise revenue from the marihuana traffic, but also todiscourage the current and widespread undesirable use ofmarihuana by smokers and drug addicts and thus drive the trafficinto channels where the plant will be put to valuable industrial,medical, and scientific uses. In accomplishing this generalpurpose two objectives should dictate the form of the proposedlegislation: First, the development of a scheme of taxation whichwould raise revenue and which would also render virtuallyimpossible the acquisition of marihuana by person who would putit to illicit uses without unduly interfering with the use of theplant for industrial , medical, and scientific purposes; andsecond, the development of an adequate means of publicizingdealings in marihuana in order that the traffic may beeffectively taxed and controlled. The Harrison Narcotics Act (U.S.C. title 26, sec 1040-10541383-1391), was designed to accomplish these same generalobjectives with reference to opium and coca leaves and theirderivatives. That act required all legitimate handlers ofnarcotics to register, pay an occupational tax, and fileinformation returns setting forth the details surrounding theiruse of the drugs. It further provided that no transfer ofnarcotics (with a few exceptions, notably by practicioners intheir bona-fide practice and druggists who dispense onprescription) could be made except upon written order forms.Since it was also provided that no one except registered personscould legally acquire these order forms and since illicitconsumers were not eligible to register, the order-formrequirement serves the double purpose of publicizing transfers ofnarcotics and restricting them to legitimate users. The same objectives impelled Congress to enact the NationalFirearms Act (U.S.C. title 26, sec. 1132-1132q) In that act, inorder to accomplish them, it was provided that all manufacturers,dealers, and importers of firearms should register and payspecial taxes ranging from $200 to $500 per year. It was furtherprovided that firearms could not be transferred except inpursuance of a written order form and upon payment of a $200 taxfor each transfer, transfers made to law enforcement officersbeing excepted. Thus, provision was made for publicizing dealingsin firearms and for restricting their use to those persons whowould have legitimate use for them. The proposed marihuana bill is something of a synthesis ofboth of these statutes. It provides that all manufacturers,compounders, importers, producers, dealers, laboratory users, andpracticioners must register and pay a special occupational taxranging from one dollar for practicioners and scientific users tofifty dollars for importers compounders, and manufacturers. Thefiling of information returns is also required in order topublicize the dealings in the plant. As an additional means ofbringing the marihuana traffic out into the open, the bill alsomakes it illegal, with certain exceptions, to transfer marihuanaexcept in pursuance of a written order form setting forth thefacts surrounding the transaction. Substantial criminal penaltiesare imposed for violating the order form or registry provisionsof this bill. In order to raise additional revenue and to stamp outtransfers to persons who would use marihuana for undesirablepurposes, it is further required that on any transfer which isrequired to be made in pursuance of an order form a transfer taxshall be imposed. This tax will be at the comparatively low rateof one dollar per ounce, or fraction thereof, for transfers toregistered persons, but at the rate of $100 per ounce, orfraction thereof, on transfers to persons who have not registeredand paid the special occupational tax whether or not they arerequired to register and pay the tax. It is made a criminaloffense to acquire marihuana without having paid the transfertax, when payment of such tax is required. Since those who wouldconsume marihuana are not eligible to register under the bill,and since the $100 tax on unregistered persons is designed to beprohibitive, such persons could not acquire marihuana. The form of the bill is such, however, as not to interferematerially with any industrial, medical, or scientific uses whichthe plant may have. Since hemp fiber and articles manufacturedtherefrom are obtained from the harmless mature stalk of theplant, all such products have been completely eliminated from thepurview of the bill by defining the term "marihuana" inthe bill, so as to exclude from it provisions the mature stalksand its compounds or manufactures. There are also some dealings in marihuana seeds for plantingpurposes and for use in the manufacture of oil which isultimately employed by the paint and varnish industry. As theseeds, unlike the mature stalk, contain the drug, the samecomplete exemption could not be applied in this instance. Butthis type of transaction, as well as any transfer of completedpaint or varnish products, has been exempted from transfer tax.Any negligible medical use which marihuana may have will also beleft largely unrestricted by this bill. It is provided, as in the Harrison Act, that dispensations byregistered practicioners in the course of their professionalpractice and transfers made in good faith by druggists inpursuant of a written prescription issued by a registeredpracticioner shall be exempt from the order-form provisions andfrom the transfer tax. Moreover, we are informed by authoritiesin the Public Health Service that there is no real medical usefor the drug marihuana for the reason that its effect on humanbeings is so variable and also because there are bettersubstitutes. The heart of this bill is contained in sections 2, 6, and 7.Section 2 imposes an occupational excise tax in the case of (1)importers, manufacturers, and compounders of marihuana, $50 peryear; (2) producers of marihuana, $25 per year; (3) physicians,dentists, veterinary surgeons and other practicioners one dollarper year; (4) persons who use marihuana for research, instructionor analysis, $1 per year; (5) dealers, $15 per year. Upon payment of the tax, the taxpayer is required to registerwith the collector. These occupational taxes and registrationprovisions are similar to those imposed by the Harrison NarcoticAct and the National Firearms Act. The constitutionality of suchprovisions in the Harrison Narcotics Act was sustained by theSupreme Court in Doremus vs. United States (249 U.S. 86) and onthe 29th of March of this year, the Supreme Court sustained thevalidity of the similar occupational taxes and registrationprovisions imposed by the National Firearms Act in the case ofSonzinsky vs. United States (57 S. Ct. 554). Section 6 of the bill makes in unlawful for anyone to transfermarihuana except in pursuance of a written order of the person towhom such marihuana is transferred on a form to be issued inblank, for that purpose by the Secretary of the Treasury. Thisorder form requirement does not apply, however, to a transfer ofmarihuana by a practicioner to his patient, or by a druggist to aconsumer who presents to the druggist a prescription issued by apracticioner registered under the act. Nor does it apply toexportations of marihuana, transfers of marihuana to Governmentofficials, transfers to paint or varnish of which marihuana is aningredient, transfers of marihuana to registered persons for usein the manufacture of paint or varnish and transfers of seeds ofthe marihuana plant. This order form requirement is similar tothat contained in the Harrison Narcotics Act and the NationalFirearms Act. Section 7 imposes a tax of one dollar per ounce upon alltransfers of marihuana to person who have paid the specialoccupational tax and registered under Section 2 of the bill. Itimposes a tax of $100 per ounce on transfers of marihuana tononregistered person. The types of transfer exempted form theorder form requirements under section 6, such as those bypracticioners and druggists, are likewise exempted from thepayment of any tax under the provisions of this section. At this point, this bill, like the National Firearms Act,departs from the plan of the Harrison Narcotics Act which limitsthe right to purchase narcotic drugs to those persons who arepermitted to register under that act. This limitation was thefocal point of attack against the constitutionality of theHarrison Narcotics Act in the case of Doremus vs. United States,supra, and Nigro vs. United States (1927) (276 U.S. 332). In thelatter case, the minority of the court expressed the view thatthis provision in the Harrison Narcotics Act, which limited thepersons entitled to purchase narcotic drugs, was unconstitutionalon the ground that it manifested an intention on the part of theCongress to regulate a subject matter reserved to the Statesunder the Tenth Amendment. Thus, in order to obviate the possibility of a similar attackup the constitutionality of this bill, it , like the NationalFirearms Act, permits the transfer of marihuana to nonregisteredpersons upon the payment of a heavy transfer tax. The bill wouldpermit the transfer of marihuana to anyone, but would impose a$100 per ounce tax upon a transfer to a person who might use itfor purposes which are dangerous and harmful to the public, justas the National Firearms Act permits a transfer of a machine gunto anyone but imposes a $200 tax upon a transfer to a person whowould be likely to put it to an illegal use. Although the $100 transfer tax in this bill is intended to beprohibitive, as is the $200 transfer tax in the National FirearmsAct, it is submitted that it is constitutional as a revenuemeasure. In the case of Veazie Bank v. Fenno (1869, 8 Wall, 533) theSupreme Court sustained as a proper exercise of the taxing powera ten percent tax upon state-bank notes, notwithstanding the tax,as it was intended to be, was so heavy as to drive such notes outof circulation. The Court said that the fact that a tax wasprohibitive would not invalidate it if, on its face, it appearedto be a revenue raising measure, and the fact that a tax isburdensome or tends to restrict or suppress the thing taxed, doesnot make it any the less a valid exercise of the taxing power.Where the taxing act appears on its face to be a revenue measure,the Court stated that it is not within the province of thejudiciary to inquire other motives that may have influenced theCongress in enacting the tax. In 1913 the Ways and Means Committee reported out a bill whichbecame the Smoking Opium Act of January 17, 1914 (38 Stat. 277).That act imposed a prohibitive tax of $300 per pound upon themanufacture of smoking opium. The act further required anyonedesiring to engage in the business of manufacturing smoking opiumto give to the United States a bond in the minimum amount of$100,000 to insure the collection of this tax. Theconstitutionality of this prohibitive tax was considered by theCircuit Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in the case ofLee Mow Lin v. United States (195 U.S. 27), in which the courtconsidered the constitutionality of the Oleomargarine Act of1902. That act imposed a tax of one-quarter cent per pound uponthe manufacture or white oleomargarine and a tax of ten cents perpound upon the manufacture of yellow oleomargarine. The lattertax was deliberately designed to discourage the manufacture ofyellow oleomargarine. The constitutionality of the ten cent taxon yellow oleomargarine was challenged on the grounds, first,that it was so heavy as to indicate an intention by Congress toregulate a subject-matter reserved to the States by the tenthamendment; and second, that it was an unreasonable classificationin that the ten cent tax arbitrarily discriminated against yellowoleomargarine and in favor of white oleomargarine in violation ofthe due process clause of the fifth amendment. The Supreme Court overruled both of these contentions. INanswer to the first, it held that, although the ten cent tax wasprohibitive, it was nevertheless within the power of Congress toimpose such a tax. The Court repeated the rule that so long as astatute appears upon its face to be a revenue measure, the Courtcannot go behind the statute and inquire as to the motives whichimpelled Congress to enact it, although these motives may havebeen to regulate, rather than to raise revenue. In answer to the second contention, namely, that theclassification as between the two kinds of oleomargarine violatedthe due process clause of the fifth amendment, the Court statedthat a classification need be based only on a reasonabledifference between the subjects of the classification. Sinceyellow oleomargarine was likely to deceive the public into buyingit as butter, the classification was held to be a reasonable one.Just as many of the States now prohibit the manufacture ofmarihuana, many of the States then prohibited the manufacture ofyellow oleomargarine. Since there is obviously a materialdifference between a transfer of marihuana which may be used forpurposes dangerous or harmful to the public, and a transfer ofmarihuana to a legitimate dealer who will put it to industrial,scientific, or medical uses, it is submitted that the impositionof the one dollar tax upon transfers of marihuana to registeredpersons and the $100 tax upon transfers to nonregistered personsis a reasonable classification and, therefore, valid. Finally these same principles were reiterated in the recentcase of Sonzinsky v. United States, supra. In that case, thedefendant was indicted and convicted for failing to pay theoccupational tax and register under the National Firearms Act. Hecontended that the whole act was an unconstitutional, regulatoryscheme, because of the cumulative effect of the heavyoccupational tax, coupled with the transfer taxes, was toprohibit traffic in firearms. Although the court did not passupon the validity of the transfer tax standing by itself, thecourt brushed aside this argument, remarking: It has long been established that an act of Congress which onits face purports to be an exercise of the taxing power is notany the less so because the tax is burdensome, or tends torestrict or suppress the thing taxed. It is urged, therefore, that the $100 transfer tax imposed byH.R. 6385 is a valid taxing provision on the authority of thebanknote, smoking opium, oleomargarine, and firearms cases,supra, which hold that if a statute is on its face a revenuemeasure, the court will not inquire as to what other motives mayhave impelled Congress to enact it. Of course if a purportedtaxing measure appears on its face to be regulatory, that is,contains regulatory provisions which are not reasonably necessaryto protect or aid in the collection of the revenue, but the taxis imposed to compel obedience to such regulatory provisions, thestatute will be held unconstitutional as an attempt by Congressto regulate a subject-matter which is reserved to the States bythe tenth amendment. The court so held in the Child Labor TaxCase (1921) 259 U.S. 20 and Hill v. Wallace (1922 259 U.S. 44) In the Child Labor Case, the court considered a statute whichlevied a ten percent tax upon the annual net earnings ofemployers who had at any time during the year employed childlabor except where it was done in an honest mistake as to theemployee's age. The statute was held unconstitutional as anattempt to regulate a subject matter reserved to the States bythe tenth amendment, because the purported excise was not a tax,but a penalty to enforce the regulation of child labor. As indicative of this fact, the court pointed out that the actprovided a heavy exaction for departure from a detailed andspecific course of conduct n business set out on the face of thelaw, without basing the amount of the so-called tax in any degreeupon the extent or frequency of the departures. The element ofintent involved in the act was also associated, the courtthought, with criminal penalties rather than taxes. Finally, thecourt pointed to the fact that the Secretary of Labor was toparticipate in the administration of the act, and stated thatthis also indicated that the law was not a revenue measure, sincerevenue laws are administered by the Secretary of the Treasury. The Grains Futures Trading Act which was held unconstitutionalin Hill v. Wallace, imposed a tax of twenty cents a bushel on allcontracts for the sale of grain for future delivery,. butexempted contracts, consummated on boards of trade designated ascontract markets by the Secretary of Agriculture, the designationbeing reserved for those markets which had complied with a largenumber of stringent regulations set out in the act. The courtfound it impossible to escape the conclusion that the act underconsideration was regulatory on its face, and that the tax wasmerely imposed as a penalty to compel boards of trade to complywith these regulations, many of which were not relevant to thecollection of the tax. The court pointed out that the elaborate mechanism set up inthe statute for hearings by the Secretary of Agriculture todetermine whether or not a particular board of trade had compliedwith the prescribed regulations and the fact that the title ofthe act expressly recited that one of its purposes was that ofregulating boards of trade were also strong evidence of theregulatory nature of the act. It is submitted that the $100 tax imposed by H.R. 6385 couldnot be held unconstitutional under these cases, for the onlyregulation is that bill with which the taxpayer need comply isthat which requires him to make a transfer of marihuana upon anorder form. This order form requirement cannot be resorted to,however, as indicating that the $100 transfer tax is intended toregulate a subject-matter reserved to the States under the tenthamendment, for the reason that the much more drastic order formrequirement in the Harrison Narcotic Act was upheld by theSupreme Court in Doremus v. United States, supra, as a regulationreasonably necessary to aid in the collection of the occupationaltaxes imposed by that act. In the course of its decision theCourt stated: Congress, with full power over the subject, short of arbitraryand unreasonable action which is not to be assumed, insertedthese provisions in an act specifically providing for the raisingof revenue. Considered of themselves, we think they tend to keepthe traffic aboveboard and subject to the inspection of thoseauthorized to collect the revenue. They tend to diminish theopportunity of unauthorized persons to obtain the drugs and sellthem clandestinely without paying the tax imposed by the Federallaw. After the Doremus case, Congress amended the Harrison NarcoticAct, raising the occupational taxes and imposing a manufacturerexcise tax on narcotics. In Nigro v. United States, supra, theSupreme Court again sustained the order for requirement asreasonable and necessary to aid in the collection of theoccupational taxes and, in passing, stated that it was alsoreasonably necessary to aid the collection of the manufacturers'excise taxes. Furthermore, the Supreme Court sustained theadditional and more stringent requirement absent in the NationalFirearms Act and in this bill, which limits the persons to whomthe order forms may be sold and, consequently, those to whomnarcotics may be sold. In that decision, the Court stated: It would seem admissible and wise, in a law seeking to imposetaxes for the sale of an elusive subject, to require conformityto a prescribed method of sale and delivery calculated todisclose or make more difficult any escape from the tax. If thismay be done, any departure from the steps enjoined may bepunished, and added penalties may be fixed for successiveomissions, but all for the one ultimate purpose of making itdifficult to sell opium or other narcotics without registering orpaying the tax. The reasonableness of such requirements is will illustrated inthe many limitations which were imposed upon the ancient freedomin the making and sales of distilled spirits, to the end that thecollection of the heavy tax on the subject matter might besuccessfully secured in spite of the temptation to avoid the tax.The provision of section 2 making it an offense to sell unlessthe purchaser gives a particular official form of order to theseller was enacted with a like object. The sale without such anorder thus carries its illegality on its face. Its absencedispenses with the necessity of sending to examine the list ofthose registered to learn whether the seller is engaged in alegal sale. The requirement that the official forms can only bebought and obtained by one entitled to buy, who name shall bestamped on the order form, and that after the sale the order formshall be recorded, effects a kind off registration of lawfulpurchasers, in addition to one of lawful sellers, and keepsselling and buying on a plane where evasion of the tax will bedifficult. Since the similar order-form requirement in the Harrison Actwas sustained as a regulation reasonably necessary to aid in thecollection of the occupational taxes imposed by that act, anyonechallenging the constitutionality of the $100 transfer taximposed by this bill will be unable to rely upon the order-formrequirement as indicating that the $100 tax is regulatory incharacter, but will be compelled to rely solely upon the factthat the tax is too heavy. Thus, the $100 transfer tax is broughtsquarely within the bank-note, smoking-opium, and oleomargarinecases which establish the proposition that the prohibitivecharacter of a tax does not make it any the less a valid revenuemeasure. In the final analysis, after the committee has given fullconsideration to the subject of marihuana, it is not beyond therealm of possibility that the committee may conclude that thelegitimate uses of marihuana are so negligible as compared to theinjurious effect it has upon the public health and morals of thepeople of this country, that the committee will conclude toimpose a prohibitive tax upon the production, manufacture, andsale of marihuana, and thus discourage its use in any form inthis country. MR. LEWIS: The treatment of this subject as a matter ofmethod, and so far as constitutional basis is concerned, is aboutthe same as the Harrison Narcotic Act, is it not? MR, HESTER: With one exception. MR. LEWIS: I was thinking you might add this drug as anamendment to the Harrison Narcotic Act. MR, HESTER: No; there are three reasons why we think thatwould be a bad thing to do. The first is that while the Harrison Narcotic Act wouldinclude producers, there are actually no producers in the UnitedStates of the plant from which opium and coca leaves areobtained. Therefore, we have never had a problem under theHarrison Narcotic Act with respect to products which are producedin this country but have only been concerned with products whichare imported from abroad. here we have the reverse situation. Practically all of thismarihuana is grown in the United States and for that reason,instead of being concerned only with importation and sale asunder the Harrison Act, provision must also be made forregulation of production of marihuana. There is the further point that opium and coca leaves, whichare the subjects of the Harrison Act, are legitimately usedalmost exclusively as medicines, whereas there are manyindustrial uses for marihuana. That is another distinctionbetween the Harrison Act and this bill. The third is this, that the Harrison Narcotic Act has twicebeen sustained by the Supreme Court of the United States andlawyers are no longer challenging its constitutionality. If anentirely new and different subject matter were to be inserted inits provisions, the act might be subjected to furtherconstitutional attacks. We feel, in view of the reasons I have cited, that thisproblem is one that should be dealt with under a separate act. We have departed from the Harrison Narcotic Act in one majorrespect, and we have done that because the Ways and MeansCommittee departed from the plan of the Harrison Act in preparingthe National Firearms Act. Under the Harrison Narcotic Act no one can buy narcoticsunless he has registered and paid the occupational tax. In theNational Firearms Act the committee did not follow that plan.Anyone is permitted to buy a machine gun or a submachine gun, buthe must pay a $200 transfer tax, and carry out the purchase on anofficial order form. The focal point of attack on the Harrison Narcotic Act by thejudges who dissented in the Doremus case and the Nigro case, wasthat the provision of the act which limited the persons to whomnarcotics could be sold clearly indicated that the primarypurpose of the act was not to raise revenue but to regulatematters which were reserved to the States under the tenthamendment. MR. VINSON How did the Court stand in those cases? MR, HESTER: In the first case the Court stood 5 to 4, and inthe second case the Court stood 66 to 3. MR. MCCORMACK: What was the firearms case? MR, HESTER: The firearms case involved only the occupationaltax under the Firearms Act. MR. MCCORMACK: Was that decision unanimous? MR, HESTER: Yes, that was a unanimous decision. That is thedecision of March 29, In the Firearms Act you arranged it of thatanybody can buy a machine gun but he must pay a transfer tax of$200 and would have to use an order form. We have looked into the records in connection with thetransfer tax in the Firearms Act, and we found that only onemachine gun was purchased at $200 last year. MR. DINGELL: Legitimately? MR, HESTER: Yes, this bill would permit anyone to purchasemarihuana, as was done in the National Firearms Act in permittinganyone to buy a machine gun, but he would have to pay a tax of$100 per ounce of marihuana and make his purchase on an officialorder form. A person who wants to buy marihuana would have to goto the collector and get an order form in duplicate, and buy the$100 tax stamp and put it on the original order form there. Hewould take the original to the vendor, and keep the duplicate. Ifthe purchaser wants to transfer it, the person who purchases themarihuana from him has to do the same thing and pay the $100 tax.That is the scheme that has been adopted to sto high-schoolchildren from getting marihuana. MR.VINSON: What is the fair market value, per ounce, ofmarihuana? MR, HESTER: In its raw state it is about a dollar per ounce,as a drug. MR. VINSON: I notice in your statement -- and I want to say itis a good statement; the gentleman does not have any other kindof a statement when he comes before our committee. MR, HESTER: I thank you. MR. VINSON: You say in your statement that ---- It is provided, as in the Harrison Act, that dispensations byregistered practitioners in the course of their professionalpractice and transfers made in god faith by druggists inpursuance f a written prescription issued by registeredpractitioners shall be exempt from the order-form provisions andfrom the transfer tax. I was wondering whether the good-faith requirement was in theHarrison Act. MR. TIPTON: The good-faith requirement is not in the HarrisonAct. MR. VINSON: It seems to me that is a weakness of the HarrisonAct. I think the good-faith provisions in this act willstrengthen the law. MR. TIPTON: Exactly. That is the reason we put that in there.That provision is not in the Harrison Act. MR. VINSON: It is not included in the Harrison Act? MR. TIPTON: No. MR, HESTER: Mr. Tipton says they have had difficulty inenforcing the Harrison Act because of the absence of thatrequirement. MR. VINSON: I had the notion that the provision would reallystrengthen the law in regard to a menace of this kind. MR, HESTER: That is right. MR. VINSON: I would like to have some information as to whereyou get this plant. MR, HESTER: I have completed my statement, and I may say, Mr.Vinson, that we have here a pharmacologist, a chemist, and anoutstanding botanist, who can give you information of thatnature. MR. VINSON: I take it, Mr. Hester, from your citations of thedecisions in the Doremus case, and in the Firearms case, togetherwith the decision in the Veazie case and the McCray, orOleomargarine case - - - MR, HESTER: (interposing) We have cited five cases. MR. VINSON: What is the fifth one? MR, HESTER: that is a decision from the Circuit Court ofAppeals of the Eighth Circuit which sustained the imposition of atax of $300 per pound upon smoking opium. MR. VINSON: In view of these cases you have no doubt as to thepower of Congress to enact this character of legislation? MR, HESTER: My answer to that is, no; we have given it a greatdeal of consideration. In the final analysis we submit it to yourjudgment. The Supreme court, in the Nigro case and in the Doremus caseheld that the regulatory provisions of the act, which evenlimited the class of people who could buy narcotics, wereconstitutional, since they were regulations reasonably necessaryto aid in collecting the revenue. Therefore in considering theconstitutionality of H.R. 6385 we do not even have to considerthe order-form provision in that bill. Consequently, there isnothing left in the bill to consider but the prohibitive tax, andthe McCray case, which held constitutional ten percent tax onyellow oleomargarine, and the Bank Note case and other caseswhich we have cited clearly hold that, although the tax may beprohibitive, if there are no regulatory provisions on the face ofthe act which the court may say are not reasonable and necessaryto aid in the collection of the tax, the tax is constitutional. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-82IA087-000625-B018-204http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/anslng1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044511 text/html 38953HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:45:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:45:46 GMTContent-length: 38734 Statement of Harry J. Anslinger Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF H. J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONER OF NARCOTICS, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, DEPARTMENTOF THE TREASURY MR. ANSLINGER: Mr. Chairman, my name is H. J.Anslinger; I am Commissioner of Narcotics in the Bureau ofNarcotics, in the Treasury Department. Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the Ways and MeansCommittee, this traffic in marihuana is increasing to such anextent that it has come to the be cause for the greatest nationalconcern. This drug is as old as civilization itself. Homer wrote about,as a drug that made me forget their homes, and that turned theminto swine. In Persia, a thousand years before Christ, there wasa religious and military order founded which was called theAssassins and they derived their name from the drug calledhashish which is now known in this country as marihuana. Theywere noted for their acts of cruelty, and the word"assassin" very aptly describes the drug. The plant from which the drugs comes is a hardy annual,growing from 3 to 16 feet in height. Marihuana is the same as Indian hemp, hashish. It is sometimescultivated in backyards. Over here in Maryland some of it hasbeen found, and last fall we discovered three acres of it in theSouthwest. As I say, marihuana is the same as Indian hemp, and issometimes found as a residual weed, and sometimes as the resultof a dissemination of birdseed. It is known as cannabin, cannabisAmericana, or Cannabis Sativa. Marihuana is the Mexican term forcannabis indica. We seem to have adopted the Mexican terminology,and we call it marihuana, which means good feeling. In theunderworld it is referred to by such colorful, colloquial namesas reefer, muggles, Indian hay, hot hay, and weed. It is known invarious countries by a variety of names. MR. LEWIS: In literature it is known as hashish, is itnot? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. There is a great deal of useof it in Egypt, particularly. It was found years ago in Egypt.The traffic has grown so that something like 14 percent of thepopulation are addicts. In India it is sold over the counter tothe addicts, direct, and there it is known as bhang and ganja. At the Geneva Convention is 1895 the term "cannabis"included only the dried flowering or fruiting top of thepistillate plant as the plant source of the dangerous resin, fromwhich the resin had not been extracted. That designation was usedin the uniform State act. "but research that has been madeduring the past few months has shown that this definition is notsufficient, because it has been found by experiment that theleaves of the pistillate plant as well as the leaves of thestaminate plant contain the active principle up to 50 percent ofthe strength prescribed by the United States Pharmacopoeia. So we have urged the States to revise their definition so asto include all parts of the plant, as it now seems that the seedsand portions other than the dried flowering tops containpositively dangerous substances. We were anticipating a challenge in one of the States of thatold definition. There was a case in Florida recently in which adefendant appealed to a higher court on the ground that theprosecution had not proven that this was the dried flowered topof the pistillate plant. The higher court said: "We are of the opinion, therefore, that the informationwas insufficient to clearly apprise accused of the nature andcause of the accusation against him because of the sale ofcigarettes containing cannabis, from which the resin had not beenextracted may relate to the resin of the staminate plant, theresin of which appears to be harmless." As a matter of fact the staminate leaves are about as harmlessas a rattlesnake. So in this act it was necessary to make the definition allinclusive. In medical schools, the physician-to-be is taught that withoutopium he would be like a one-armed man. That is true, because youcannot get along without opium. But here we have drug that is not like opium. Opium has all ofthe good of Dr. Jekyll and all the evil of Mr. Hyde. This drug isentirely the monster Hyde, the harmful effect of which cannot bemeasured. I have here an excerpt from a report made to the League ofNations by the Council at its last session. It says: Excerpt of League of Nations Document O.C. 1542 (O) DatedGeneva, February 17, 1937 Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and Other DangerousDrugs, Sub-Committee on Cannabis (Report by Dr. J. Bouquet, hospital pharmacist, Tunis,inspector of pharmacies, Tunis, containing answers toquestionnaire submitted to the experts) VII (P. 39) (7) (A) Do any preparations of Indian hemp exist possessing atherapeutic value such that nothing else can take their place formedical purposes? No. (a) Indian hemp extract has been recommended for thepreparation of corn cures products, that most often consist of asolution of salicylic acid in collodion; the action of thecannabis extract is nil. At my request, experiments were made for several months in1912 with different preparations of cannabis, without theaddition of other synergetic substances (Profession Lannois'Service, Lyons Hospital). The conclusion reached was that in afew rare cases Indian hemp gives good results, but that ingeneral it is not superior to other medicaments which can be usedin therapeutics for the treatment of the same affliction. To sum up, Indian hemp, like many other medicaments, hasenjoyed for a time a vogue which is not justified by the resultsobtained. Therapeutics would not lose much if it were removedfrom the list of medicaments. MR. DINGELL: I want to be certain what this is. Is thisthe same weed that grows wild in some of our Western States whichis sometimes called the loco weed? MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir, that is another family. MR. DINGELL: That is also a harmful drug-producingweed, is it not? MR. ANSLINGER: Not to my knowledge. It is not used byhumans. THE CHAIRMAN: In what particular sections does thisweed grow wild? MR. ANSLINGER: In almost every state in the Uniontoday. MR. REED: What you are describing is a plant which hasa rather large flower? MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir, a very small flower. MR. REED: It is not Indian hemp? MR. ANSLINGER: It is Indian hemp. We have somespecimens here. MR. VINSON: When was this brought to your attention asbeing a menace among our own people? MR. ANSLINGER: About ten years ago. MR. VINSON: Why did you wait until 1937 to bring in arecommendation of this kind? MR. ANSLINGER: Ten years ago we only heard about itthroughout the Southwest. It is only in the last few years thatit has become a national menace. It has grown like wildfire, butit has only become a national menace in the last three years. Itis only in the last two years that we have had to send reportsabout it to the League of Nations. MR. VINSON: We did not have to have any conventionadopted by the League of Nations in order to legislate on thissubject? MR. ANSLINGER: No; but it was covered in one of theconventions. MR. VINSON: It seems to me you have been rather slow ingetting to this legislation. MR. FULLER. I do not think that is any defense for thismeasure. MR. ANSLINGER: We have been urging uniform statelegislation on the several States, and itt was only last monththat the last State legislature adopted such legislation. MR. VINSON: You have not urged the passage of anylegislation upon Congress. MR. ANSLINGER: There is no law in the District. Thisuniform act has been urged upon the states for four or fiveyears. MR. VINSON: But you have not urged Congress to passthis act or anything that looks like it until now. MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir. MR. FULLER: That is no defense, if it is a goodmeasure. MR. VINSON: I am not talking about their defense. Itseems to me it has taken a long time to get this before Congress. MR. FULLER: It took a hundred years to get the HarrisonNarcotic Act. MR. ANSLINGER: It is only in the last two years that wehave a report of seizures anywhere but in the Southwest. Lasyear, New York State reported 195 tons seized, whereas beforethat I do not believe that New York could have reported one tonseized. Let me quote from this report to the League of Nations: This discussion disclosed that, from the medical point of viewin some countries the use of Indian hemp in its various forms isregarded as in no way indispensable and that it is thereforepossible that little objection would be raised to draftinglimitations upon medical use of derivatives. That is only last year. Here is what Dr. J. Bouquet, hospital pharmacist at Tunis, andinspector of pharmacists at Tunis, says. He is the outstandingexpert on cannabis in the world. He says: To sum up, Indian hemp, like many other medicaments, hasenjoyed for a time a vogue which is not justified by the resultsobtained. Therapeutics would not lose much if it were removedfrom the list of medicaments. That comes from the greatest authority on cannabis in theworld today. MR. MCCORMACK: What are its first manifestations, afeeling of grandeur and self-exaltation, and things of that sort? MR. ANSLINGER: It affects different individuals indifferent ways. Some individuals have a complete loss of sense oftime or a sense of value. They lose their sense of place. Thathave an increased feeling of physical strength and power. Some people will fly into a delirious rage, and they aretemporarily irresponsible and may commit violent crimes. Otherpeople will laugh uncontrollably. It is impossible to say whatthe effect will be on any individual. Those research men who havetried it have always been under control. They have alwaysinsisted upon that. MR. MCCORMACK: Is it used by the criminal class? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, it is. It is dangerous to the mindand body, and particularly dangerous to the criminal type,because it releases all of the inhibitions. I have here statements by the foremost expert in the worldtalking on this subject, and by Dr. Cutter a noted anddistinguished medical man in this country. (The statements referred to are as follows:) (From the report by Dr. J. Bouquet, Tunis, to the League ofNations) Does Indian hemp (Cannabis Sativa) in its various forms giverise to drug addiction? The use of cannabis, whether smoked or ingested in its variousform, undoubtedly gives rise to a form of addiction, which hasserious social consequences (abandonment of work, propensity totheft and crime, disappearance of reproductive power). From the Washington Post, Nov. 23, 1936 TODAY'S HEALTH TALK By Dr. Irving S. Cutter A Dangerous Intoxicant Ever since the world began man has been searching forchemicals or charms that would relieve pain. Out of the East cameIndian hemp, and it is surprising how rapidly its properties wererecognized and how widespread became its use. History relates that in the eleventh century a remarkable sectof Mohammedans established themselves as a powerful military unitunder the leadership of a sheik who led his marauding band tovictory while under the influence of hemp. In South Africa theHottentots smoked the drug under the name of dagga. The plant was originally native in Persia and India, butbecause of the desirability of its fiber it is now cultivated inall parts of the world. For the last few years marihuana, as itis commonly called, has been sold in the United States andCanada, chiefly in the form of cigarettes, which are peddledfrequently in dance halls. Much of the raw material comes fromMexico or the West Indies, and occasionally press dispatches willreport that the weed had been grown even within prison walls. As a stimulant to crime the drug is probably as important ascocaine, certainly far more so than opium or any of itsderivatives, and narcotic-control agencies will be put to asevere test in routing out this traffic. As a rule the addict passes into a dreamy state in whichjudgment is lost and imagination runs riot. Fantasies arise whichare limitless and extravagant. Scenes pass before the mind's eyein kaleidoscopic confusion and there is no sense of the passingof time. Under relatively large doses consciousness does not leaveentirely, even though actions and movements are out of control.As the influence of the drug persists there may be periods ofstupor from which, however, the patient can be aroused. In mostindividuals there is no succeeding nausea and the thrill seekerfinds inhibitions destroyed and, abandoning his normal sense ofpropriety, he may do and say things quite foreign to his makeup. Cannabis indica is the medicinal preparation known tophysicians. But the potent resin produced chiefly by the top ofthe female plant is as much sought after in certain quarters asis opium. Its legitimate use in the field of medicine isrelatively limited, as other drugs more accurate and dependableas to effects have largely taken its place. Cases of fatal poisoning rarely if ever occur. Nevertheless,it is one of the dangerous drugs that should be known only to beshunned--an intoxicant with the most vicious propensities. Copyright, 1936, by the Chicago-Tribune, New York TimesSyndicate, Inc. I will give you gentleman just a few outstanding evidences ofcrimes that have been committed as a result of the use ofmarihuana. MR. REED: The testimony before the committee of which Iwas formerly chairman in reference to heroin said in reference tothe effect of it that it made men feel fearless, and that a greatmajority of the crimes of great violence that were committed werecommitted by addicts, and one man stated that it would make arabbit fight a bulldog. Does this drug have a similar effect? MR. ANSLINGER: Here is a gang of seven young men, allseven of them, young men under 21 years of age. They terrorizedcentral Ohio for more than two months, and they were responsiblefor 38 stick-ups. They all boast they did those crimes whileunder the influence of marihuana. MR. LEWIS: Was that as an excuse, or a defense? MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir. MR. LEWIS: Does it strengthen the criminal will; doesit operate as whisky might, to provoke recklessness? MR. ANSLINGER: I think it makes them irresponsible. Aman does not know what he is doing. It has not been recognized asa defense by the courts, although it has been used as a defense. MR. LEWIS: Probably the word "excuse" or"mitigation" would be better than defense, I think. MR. ANSLINGER: Here is one of the worst cases I haveseen. The district attorney told me the defendant in this casepleaded that he was under the influence of marihuana when hecommitted that crime, but that has not been recognized. We have several cases of that kind. There was one town in Ohiowhere a young man went into a hotel and held up the clerk andkilled him, and his defense was that he had been affected by theuse of marihuana. MR. FULLER: The only question was whether or not heknew what he was doing, whether he was insane. That is always adefense, whether or not a man is in such a state of mind that hedoes not know good from evil. The question is whether or not hismind is right, whether he is responsible. MR. ANSLINGER: As to these young men I was telling youabout, one of them said if he had killed somebody on the spot hewould not have known it. In Florida a 21-year-old boy under the influence of this drugkilled his parents and his brothers and sisters. The evidenceshowed that he had smoke marihuana. In Chicago recently two boys murdered a policeman while underthe influence of marihuana. Not long ago we found a 15-year-oldboy going insane because, the doctor told the enforcementofficers, he thought the boy was smoking marihuana cigarettes.They traced the sale to some man who had been growing marihuanaand selling it to these boys all under 15 years of age, on aplayground there. MR. JENKINS: In my home town just recently two boyswere sent to the penitentiary for life for killing a man, andtheir defense was built upon the fact that they had used a drug.I do not believe it was this drug. MR. ANSLINGER: There have been a number of cases inOhio recently. MR. JENKINS: The defense was made for them by a verysuccessful lawyer. MR. REED: Is there any cure for a person who becomes anaddict? MR. ANSLINGER: I do not think there is such a thing asnot being able to cure an addict. Marihuana addicts my go to aFederal narcotic farm. But I have not seen many addicts who couldnot be cured. An addict could drop it and he will not experienceany ill effects. One of these boys I referred to went insane, and they stoppedit. Here in Colorado -- and Colorado seems to have had a lot ofcases of violence recently -- in Alamosa County, and in HuerfanoCounty the sheriff was killed as the result of the action of aman under the influence of marihuana. Recently in Baltimore ayoung man was sent to the electric chair for having raped a girlwhile under the influence of marihuana. I will show you how this traffic is increasing. MR. MCCORMACK: Have you completed your statement inreference to the criminal cases? MR. ANSLINGER: I have a number of cases here. MR. MCCORMACK: Are you acquainted with the report ofthe public prosecutor at New Orleans in 1931? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. MR. MCCORMACK: I think that would be valuable. That wasa case where 125 our of 450 prisoners were found to be marihuanaaddicts, and slightly less than one-half of the murderers weremarihuana addicts, and about 20 percent of them were charged withbeing addicts of what they call "merry wonder". MR. ANSLINGER: That is the same thing. MR. ANSLINGER: You are acquainted with that? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, I have that report. MR. MCCORMACK: There was a report from other citiesalso. MR. ANSLINGER: That is one of the finest reports thathas been written on marihuana by that district attorney. He haddaily contact with the problem and saw its effect on crime inthat city. I might say in that connection, that he said this-- and thisis the report of Eugene Stanley -- in which he has said: Inasmuch as the harmful effects of the use of the drug isbecoming more widely known each day, and it has been classed as anarcotic by the statutory laws of 17 American states -- Since that time we have that in every State--- England and Mexico, and persons addicted to its use have beenmade eligible for treatment in the United States narcotic farms,the United States Government, unquestionably, will be compelledto adopt a consistent attitude toward the drug, and include it inthe Harrison Anti-Narcotic Law, so as to give Federal aid to theStates in their effort to suppress a traffic as deadly and asdestructive to society as the traffic in the other forms ofnarcotics now prohibited by the Harrison Act. This drug is not being used by those who have been usingheroin and morphine. It is being used by a different class, by amostly younger group of people. The age of the morphine andheroin addict is increasing all the time, whereas the marihuanasmoker is quite young. MR. DINGELL: I am just wondering whether the marihuanaaddict graduates into a heroin, an opium, or a cocaine user. MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir; I have not heard of a case ofthat kind. I think it is an entirely different class. Themarihuana addict does not go in that direction. MR. DINGELL: And the hardened narcotic user does notfall back on marihuana. MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir: he would not touch that. Dr.Walter Bromberger, a distinguished psychiatrist in New York hasmade this statement: Young men between the ages of 16 and 25 are frequent smokersof marihuana; even boys of 10 to 14 are initiated (frequently inschool groups); to them as other; marijuana holds out the thrill.Since the economic depression the number of marihuana smokers hasincreased by vagrant youths coming into contact with olderpsychopaths. MR. LEWIS: Do they make their own cigarettes? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. The cigarette is usuallyrolled by the peddler. It is crudely rolled cigarette. MR. MCCORMACK: Is not Dr. Bromberger the seniorpsychiatrist at Bellevue Hospital? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. MR. MCCORMACK: What did he say in reference to crime? MR. ANSLINGER: He argued one way and then he arguedanother way. His conclusions were based on a study made of thosemen who had been sentenced to prison. But that is not a fairconclusion because at the present time we have so many in prisonin the several states sent up as a result of using marihuana. I think in some states today that study would show a fairerconclusion than he arrived at, although in one part of hisarticle he did say he believed that this excited to crime a manwho would be less likely to commit a crime. MR. MCCORMACK: He did admit that it was a drug? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. I think he realized, and hisarticle indicated that he realized, the danger of it. Last year several states made 338 seizures of marihuana thatwe know of. In most of those we participated, because we arecooperating with the states in carrying out the uniform Statelegislation. We have also assisted several states by sendingchemists to the local police to show them how to identify thisdrug, and we have conducted chemical research here. Most of the complaints about this drug have been coming to theFederal office, and because time is of the essence we would liketo have this legislation enacted very much, so we can step intothe situation where it is highly desirable that we do so. I will refer you to the case of a man in one of the SouthernStates. One of our good friends gave us information to indicatethat this man had about a ton of these high explosives stored inhis barn. There was no Federal law and no State law. We took upthe matter with the attorney general of that state, and we had towait until the state had its act enacted, before we could takeany action. THE CHAIRMAN: How many states have laws in reference tomarihuana? MR. ANSLINGER: Every state, except the District ofColumbia. THE CHAIRMAN: You said there was no state law. MR. ANSLINGER: In that particular state at that timethere was no state law. THE CHAIRMAN: The states now all do cooperate? MR. ANSLINGER: Every one of them, yes, sir. But they donot all have central enforcement agencies. MR. MCCORMACK: You say every state has a law, and thereare about 35 of the states that have the uniform state act? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. The uniform state act has beenadopted by 35 states. THE CHAIRMAN: With this uniform state legislation, whycan they not stamp this out? What progress are they making? MR. ANSLINGER: They are making some progress, as isindicated by the 338 seizures made last year. Last year the stateof Pennsylvania destroyed 200,000 pounds. MR. LEWIS: Under the uniform state act the growth anddistribution is prohibited. Is that correct? MR. ANSLINGER: That is true in most of the states. MR. LEWIS: What would the effect be in this case of ourimposing an act under which we would be collecting revenue, andmaking the growth and distribution legitimate from the standpointof the Federal Government. MR. ANSLINGER: The state acts provide for that. Theyprovide for legitimate distribution and for licensing of thegrower under certain conditions. MR. LEWIS: Does this act require the licensing of thegrower? MR. ANSLINGER: It requires registration. MR. LEWIS: What is the legitimate distribution of thisdrug? You spoke of the industries. MR. ANSLINGER: There is its use in medicine. Then thehemp product is used in some parts of Kentucky, Minnesota, andWisconsin. It is grown for hemp purposes. It makes very finecordage, and this legislation exempts the mature stalk when it isgrown for hemp purposes. MR. MCCORMACK: There are other commercial purposes: MR. ANSLINGER: Yes. MR. MCCORMACK: There is fiber out of which hats aremade? MR. ANSLINGER: That is not done so much in thiscountry. MR. MCCORMACK: There is some of that. MR. ANSLINGER: Just a little. MR. MCCORMACK: Then is not the seed used for paints andoil? MR. ANSLINGER: They import all their seed fromManchuria. MR. MCCORMACK: And it is also used as a constituent ofcommercial bird seed? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes. MR. MCCORMACK: Mr. Lewis asked you a question about thecommercial purposes. MR. ANSLINGER: Those are the only commercial purposesthat I know of. MR. JENKINS: Mr. Hester said that he thought thecommercial purposes were practically negligible . I understandyou to say that most of the products that are made from the seedare made from imported seed. MR. ANSLINGER: That is for oil. MR. JENKINS: You say that 35 of the states have adopteduniform legislation. Where do they get that uniformity from? MR. ANSLINGER: That is from the commissioners onuniform state laws. They were adopted by the American BarAssociation and approved by the American Medical Association andsome of the drug trade. MR. JENKINS: If each state has a law on this subject Iwonder why that does not reach it. MR. ANSLINGER: It does reach it, but in spite of theact, we get requests from public officials from different states,and I will name particularly the states of Colorado, Kansas, NewMexico, Louisiana, and Oklahoma that have urged Federallegislation for the purpose of enabling us to cooperate with theseveral states. MR. JENKINS: It seems to me if the states have takensuch action on this subject so far, and if we are going to takeany action at all, we ought to be able to stamp it out. MR. ANSLINGER: I think this bill will do that. MR. JENKINS: If you are going to temporize with themand say as it seems you say here "No, we can not stamp itout; we will encourage its growth. it is all right to growit." I do not see how you will stamp it out. MR. ANSLINGER: We do not do that for hemp production,and we recognize the fact that it is grown, that the farmers insome of these states grow it for hemp purposes. I think about10,000 acres cover that. Dr. Dewey can tell you about that. Hehas been with this problem for 30 years, and I would defer to hisjudgment, particularly as to legitimate uses. MR. MCCORMACK: There are state laws in reference toother drugs? MR. ANSLINGER: The uniform state act covers opium andits derivatives, coca leaf and its derivatives, but there is atwilight zone there that the peddler breaks right through if thestate has not taken action. MR. MCCORMACK: This is a tax measure and we might aswell get the revenue out of it that enables the Federalgovernment to cooperate with the states in connection with thestate activities. MR. ANSLINGER: And you get a certain uniformity. Youalso get to help the local police, and the always want it. Youalso get to help the state police, and the always ask for thishelp. Whenever they find marihuana the first place on which theycall for help is the Federal narcotic office, so that they cantake a man along who is a specialist on narcotic matters. The have 35 states under the uniform act, and we have Federallegislation dealing with opium and coca leaves. With this legislation we will make a drive on this traffic,and bend every effort to stamp it out, and it will not cost verymuch. I say that advisedly because we have men throughout thecountry at the present time who are dealing with the narcoticproblem. But the use of marihuana is increasing. I want to show you one more thing and that is in reference tothe international side of this problem. Canada made some seizuresover here last year and they pointed the finger of scorn at usand said, "Why do you not do something about this?" Wehad to admit that we did not have any legislation. There is some evidence that this drug is being smuggled toChina today. We have always pointed the finger of scorn at China,and now marihuana is being smuggled out to China, by sailors. We are far ahead of any government when it comes to the 1912Hague Convention, and the 1931 convention, but we are behind onthe 1925 convention. We are not signatories to it, but wecooperate with them. We were in a curious position only a few months ago when anexporter sent a lot of cannabis to a British firm. It was alegitimate shipment, but the British law demanded and exportcertificate, and we had to tell the British government that wedid not have a law to compel that exporter to stop the shipmentof cannabis. He will probably do so, as a matter of cooperation.But we had to warn him to stop violating British law, and thatgoes for practically every government on the face of the earth,except the United States. Over 50 nations have nationallegislation on this problem, and it is very humiliating to haveto say to these people when they trace the matter right to ourshore, to tell them that we have no legislation to deal with thatproblem: MR. LEWIS: You spoke about the District of Columbiahaving no law. How about the Territories? MR. ANSLINGER: Hawaii has a law. I cannot tell youabout Alaska. Puerto Rico dos have a law. The only place I am notsure about is Alaska. MR. LEWIS: You are sure about the District of Columbia? MR. ANSLINGER: Not having a law? MR. LEWIS: Yes. MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; because last year there were15 dealers arrested here for peddling marihuana, and they had tobe prosecuted for practicing pharmacy without a license. MR. BUCK: Have you suggested the enactment of such alaw to the Committee on the District of Columbia? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; they have had a proposeduniform state laws for 3 or 4 years. MR. BUCK: Have they taken action on it at all? MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir. MR. THOMPSON: What is the price of marihuana? MR. ANSLINGER: The addict pays anywhere from 10 to 25cents per cigarette. It will be sold by the cigarette. In illicittraffic the bulk price would be around $20 per pound.Legitimately, the bulk is around $2 per pound. MR. THOMPSON: How does that compare with the price ofopium or morphine? Do the class of people who use this drug useit because it is cheaper than the other kinds? MR. ANSLINGER: That is one reason, yes, sir. To be amorphine or heroin addict it would cost you from $5 to $8 a dayto maintain your supply. But if you want to smoke a cigarette youpay 10 cents. MR. BOERNE: Just one of them will knock the socks offof you. MR. ANSLINGER: One of them can do it. MR. MCCORMACK: Some of those cigarettes are sold muchcheaper that 10 cents, are they not? In other words, it is alow-priced cigarette, and that is one of the reasons for thetremendous increases in its use. MR. ANSLINGER: Yes; it is low enough in price forschool children to buy it. MR. MCCORMACK: And they have parties in different partsof the country that they call "reefer parties". MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; we have heard of them, andknow of them. MR. FULLER: Another thing is that they will not be ableto get other kinds of dope, but they do have an opportunity toget this marihuana, which causes it to be so much sought afterand used in the community. MR. ANSLINGER: That is true, and the effect is justpassed by word of mouth and everybody wants to try it. MR. WOODRUFF: Have you put into the record a statementshowing the names of the different states in which this drugplant is grown? MR. ANSLINGER: It is grown in practically all states. Ihave a statement in reference to the seizures, which I will putin the record. MR. THOMPSON: I would like to know whether or not thesemarihuana cigarettes move through legitimate channels. Are theremanufacturing concerns that make them, or are they rolled in thekitchens and cellars like illicit liquor used to be made? MR. ANSLINGER: It is 100 percent illicit. MR. THOMPSON: No concerns make it legitimately? MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir. MR. MCCORMACK: As a matter of fact, I understand theyfound that some were grown in one of our Federal prisons. MR. ANSLINGER: They found some marihuana growing in oneof the prisons. We heard of that. There was a seizure made in the Colorado State Reformatory forboys not long ago. MR. MCCORMACK: Was there not one made at San Quentin? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. MR. BUCK. Mr. Hester testified that there were about11,000 acres in cultivation in the country. Is that legitimatecultivation? MR. ANSLINGER: That would be legitimate cultivation.Dr. Dewey of the Department of Agriculture can give you thatexact information. MR. REED: Mr. Anslinger, you have been interrupted inyour statement from time to time, and I am wondering if you havenot some statement that would give the general information to thecommittee on this subject which you might like to put in therecord. MR. ANSLINGER: I would like to put in the record thestatement of the district attorney that I referred to. I alsohave a statement showing the seizures of marihuana during thecalendar year 1936 in the various states. THE CHAIRMAN: Without objection, you may extend yourstatement in the record by inserting such information as youthink would be helpful to the committee. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-83IA087-000625-B018-228http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t10a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044534 text/html 65046HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:45:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:14 GMTContent-length: 64828 Additional Statement of Harry J. Anslinger Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Transcripts of Congressional Hearings ADDITIONAL STATEMENT OF H. J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONER OFNARCOTICS (The following statements were submitted by Mr. Anslinger) ORIGIN The origin of this drug is very ancient. In the year 1090A.D., the religious and military order or sect of the Assassinswas founded in Persia and the numerous acts of cruelty of thissect were known not only in Asia, but in Europe as well. Thisbranch of the Shiite sect, known as Ismalites, was calledHashishan, derived from hashish, of the confection of hemp leaves"marihuana". In fact, from the Arabic Hasishan we havethe English word "assassin." The plant was known by the Greeks as "nepenthe" andwas lauded in the immortal Odyssey of Homer. It was known inancient times to the Egyptians, and its use in Egypt at thepresent time is widespread. Its effect upon the Malays has beenterrific and the natives of the Malay Peninsula have been known,while under its influence, to rush out and engage in violent andbloody deeds, with complete disregard for their personal safety,of the odds arrayed against them. to run "amok" in theMalay Peninsula is synonomous with saying one is under theinfluence of this drug. DESCRIPTION: Indian hemp is a rough, annual plant, and grows to varyingheights, from about 3 to 16 feet. Its stem is erect, branchingand angular; the leaves are alternate or opposite and coarselyserrated. Marihuana is the same as Indian hemp, hashish,cannabin, cannabis Americana, or cannabis sativa. Marihuana isthe Mexican term for cannabis indica. In the argot of heunderworld it has colloquial, colorful names such as reefer,muggles, Indian hay, hot hay, and weed. The drug is known in manycountries by a variety of different names. In India it is knownas bhang and ganja; as dagga in Africa. the term "cannabis" in the Geneva Convention of 1925and in the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act included only the driedflowering or fruiting tops of the pistillate plant as the sourceof the dangerous resin. Research during the past few months showsconclusively that this definition is insufficient, as we havefound by experiment that the leaves of the pistillate plant aswell as the leaves of the staminate plant contain the activeprincipal up to 50 percent of the U.S.P. strength. Accordingly,we are urging the several states to revise their definition toinclude all parts of the plant, as it now appears that the seedsand portions other than the dried flowering tops containpositively dangerous substances. We have been anticipating achallenge of the old definition in the courts and only a fewweeks ago a defendant in a case in Florida in appealing to thehigher court of that State said: "We are of the opinion, therefore, that the informationwas insufficient to clearly apprise the accused of the nature andcause of the accusation against him because of the sale ofcigarettes containing cannabis from which the resin had not beenabstracted may relate to the resin of the staminate plant, theresin of which appears to be harmless." This challenge demonstrates the advisability of making ourdefinition all-inclusive, which has been done with respect to thebill under discussion, H.R. 6385. EFFECTS The toxic effects produced by "cannabin", the activenarcotic principal of the cannabis sativa, hemp, or marihuana,appear to be exclusively to the higher nerve centers. The drugproduces first an exaltation with a feeling of well-being; ahappy, jovial mood, usually; and increased feeling of physicalstrength and power; and a general euphoria is experienced.Accompanying this exaltation is a stimulation of the imagination,followed by a more-or-less delirious state characterized by vividkaleidoscopic visions, sometimes of a pleasing sensual kind, butoccasionally of a gruesome nature. Accompanying this deliriousstate is a remarkable loss in spatial and time relations; personsand things in the environment look small; time is interminable;seconds seem like minutes and hours like days. Let us think, forinstance, of what might happen if a person under its influencewere driving a high-powered automobile. Those who are habitually accustomed to use of the drug aresaid to develop a delirious rage after its administration, duringwhich they are temporarily, at least, irresponsible and liable tocommit violent crimes. The prolonged use of this narcotic is saidto produce mental deterioration. It apparently releasesinhibitions of an antisocial nature whichh dwell within theindividual. It is said that the Mohammedan leaders, opposing theCrusaders, utilized the services of individuals addicted to theuse of hashish for secret murders. Despite the fact that medical men and scientists havedisagreed upon the properties of marihuana, and some are inclinedto minimize the harmfulness of this drug, the records offer ampleevidence that it has a disastrous effect upon many of its users.Recently we have received many reports showing the crimes ofviolence committed by persons while under the influence ofmarihuana. The effect of the use of the drug depends largely upon theindividual. Among some people the dreams produced are usually ofan erotic character, but the principal effect is on the mindwhich seems to lose the power of directing and controlling itsthoughts. Then follow errors of sense, false convictions and thepredominance of extravagant ideas where all sense of value seemsto disappear. The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the drug render ithighly dangerous to the mind and body upon which it operates todestroy the will, cause one to lose the power of connectedthought, producing imaginary delectable situations and graduallyweakening the physical powers. Its use frequently leads toinsanity. I have statement here, giving an outline off cases reported tothe Bureau or in the press, wherein the use of marihuana isconnected with revolting crimes. EXTENT OF TRAFFIC The rapid development of a widespread traffic in marihuanaduring the past several years, particularly during 1935 and 1936is a matte of grave national concern. About ten years ago therewas little traffic in marihuana except in parts of the Southwest.The weed now grows wild in almost every state in the Union, iseasily obtainable, and has come to be widely abused in manystates. The situation is especially fraught with danger becausethis drug is being carried as a new habit to circles whichheretofore have not been contaminated. Incomplete reports thathave come to my attention during the past year on marihuanaseizures effected throughout the country by state authoritiesshow the existence of a dangerous and rapidly increasing trafficin this drug in at least 29 states. (Included Table - Page 30) Three hundred and thirty-eight arrests for violations during1936, but this by no means represents extent of traffic, becausenot many of the states have actually begun real enforcement asagainst marijuana -- many of the states lack special enforcementfacilities and require education of their enforcement officers inthe detection and prevention of marihuana traffic, especially inidentifying the drug. STATE LAWS All of the states now have some type of legislation directedagainst the traffic in marihuana for improper purposes. There isno legislation in effect with respect to the District of Columbiadealing directly with marihuana traffic. There is unfortunately aloophole in much of this state legislation because of a toonarrow definition of the term. Few of the states have a specialnarcotic law enforcement agency and, speaking generally,considerable training of the regular polce officers of the stateswill be required together with increased enforcement facilitiesbefore a reasonable measure of effectiveness under the state lawscan be achieved. THE NEED FOR FEDERAL LEGISLATION Even in states which have legislation controlling in somedegree the marihuana traffic, public officials, private citizens,and the press have urged or suggested the need for nationallegislation dealing with this important problem. A partial listof states wherein officials or the press have urged the need forFederal legislation on the subject are Colorado, Kansas, NewMexico, Louisiana, and Oklahoma. The uniform state narcotic law has now been adopted by some 35states, many of these including cannabis or marihuana within thescope of control by that law. However, it has been recentlylearned that the legislative definition of cannabis in most ofthese laws is too narrow, and it will be necessary to have thedefinition amplified in amendatory legislation in most of thestates, to accord with the definition in the pending Federalbill. As is the case at present with respect to opium, cocaleaves, and their respective alkaloids, the uniform state lawdoes not completely solve the enforcement problem with respect tomarihuana but it will provide the necessary supplement to theFederal act and permit cooperation of state an Federal forces,each acting within its respective sphere, toward suppression oftraffic for abusive use, no matter in what form the traffic isconducted. The Bureau of Narcotics, under the Marihuana TaxingAct, would continue to act as an informal coordinating agency inthe enforcement of the uniform state law, exchanging informationas between the respective state authorities in methods ofprocedure and attempting to secure true uniformity in theenforcement of the act in the various states which have adoptedit. INTERNATIONAL EFFECT The United Sates is not a party to the Geneva Convention off1925 which includes Indian hemp in the classes of drugs withrespect to which the convention operates. It is a party to theHague Convention of 1912 and the Manufacturing LimitationConvention of 1931, under both of which it submits completereports of progress in enforcement to the League of Nations(insofar as opium, coca leaves, and their alkaloids areconcerned.) The United States goes beyond the letter of itsobligations under the last-mentioned conventions in internationalcooperation with respect to opium and coca leaves and theiralkaloids. It is only with respect to cannabis (marihuana) thatit cannot afford complete cooperation with other countries, sinceit is obviously handicapped by the lack of national druglegislation which would permit a reasonable degree of controlover this drug and afford a direct means of informationconcerning the trend of the traffic. The United States has morethan kept pace with other world powers in the united battleagainst the opium, morphine, and cocaine traffic; it continues tofall behind in the international movement directed against theuse of marihuana. The importation and exportation of marihuana,with respect to the United States is practically unrestricted,and on once occasion the attention of the Bureau was called to anexcess exportation of cannabis, by one of our exporters, toEngland, When the British governmental agency called attention tothis exportation of a quantity from the United States in excessof the British import certificate, we were in the humiliatingposition of informing it that our laws did not cover cannabis,and remedial action had to be limited to a warning to theexporter -- not that he was violating a law of the United States,but an admonition that he would please refrain from violating theBritish laws. Alamosa Daily Courier Alamosa, Colorado, September 4, 1936 United States Treasury Department Bureau of Narcotics Gentlemen: Two weeks ago a sex-mad degenerate, named LeeFernandez, brutally attacked a young Alamosa girl. He wasconvicted of assault with intent to rape and sentenced to 10 to14 years in the state penitentiary. Police officers here knowdefinitely that Fernandez was under the influence of marihuana. But this case is one in hundreds of murders, rapes, pettycrimes, insanity that has occurred in southern Colorado in recentyears. The laws of this state make the first offense of using,growing, or selling marihuana a mere misdemeanor. The secondoffense constitutes a felony. Indian hemp grows wild within the limits of this city. It isclandestinely planted in practically every county in thissection. Its use amounts to a near traffic in drugs. The people and officials here want to know why something can'tbe done about marihuana. The sheriff, district attorney, and citypolice are making every effort to destroy this menace. Our paperis carrying on an educational campaign to describe the weed andtell of its horrible effects. Your bulletins on traffic in opium and other dangerous drugsstate that the production and use of Indian hemp are notprohibited by Federal law. Why? Is there any assistance your Bureau can give us in handlingthis drug? Can you suggest campaigns? Can you enlarge yourDepartment to deal with marihuana? Can you do anything to helpus? I wish I could show you what a small marihuana cigaret can doto one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents. That's whyour problem is so great; the greatest percentage of ourpopulation is composed of Spanish-speaking persons, most of whoare low mentally, because of social and racial conditions. While marihuana has figured in the greater number of crimes inthe past few years, officials fear it, not for what it has done,but for what it is capable of doing. They want to check it beforean outbreak does occur. Did you read of the Drain murder case inPueblo recently? Marihuana is believed to have been used by oneof the bloody murderers. Through representatives of civic leaders and law officers ofthe San Luis Valley, I have been asked to write to you for help.Any help you can give us will be most heartily appreciated. Very sincerely yours, Floyd K. Baskette City Editor, The Alamosa Daily Courier MARIHUANA - A MORE ALARMING MENACE TO SOCIETY THAN ALLOTHER HABIT-FORMING DRUGS (By Dr. Frank R. Gomila, commissioner of public safety, andMiss Madeline C. Gomila, assistant city chemist) Many papers have been written on the effects, physical andmental, of the marihuana weed. Some of the best descriptions thatwe have read can be found in Bromberg's (1) paper calledMarihuana Intoxication; Bragman's (2) Toxic Effects - Weed ofInsanity; and Kingman's (3) Green Goddess. But talking andwriting of the various results that ensue from constant use ofthis weed in no way impresses the reading public with theseriousness of the problem that faces it today. To our knowledge, this is the first time that such a paper asthis will be presented. After searching the literature thoroughlywe could find no complete record of the situation in thiscountry. We have not deluded ourselves into believing that theinformation compiled her is in any way a complete record of thesituation, but we do believe that it is the best that can beobtained. The difficulty encountered is that any drug addictionis such a secretive affair that not even the authorities incharge know all the culprits. Also, we have encountered somerather unexpected reluctance on the part of some of the stateauthorities to furnish the information. The large gaps in thetable that we compiled are due to this lack of information. Referring to Table 1, we find that 46 out of 48 states, or 94percent, have found it necessary to pass some legislation againstthe use, possession, and sale of this menacing weed. the urgentreason for all these laws was that in many states the discoverywas made that scores of youngsters of high school age had becomevictims of the weed. It was only last year that the St. LouisStar Times in a series of newspaper articles, led the people ofMissouri in a stirring fight for the passage of a state law forthe protection of their children. Quoting from the St. LouisStart-Times of February 4, 1935, we read: "Those acquaintedwith the traffic say there are more women smokers than men. Ifyou are a 'right guy' a 'giggle smoke' is available in places oflenient morals and may be purchased from a 'bystander' in many ofthe cheaper downtown resorts. "One gentleman of the byways explained, 'The worst thingabout that loco weed is the way these kids go for them. Most ofthem, boys and girls, are just punks and when they get high onthe stuff you can write your own ticker.'" (4) The article goes on to tell how, when the number of mugglesmokers increased, marihuana dives came into existence. Here is adescription, "The windows were covered with blankets and asingle electric bulb flickers through smoke so dense you canbarely see across the room. A dozen person around a penny-antepoker game. They range from boys of 16 to men in their late 20's,all in a state of dazed exhilaration. "There are only a few rickety charis and the table forfurnishings and the gang lolls about the room, some chasing cheapwhisky with long muggles drags, others content to smoke, laughvacuously and 'walk on air.'" (5) Still quoting from the St. Louis Star-Times of an earlier datewe find the case of a young high school student reported. "Acase in point is that of a young man, an intelligent high schoolstudent, now confined to an institution for the mentallydiseased. His experience is entirely the result of acquiring thehabit of smoking marihuana cigarettes. "One of his friends said to a Star-Times reporter,calling the youth by name, 'He was a swell fellow until marihuanagot him. Like the rest of us, he thought the weed wasn'thabit-forming and had no idea of the possible consequences ofsmoking it. He smoked so many he couldn't quit. finally he wentcrazy and his folks put him in a sanitarium.'" (6) From thissame article we read: "'Weed' smoking among young St.Louisians appears to be chiefly confined to boys. Girls whoindulge do so largely as a result of association with boys whosmoke the drug." "A girl student, still in her teens told a reporter shehad seen some of her friends under the influence and named a boyand a girl who lost their senses so completely after smokingmarihuana that they eloped and were married. "'Another boy I know got the habit so bad he didn't haveenough money to buy all the cigarettes he craved. To get themoney he stole jewelry from his mother while under the influenceof marihuana and pawned it. He was arrested, but when his motherfound out who the thief was she naturally dropped her complaint. "'I know at least 20 boys, some of them in school, whom Ihave seen smoking marihuana cigarettes. Sometimes three or fourof them crowd into a telephone booth and puff on a singlecigarette. "'Several girls I know have smoked marihuana and I smokedwith them, but I've decided its bad business and haven't smokedlately. "'Sometimes we would go to a beer tavern and smoke, theboys always supplying the muggles.'" Referring to table II, we find then that Colorado reports thatthe Mexican population there cultivates on an average of 2 to 3tons of the weed annually. This the Mexicans make intocigarettes, which they sell at two for 25 cents, mostly to whitehigh school students. Strangely enough, it has been noted thatwhen this weed is grown at altitudes considerably higher than sealevel, it is much more potent. Colorado, a state that has anaverage altitude than sea level (sic), can therefore grow a plantthat is much more powerful than one grown in Louisiana. (8) From Massachusetts we learn that cigarettes sell for 25 centsapiece and that they are chiefly used among the younger peoplebetween the ages of 18 and 21. In Louisiana the age range is18-37 years. Minnesota, like Missouri, has its difficulties withhigh school addicts. Oklahoma is another of the afflictedstates,. Reports state that the weed is used widely among thehigh school students there. The tragic picture of all these youngsters coming under theinfluence of the drug certainly must have some significance. Itmeans that more drastic action is necessary. All these stateshave passed laws concerning this drug but though the law hascurbed the use of marihuana to a certain degree it has by nomeans eradicated it. This is still a very important problem. Whyshouldn't our Federal government, with its wheels of actionalready set in motion, take over the control of the use of thisdangerous drug in the United States? We said "wheels ofaction, already set in motion", because in many large citiesthe Federal narcotic squads are cooperating with the local policein stamping out the danger threatened by this drug. The states,individually, are doing what they can, though in many instancesthey are sorely handicapped by lack of experience with thisproblem, insufficient funds and ignorance of the proper methods.Referring to Table 1, again, we find that the narcotic squad iseven now helping curb this menace in Louisiana, Maryland, NewYork, New Jersey, and Wyoming. In New Orleans we were called in a case in which Federalnarcotics agents had made the wholesale arrests of 36 peddlerssimultaneously. This is just one case out of many handled by theFederal men this year. These men are more thoroughly trained andmuch better equipped to handle the situation than the localpolice. Certainly our government could help out in thisdeplorable situation by amending the Harrison Narcotic Act toinclude marihuana as a potent and dangerous drug. As long ago as1931 our country was one among 57 other countries that met atGeneva Switzerland, in order to draw up a treaty convention forrestricting the manufacture and cultivation of narcotic drugs.Included among the narcotics listed by this treaty convention ismarihuana. by the end of the year 1935, 55 nations had ratifiedthis convention, the United States being the second nation to doso in 1932. Why then should our Government ratify this treatyconvention and not include marihuana in our own Harrison NarcoticAct(11)? The increasing prevalence of this menace is another matter forserious thought. From Table 1, we find that eight states enactedlegislation against the use, sale, and possession of this weed in1935 and 1936. by glancing over Table II you'll find that NewYork State alone destroyed 187 tons of the weed in 1935. Thereseems to be no shortage there. In Louisiana, in recent months,the state police have destroyed more weed here than every before.there are many states in a similar dilemma. This problem seems inno way to be solved butt on the contrary is growing to be a moredangerous one every day. From table II we ascertain that out of 450 persons arrested inNew Orleans, La. in 1934, 125 were marihuana addicts; out of 37murders 177 were addicted to the use of marihuana, and out of 193convicted of thefts, 34 were under the influence of this drug.Therefore, the ratio is that approximately 1 out of every 4persons arrested in this city has become a victim of thisdangerous drug. (12) In the state of New Mexico, 4 percent of the inmates of thepenitentiary are confessed users of the weed. In New York we findthat ten percent of all the narcotic violators are marihuanacases. The warden of the state penitentiary in North Dakotareports that some of the prisoners are addicted to the drug butthat there are none there at present. In Minnesota 10 out of 348cases at the reformatory confessed to being addicts, while inMississippi 6 confessed users were arrested. Illinois reportshaving arrested 30 marihuana addicts since 1933. In the case of the city of New Orleans, if we refer to tableIII for the year 1936, we find that in the first 4 months of thatyear 36 arrests were made. This number does not include thearrests made by the Federal narcotics men which greatly exceedsthis figure. If we consider this figure 36 as an average figurefor that period we find that the total number of arrests for theyear of 1936 will substantially exceed the total for any one ofthe preceding years. This is a significant fact and proves thatthe danger is growing instead of abating. Practically every article written on the effects of themarihuana weed will tell of deeds committed without the knowledgeof the culprit, while he was under the influence of this drug.There are many arguments for and against this statement, and manycases reported which uphold it, and still others which contradictit. Our opinion is that both arguments for and against arecorrect because of the inconsistency of the action of this drugon individual victims. The reactions resulting depend to a largeextent on the innate characteristics of the individual. Theperson who is so unfortunate as to come under the influence ofthis drug, in many cases, becomes the unwilling offender of thelaw because the central nervous system has become affected, as isthe case with other habit-forming drugs. As a representativecase, note the tragic predicament of this Californian. "Aman under the influence of marihuana actually decapitated hisbest friend; and thn, coming out of the effects of the drug, wasas horrified aas anyone over what he had done" (9). Then wehave the case of a young boy in Florida. The story runs asfollows: "A young boy who had become addicted to smokingmarihuana cigarettes, in a fit of frenzy because, as he statedwhile still under the marihuana influence, a number of peoplewere trying to cut off his arms and legs, seized an axe andkilled his father, mother, two brothers and a sister, wiping outthe entire family except himself." (10) Those of us who are native New Orleanians must well rememberthe tragic incident that happened in our city last year. In adowntown section a man under the influence of the weed became sofrenzied and angered at his wife as to kill her out on the streetin front of many witnesses. These are only three cases of which there are hundreds. Eachone is a blot on the history of the State where the crime wascommitted and so it is very difficult to unearth suchinformation. Is marihuana sufficiently like any other habit-forming drugthat it should receive recognition as a real menace? For ananswer we have only to glance over table IV, where we find thatin comparison with other habit-forming drugs, heroin, morphine,opium, and cocaine, marihuana has an established place. Likethese drugs named, it , too, derives it effects chiefly fromresultant changes to the central nervous system. It decreasespain and in certain instances dispenses it completely. Comparableto the other drugs mentioned, a certain amount of tolerance isset up rather easily with marihuana. In its action of depression and stimulation it is very muchlike that noted under small doses of morphine. Habit-formingdrugs in ever case disturb the vision and heart. In this instancemarihuana reacts like cocaine, in that the pupils become dilatedand the pulse is accelerated. Habitual use of heroin weakensjudgment, self-control, and attention. IN this sense, marihuanais like heroin as constant use results in loss of judgment andmeasurement of time and space. Marihuana makes the imaginationrun rampant and the dreams that result are as extravagant asthose reported by opium eaters. Social dangers that ensue fromthe use of marihuana are comparable to those that result fromheroin. The heroin habit produces an utter disregard forconventions and moral; similar results ensue from the smoking ofthe weed. Here, however, the skeptic has a point which he candispute. The action of marihuana is much less constant thanheroin, as it depends to a certain extent on the disposition andintellectual activity of the victim. However, we must remindfriend skeptic that the great majority of users are ignorant andinexperienced youngsters and members of the lowest strata ofhumanity. When you think this fact over there should be no roomfor argument on that point. After an exhaustive search on marihuana from its earliesthistory to the present time, it is easy to see that thedestruction of the plant is absolutely essential in allcommunities in this country. To this end we believe that themembers of the Orleans Parish Medical Society should lend theirwholehearted cooperation. In conclusion we wish to state that we have provedconclusively: 1. The seriousness of the problem as it concerns youngsterswho are willing to take a chance at all times. 2. The increasing prevalence of this menace which results in alarge percentage of criminal users. 3. The tragedy of persons who use the weed becoming unwillingoffenders of the law because the central nervous system has beenso affected. Table III -- Statistics of number of arrests, number ofcigarettes confiscated, and pounds of weed destroyed in the cityof New Orleans for the years of 1928 to April, 1936. Year Number of arrests Number of white arrests Number of colored arrests Number color not recorded Number of cigarettes confiscated Pounds of weed confiscated 1928-29 19 9 6 4 406 4.2 ounces 1930 30 17 4 9 527 27 pounds, 10 ounces, 7 stalks of freshly cut herb 1931 18 6 1 11 405 2 pounds, 6 ounces 1932 20 11 5 4 94 1 pound 2 ounces 1933 13 6 3 4 62 1 ounce 1934 20 9 7 4 236 3 pounds, 6.4 ounces; 2 3/4 pounds seeds and fragments of leaves 1935 82 22 32 28 2,752 3 pounds, 11 ounces 1936 (January through April 36 18 15 3 149 3.01 ounces Table IV. An interesting comparison of the action of heroin,morphine, opium, cocaine, and marihuana Heroin Morphine and opium Cocaine Marihuana Action on cerebrum and medulla seems to be stronger than morphine. Senses dulled. Decided action on cerebrum and medulla. Depression of sensibility. Most important effect is that on central nervous system. Applied locally, paralyzes sensory nerve terminations. Injections anesthetize all areas where drug penetrates, complete loss of sensation in lower part of body but movements unimpaired. Effects due chiefly to changes in central nervous system. Sensation of pain decreased or entirely absent. Sense of touch dulled. Tolerance set up rapidly Tolerance easily maintained for large doses. Tolerance can be attained by habitual use. Some tolerance is rapidly acquired. Has little effect in intestines. Movement of bowels irregular. Depression and stimulation follow each other in rapid fashion. Movement of intestines are augmented. Depression succeeds stimulation in some order; 2 statges not divided and often overlap. Causes diarrhea. Depression and stimulation that results is comparable to that noted under small doses of morphine. Vision disturbed. Pupils contracted Pupils dilated. Pupils dilated. Slow small pulse Heart irregular Appetite bad Pulse accelerated Loss of appetite Pulse accelerated. Appetite increased. Judgment, self-control attention weakened; resembles morphine in its general effects Results in nervousness, weak character and lack of energy; utterly unfit for work unless supplied with drug; tremors and unsteadiness in walking may be apparent. Reflexes more easily excited. tremors or slight convulsive movements often occur; has surprising power of removing fatigue; small doses, mental powers increased; large doses stimulant effect spreads to lower areas and produces a great increase of movement. Results in loss of judgment; imagination runs rampant; measurement of time and space lost; dream state followed by unconsciousness and then by restful sleep; action less constant that any other drug; depends greatly on disposition and intellectual activity of victim; large doses result in loud disturbances and violence Social dangers greater that in the case of morphine as it produces marked changes in personality, utter disregard for conventions and morals; degenerative changes in individual progress more rapidly than in the case of any other drug; addict quickly becomes a mental and moral degenerate. No evidence of physical deterioration or unfitness from addiction to drug. Melancholia and dementia follow continued use of drug. Sleeplessness, tremors, occasional convulsions and hallucinations often occur, also delirium, indefinite disturbances of sensation and motion; mental, moral, and physical deterioration more rapid than in the case of morphinism. Often produces disregard for conventions and morals. Habit most difficult to cure. Habit difficult to cure; relapses after withdrawal are exceedingly common. View of some doctors is that habit can be broken as easily as smoker's habit, as there seems to be no after effects upon withdrawal. Habit can be easily broken as there are no withdrawal effects, but as is the case with all drugs the increased desire due to abstinence causes continued relapses. BIBLIOGRAPHY (1) American Journal of Psychiatry, Marihuana Intoxication,Clinical Study of Cannabis Sativa Intoxication. Walter Bromberg,Volume 91, Pages 303-330, September, 1934. (2) Medical Journal and Record, The Weed Insanity. Louis J.Bragman, Syracuse, NY, October 7, 1925, pages 416-417. (3) Ibid., October 19, 1927, pages 470-475. The Green Goddess(A Studyin Dreams, Drugs, and Dementia). Robert Kingman,Brooklyn, NY (4) St. Louis Star Times, February 4, 1935. Louisville PaperFinds Marihuana a Menace There. (5) Ibid. (6) St.. Louis Star Times, January 18, 1935. Young Slaves toDope Cigaret Pay Tragic Price For Their Folly. Hulius Kleen. (7) Ibid. (8) World Narcotic Defense Association. Marihuana or IndianHemp and Its Preparations. (9) Ibid. (10) Ibid. (11) World Narcotic Defense Association. Narcotic DrugAddiction and How to Fight It. (12) World Narcotic Defense Association. Marihuana or IndianHemp and Its Preparations. US Treasury Department, Bureau ofNarcotics, Washington, DC, Traffic in Opium and Other DangerousDrugs, 1934. Cushny's Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Edmunds andGunn, pages 278-293, 1934. The New Orleans Times-Tribune Cannabis. W. G. Walker, Chief, Division of NarcoticEnforcement, San Francisco, California, July 1, 1934. Annual Report on Narcotic to Governor Lehman for 1935, NewYork State. Legal Mediciine and Toxicology. Webster, W. B. Saunders Co.,Philadelphia, United States of America, 1930. MARIHUANA AS A DEVELOPER OF CRIMINALS (By Eugene Stanley, district attorney, parish of Orleans, NewOrleans, La.) Many prosecuting attorneys in the South and Southwest havebeen confronted with the defense that, at the time of thecommission of the criminal act, the defendant was irresponsible,because he was under the influence of marihuana to such a degreehe was unable to appreciate the difference between right andwrong, and was legally insane. A great deal of difficulty hasbeen experienced in rebutting this defense by the testimony ofpsychiatrists, for, while some of these experts are conversantwith the nature and effect of this drug, it has been theexperience of the author that many psychiatrists know nothingwhatsoever of the effect of the drug. This may be due to the fact that this drug has come into wideuse in certain parts of the South only within the last 10 years. It is the purpose of this article to give a brief outline ofthe nature and origin of this drug, the legislation enacted whichprohibits its sale and use, to recommend that this drug be placedwithin the provisions of the Harrison Anti-Narcotic Act, and togive a list of some of the works which may be consulted by anypersons interested in making a thorough study of the drug. MARIHUANA IS THE MEXICAN TERM FOR CANNABIS INDICA. The plant or drug known as Cannabis indica, or marihuana, hasas its parent the plant known as Cannabis Sativa. It is popularly known in India as Cannabis Indica,; inAmerica, as Cannabis americana; in Mexico as Cannabis mexicana,or marihuana. It is all the same drug, and is known in different countriesby different names. It is scientifically known as Cannabissativa, and is popularly called Cannabis americana, Cannabisindica, or Cannabis mexicana, in accordance with the geographicalorigin of the particular plant. In the East it is known as charras, as gunga, as hasheesh, asbhang, or siddi, and it is known by a variety of names in thecountries of continental Europe. Cannabis sativa is an annual herb from the "hemp"plant; it has angular, rough stems and deeply lobed leaves. It is derived from the flowering tops of the female plant ofhemp grown in semi-tropical and temperate countries. It was oncethought that only the plant grown in India was active, but it hasbeen scientifically determined that the American specimen termed"marihuana" or "muggles" is equal in potencyto the best weed of India. The plant is a moraceous herb. In the South, amongst the Negroes, it is termed"mooter". In India, where the plant is scientifically cultivated on awide scale for the drug obtained from it, the plants, when small,are separated, the female plant being used exclusively for thepurpose of obtaining the drug. In Mexico and in America, the plants are permitted to growtogether indiscriminately, without separating the male and femaleplants, so that the potency of the female plant is lessened bythe admixture of the male element. In semitropical climates, because of the fertility of the soiland the ease with which hemp seed may be procured, the plant canbe easily cultivated, and prohibition of the actual cultivationis rendered practically impossible. It resembles a weed, and hasbeen found growing in some of the back yards and lots of thecities. the traffic in the plant , and the drug derivedtherefrom, has been found to be considerable, particularly in theSouth and Southwestern States. CULTIVATION OF HEMP Hemp is cultivated all over the world; its culture probablyoriginated in China, from whence it spread. It is cultivated forthree purposes; For the fiber, out of which rope, twine, cloth,and hats are made; for the seed, from which a rapidly drying oilis obtained that is used in the arts and as a commercialsubstitute for linseed oil; and for the narcotic contained in theresin of the dried, flowering tops of the pistillate plant. Theseed is also sold as a constituent of commercial bird seed. Hemp is grown in the New England Colonies for fiber used inthe making of homespun. It was also grown in the Virginia andPennsylvania Colonies and cultivated at an early date in thesettlements of Kentucky, from whence the industry spread toMissouri. Hemp has been grown at various times in Illinois, nearChampagne; in the Kankakee River Valley, in Indiana;; insoutheastern Pennsylvania, and in Nebraska, Iowa, and California.It is now abundant as a wild plant in many localities in WesternMissouri, Iowa, Southern Minnesota, and in the southwestern andwestern states, where it is often found as a roadside weed. It isnot known when the plant was introduced into Mexico, and thesouthwest, but probably along with the early Spanish settlements.It was introduced into Chile in the 16th Century. The early cultivation of hemp in the United States was of thesmall European variety, but this has been replaced since 1857 bythe larger Chinese hemp. Practically all the seed for present-dayAmerican hemp culture is grown in the Kentucky River Valley. CANNABIS INDICA OR SATIVA Cannabis Sativa is designated as a "narcotic" in anumber of State laws. It is sometimes mentioned in the laws as"loco weed" because of its inebriate effect upon menand cattle; in others a "marihuana", "hemp",or "hashish"; in fact, the drug is known by a widevariety of names. It is one of the several drugs included under the antinarcoticlaws of 17 States, namely Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico,Nevada, California, Oregon, Idaho, Washington, Utah, Maine,Vermont, Massachusetts, New York, Indiana, Wisconsin, and Iowa.It is also prohibited under the laws of Mexico and England. In a great many of the states where this legislation wasenacted, so widespread was the use of marihuana, and so terrificthe result, that grave emergencies were declared to exist whichjustified the legislation taking effect immediately. The restrictions respecting the smoking of "hemp"are mentioned along with those restricting opium smoking. Although the different forms of the plant have been describedunder different botanical names, there are no essentialdifferences in any of the specific characteristics, and allcultivated or wild hemp is now recognized as belonging to onespecies - Cannabis sativa. THE ORIGIN OF THE DRUG The origin of the drug is very ancient. In the year 1090 A.D. the religious and military order or sectof the Assassins was founded in Persia, and the numerous acts ofcruelty of this sect was known not only in Asia, but in Europe aswell. This branch of the Shiite sect, known as Ismalites, wascalled Hashishan, derived from Hashish, or the confection of thehemp leaves (Cannabis indica). In fact, from the Arabic "Hashishan" we have theEnglish word "Assassin". It is mentioned in the ArabianKnights, and was known at the time of the Crusaders. It is knownto the Greeks as "Nepenthe", and was lauded in theimmortal Odyssey of Homer as a drug to lull all pain and anger,and to bring forgetfulness of all sorrow. It was known in ancient times to the Egyptians, and its use inEgypt, at the present time is widespread. In fact, it is presently as widely used amongst the Egyptians,and in the East, as opium is used by the Chinese, and alcohol bythe Americans and Europeans. Its effect upon the Malays has beenterrific, and the natives of the Malayan Peninsula have beenknown, while under its influence, to rush out and engage inviolent or bloody deeds, with complete disregard for theirpersonal safety, or the odds arrayed against them. To run"amok" in the Malayan Peninsula is synonymous withsaying one is under the influence of this drug. In America, particularly in the South and Southwesternportions of the United States, it is called marihuana. It ispopularly known amongst the criminal element as"muggles", or "mooter" and addicts arecommonly termed "muggle heads." THE EFFECT OF THE USE OF THE DRUG The flowering tops of the female plant are the source fromwhich the drug is obtained, and in American these flowering topsare gathered and rolled into cigarettes and smoked, the smokebeing inhaled. A favorite method of smoking these cigarettes is for a personto draw into the mouth the smoke from one of these cigarettes andto blow the smoke from the mouth against the cupped hands, andthen inhale the smoke. In India, marihuana or "muggles" is mostly used in"ganja" form, which is the Indian name for a mixture ofthe stems, leaves, and flowering tops of the cultivate femaleplants. It is smoked, as in America, in the form of cigarettes,or in the pipe; its smell is typically offensive, and is easilyrecognized by the initiated. In Inida, Bhang, or siddi, are the Indian names for themixture of these dry leaves and capsules without stems, whethermale or female, cultivated, or in its wild state. It is thecheapest and the weakest of all the preparations of hashish, andis taken as tea. In India, the resinous substance which exudes from theflowering head of the female plant is called"chearris", and is either smoked or taken in pills orin confections, or mixed with sugar or honey, and is commonlysold amongst the bazaars of Egypt and the Far East. In many respects, the action of cannabis sativa is similar tothat of alcohol or morphine. Its toxic effects are ecstasy,merriment, uncontrollable laughter, self-satisfaction, bizarreideas lacking in continuity, and its results are extremehyperacidity, with occasional attacks of nausea and vomiting. Ithas also been described as producing, in moderate doses, from amild intoxication to a dead drunk, a drowsy and semicomatosecondition, lapsing into a dreamy state, with a rapid flow ofideas of a sexual nature and ending in a deep sleep, interruptedby dreams. On awakening, there is a feeling of great dejectionand prostration. Large doses produce excitement, delusions hallucinations,rapid flow of ideas, a high state of ecstasy, psychomotoractivity with a tendency to willful damage and violence, and atemporary amnesia of all that has transpired. In cases ofprolonged addiction, especially in the Malays, the somnolentaction of Cannabis indica is replaced with complete loss ofjudgment and restraint, the same effects so frequently observedin alcohol intoxication. It is commonly used as an aphrodisiac, and its continued useleads to impotency. This has been observed among the natives ofIndia. It is an ideal drug to quickly cut off inhibitions. At the time of the founding of the religious sect of the"Assassins" in Persia, by Hassan Ben Sabbat, young menwhom the sheik desired to subjugate were given this drug, andwhen under its influence, were taken, blindfolded, into thegarden of the sheik, where every pleasure which appealed to thesense awaited them. When complete indulgence in these pleasures were had, theywere taken from this garden, and so eager were they for a furtheropportunity to use this drug and a repetition of these pleasures,that they were under the complete domination of the sheik, whoalone knew the secret of this drug, and gladly followed his will,even to the extent of sacrificing their lives is he commandedthem to do so, in order to further experience the pleasures towhich they had been initiated. At the present time, the underworld has been quick to realizethe value of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelictsto that of the master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint,and to its influence may be attributed many of our present daycrimes. It has been the experience of the police and prosecutingofficials in the South that immediately before the commission ofmany crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged inby many criminals, so as to relieve themselves from a sense ofnatural restraint which might deter them from the commission ofthese criminal acts, and to give them the false courage necessaryto commit the contemplated crime. THE GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE TOWARD MARIHUANA Indian hemp (marihuana) addicts were made eligible fortreatment in recent legislation enacted by the SeventiethCongress, approved January 19, 1929, establishing narcotic farmsfor the confinement and treatment of persons addicted to the useof habit-forming narcotic drugs. This legislation is somewhat unique in congressionallegislation, since Indian hemp is not classified as ahabit-forming drug or narcotic in other Federal narcotic laws. Inasmuch as the harmful effects of the use of the drug isbecoming more widely known each day, and it has been classed as anarcotic by the statutory laws of 17 American states, England,and Mexico, and persons addicted to its use have been madeeligible for treatment in the United States narcotics farms, theUnited States Government, unquestionably, will be compelled toadopt a consistent attitude toward this drug, and include it inthe Harrison antinarcotic law, so as to give Federal aid to theStates in their effort to suppress a traffic as deadly and asdestructive to society as the traffic in the other forms ofnarcotics now prohibited by the Harrison Act. REFERENCES See American Illustrated Medical Dictionary (Dorland, 1927)"Marihuana." Arny, Henry V. Principles of Pharmacy (3rd Ed.) Philadelphiaand London, W. B. Saunders Co. (1926, 1978pp. Cannabis, pp767-768, Reference p. 779) (Bethea) Materia Medica and Prescription Writing (1926 pp.114-15) Boyce, Sidney S. Hemp (Cannabis Sativa), a practical treatiseon the culture of hemp for seed and fiber, with a sketch of thehistory and nature of the hemp plant. New York, Orange Judd Co.(1900, 112 pp) Briosi, Giovanni, Interno alla anatomia canapa (Cannabissativa) Milano, Tip. Bernardoni di C. Rebeschini (cc. 1894-96, 2v., bibliografia; ff. 1 pp. 2-28; v. 2, pp. 14-38) Century Dictionary and Encyclopedia (vol. 12, pp. 771, 1909). Daggett, Charles H. Theory of Pharmaceutical Chemistry.Philadelphia and New York, Lea & Febiger, 1910 (539 pp.Cannabis Indica; p. 480). Edmunds, C. W. and J. A. Gunn. A textbook of pharmacology andtherapeutics (9th ed.) , Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1928(743 pp. Cannabis; pp. 280-282) Evers, Norman and G. D. Elsdon. The analysis of drugs andchemicals. London C.Griffin & Co. (1929, 372 pp. CannabisIndica; p. 190) India. Department of Finance and Commerce. Indian Hemp DrugsCommission (No. 1369 ex. Government of India, Calcutta, 1925 23pp.) -- Memorandum on excise administration in India, so far as itis concerned with hemp drugs * * * (3d, 1. e. 2d ed.; Simla,Printed at the government central printing office 1902, 22 pp.) -- Hemp Drugs Commission. Report, Simla, printed at thegovernment central printing office (1894 7 v.) --- Supplementary Volume. Answers received to selectedquestions for the native army. * * * Calcutta, 1895 (186 pp) -- Supplementary Volume. Evidence of witnesses from nattivestates. Calcutta, office of the superintendent of governmentprinting, India, 1895 (218 pp.) Marshall C. R. The active principle of Indian hemp; apreliminary communication. Lancet (London), Jan.23 1897 (pt. 1,pp. 235-238) Marihuana (Mex) In Mexico, any one of several plants havingnarcotic properties; in many localities; Cannabis indica and inthe State of Sonora, Nicotiana glauca. Medical -- Jurisprudence & Technology, Prof. Jno. Glaisterand Hon. Jno. Glaister, Jr. (5th Ed. 1931) Wm. Wood & Co.,New York, E & S Livingstone, Edinburgh (p. 849) Merck's Index; an encyclopedia for the chemist, pharmacist,and physician (4th ed.), Rahway, NJ Merck & co., Inc. (19330,585 pp), Cannabis (p. 147) Moreau Jacques J. Du hachich et de l'alienation mentale.Etudes psychologiques. Paris, Fortin Masson et cie, 1845 (431pp). Munch, James Clyde. "Bioassays; a handbook ofquantitative pharmacology", Baltimore, the William &Wilkins Co., 1931 (pp. 190-197) An article on the subject,including a few references in the text (covers, pp. 67 -88) Orleans Parish Medical Society. the Marihuana Menace, by Dr.A. E. Fossier. Perez, Genaro. La Marihuana. Breve estudio sobre esta planta.Mexico, 1886. Noted in Nicolas, Leon. "Biblioteca botanico -mexicana." Mexico, Officina tip. de la secretaria defomento, 1895 (p. 207) Pharmacopiea of U.S.A. 1925 (pp. 95-96) Poulsson, E. A textbook on Pharmacology and therapuetics (Eng.ed.) London, W. Heinemann, 1923 (519 pp.). Cannabis indica; (pp.90-91) Prain, Sir David. on the morphology, teratology, and diclinismof the flowers of Cannabis, * * * Calcutta, office of thesuperintendent of government printing, India (9104, 32 pp.)Scientific memoirs of officers of th medical and sanitarydepartments of the government off India (new ser. no. 12) Robinson, Victor. An essay on hasheesh, historical andexperimental (2d ed.), New York. E. H. Ringer (1925, 91 pp.) Rusby, Bliss & Ballard. The Properties and Uses of Drugs(1930 ed., p. 415) Solis Cohen Githens. Pharmaceotherapeutus (192 ed., pp.1702-3) Sollman, Torald. A manual of pharmacology, and itsapplications to therapeutics and toxicology (3d ed.) Philadelphiaand London, W. b. Saunders Co. (1926, 1184 pp.) (Marihuana(Cannabis) (pp. 323-324) United States Departemtn of Publich Health, See Report ofSurgeon-General, Hugh S. Cummings, to the Seventieth Congress.See Index Catalogue of the Surgeon General's Office, as follows: Series 3 (Cannabis indica), 3:836-37, 1922 Series 2 (Cannabis indica) 3:341-45, 1898 Series 2 (Haschisch) 6:784, 1901 Series 1 (Cananbis indica) 2:690-91, 1881. U.S. Dispensatory, 1918 (p. 276) Wood, George B., The dispensatory of the United States ofAmerica (21st ed.) Philadelphia and London, J. b. Lippinscott Co.1926, 1892. Cannabis indica (Marihuana in Mexican) p. 277-281 Afew references are given in the text. JOURNALS See (Bragman) Toxic effects: Weed of insanity (M. J. &Rec. 122; pp. 416-18, 1925) (Del Favero) mental effect o hashish on Central AfricanNegroes. Pensiero med. 17;270-277, 1928 (Dontas and Zis) Narcotic action of potassium chlorate addedto smoking tobacco; comparison with hasheesh Wien. Klin.Wehnsehr. 41:161-163, 1928 (Dawner) Cannabis indica in smoking tobacco. Brit. M. J.2:521, 1923 (Fantchenko) Case history of intoxication psychosis frompoisoning with tinct. cannabis indicae. Klin. Med. 6: 770-773,1927 (Gayer) Pharmacologic standardization of oriental hashish andcannabis indica. Hasheesh Insanity (by Dr. Warnock, superintendent CairoLunatic Asylum), British Medical Journal, vol. 2, p. 2 or 8, 1903 (Huher) History of hashish and opium. Deut. Med. Wehnschr.,53: 1145, 1927 (Joel) Cultivation of cannabis indica; reply to Sabaltschka,Klin. Wehhenschr., 5: 364-365, 1926 Abst J.A.N.A. 86: 1490 (Djunjibhoy) Role of Indian hemp in causation of insanity inIndia. Far East Assn. Trop. Med. Trans. 7th Cong. 1927, V. 1:400, 1928 (Joel and Frankel) Hashish intoxication; contribution toexperimental psychopathology. Klin. Wehnschr.5: 1707-1709, 1926. (Kant and Krapf) Psychic phenomena by ingestion of HashishArchiv. f. exper. Path. u. Pharmakol. 129: 319-338, 1928 (Kant and Krapf) Question off intact function in hashishintoxication, Ztschr. f. d. ges. Neurol u. Psychiat. 112:302-305, 1928 (Kingman) Gren Goddess, study in dreams, drugs and dementia.M. J. & Rec. 126-470-475, 1927 (Sabalitschka) Cultivation of cannabis indica; comment onJoel's article, Klin. Wehnschr. 5: 1279-1280, 1926 (Straub) Bavarian hashish, experiments. Munch. Med. Nehnschrr.75: 49-51. (Kent) Forms of reaction of psychotic indivisuals to hashishintoxication; study of problem of hallucination. Arch. f.Psychiat. 91: 694-721, 1930. (Dhunjiohoy) "Indian Hemp Insanity" peculiar toIndia, J. Ment. Sc. 76; 254-264, 1930 STATUTORY REGULATIONS England -- George V (1925), Statutes 15 and 16 amending. California - Code of California, statutes and amendments(1929), page 381, chapter 216 Indiana -- A. Burns' Annotated Indiana Statutes, volume 1,section 2494, page 1228, act 1911, page 45 Iowa -- 1924 acts of Iowa, chapter 156, page 427 Louisiana -- Act 41 of 1924 Maine -- Revised statues of Maine (1930, sec. 25, ch. 23, p.477). Nevada -- Compiled laws of Nevada (1929) New Mexico -- The laws of New Mexico (1923), chapter 42, page58. Oregon -- General Laws of Oregon (1923) Chapter 27 Texas -- Vernon's Annotated Criminal Statutes of the State ofTexas (Penal Code) volume 2, 1926, chapter 3, article 720. Utah. -- Compiled laws of Utah, section 4432 (1917 edition),page 902. Vermont -- General Laws of Vermont (1919), section 6285, page1081 Washington -- Remington's Compiled Statutes of Washington(1923), supplementing chapter 7, sections 2509-2511, 2509-2512. Wisconsin -- Wisconsin Statutes (1929), tenth edition, section146.02, formerly sectioon 1419 of the Old Wisconsin Statutes,paragraph 16. Wyoming.-- Wyoming's Compiled Statutes(1920), section 3570,page 693 (see descriptive word index and tables of cases affirmed.Revised or modified, covering "Current Digest". vols, 1to 5 (1926030) (West Publishing Co. "Marijuana", p.327.) Criminal law: 507 (1), 730 (2) 569, 338 (7) 1170 1-2 (2), 1153(6) 814 (8,9), 459, 741 (1) Poisons. 9. (Thereupon the committee adjourned to meet tomorrow,Wednesday, Apr. 28, 1937, at 10:30 a.m.) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-84IA087-000625-B018-246http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/qaire1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044546 text/html 7024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:45:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:24 GMTContent-length: 6807 Answers to Marihuana Questionnaire by Dr. W. Treadway Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Answers to Marihuana Questionnaire by Dr. W. L. Treadway Division of Mental Hygeine Public Health Service 1. Cannabin. Contained in the resin produced by the femalepistillate plant of Indian hemp. 2. Cannabin is considered as the active principle. Any activeprinciple, may be curtailed by other substances which, inthemselves, are inert, or it may be enhanced, but I do not knowof any substance in hemp which activates Cannabinis regarded asthe active principle or substance. You may have a drug which hasa specific physiological action but that drug may be enhanced bythe addition of some other substance which, in itself, isprobably inert. For example, take calomel combined with soda --you would enhance the action of the calomel by the presence ofthat alkali. 3. It occurs largely in the resin that is found in the flowersof the tops of the pistillate plant. It also occurs in smallquantities in the smaller leaves of the tops of the plant and,possibly, to a slight extent, in the fresh or young stalk of theplant. 4. In the seed. 5. I do not know. That would depend upon furtherexperimentation. I do not think it woud be practical, from acommercial standpoint, to attempt to get any considerable yieldfrom any part of the plant other than the resin. It would involvegreat technical knowledge to make it commercially possible interms of contraband trade. The small quantitiess in the leavesand stalks would hardly be sufficient to warrant anyone going tothe trouble to get a satisfacgtory yield from it. In other words,it may be technically possible but it would be impractical. 6. That is a moot point. I think it is most generallyaccepted, however, that the resin from the female plant conainsthe largest amount of Cannabin.. 7. Yes. Top leavews and resin dried and kept for from a yearto eighteen months becomes practically inert. It loses thestrength rapidly. This is also true of the fluid extract ofCannabis. It tends to become inert, or lose its physiologicalstrength. 8. Yes, if kept in dry storage for a long time itdeteriorates. 9. Hemp fiber has almost been replaced by cotton because itcan be produced cheaper (clothing, etc.) It is also cultured forrope but has been replaced by Sesseli, of the Cactus family, andAbacca fiber, grown in the Philippine Islands, both of which aremore desirable for rope and cheaper. Sesseli is the moredesirable of these two. 10. It is difficult to say whether the seed in its earlydevelopment or in its embryonic form, may be contaminated by thepresence of this resin. The resin acts as a medium for thecollection of pollen. The seed does not contain the activeprinciple of Cannabin. Theoretically, and from the standpoint oftradition, hemp seed is included in bird seed -- probably becauseof the idea that it did contaiin this resin and make the birdspeppy. 11. I suppose you could pinch off the tops of the plants butit would have to be done two or three times for, after eachpruning, theyy would produce another series of buds. Likechrysanthemums, after each pruning, they would probably make anextra effort to produce more fruit and, while this pruning wouldprobably temporarily stop the production of ths deleterioussubstance it woudl eventually enhance and increase it. 12. I do not know. 13. It has been employed since about 500 B.C. for its sedativeaction. The principle pharmaceutiical product is the fluidextract but it is very rarely used now in medicine because thereare so many more desirable hypnotics. It is used, however, as ananalgesic in corm plaster. From the standpoint of thePharmacopoeia, it has been in each revision, but in talking withsome of the men interested in the new revision they questionwhether it is desirable to continue including it. 14. Cannabis Indica does not produce a dependence such as inopium addiction. In opiium addiction there is a completedependence and when it is withdrawn there is actual physical painwhich is not the case witth Cannabis. Alcohol more nearlyproduces the same effect as Cannabis in that there is anexcitement or ageneral feelingg of lifting of personality,followed by a delirious stage, and a subsequent narcosis. Thereis no dependence or increased tolerance such as in opiumaddiction. Aas to the social or moral degradation associated withCannabis it probably belongs in the same category as alcohol. Aswith alcohol, it may be taken a relatively long time withoutsocial or emotional breakdown. Marihuana is habit-forming,altthough not addicting, in the same sense as alcohol might bewith some people, or sugar, or coffee. Marihuana produces adelerium with a frenzy which might result in violence; but thisis also true of alcohol. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-85IA087-000625-B018-265http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/hester2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044556 text/html 8342HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:45:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:24 GMTContent-length: 8125 Additional Statement of Clinton M. Hester Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Additional Statement of Clinton M. Hester Taxation of Marihuana Wednesday, April 28, 1937 House of Representatives Comittee on Ways and Means Washington, DC Additional Statement of Clinton M. Hester, Assistant GeneralCounsel, Office of General Counsel for the Department of theTreasury. MR. HESTER: Mr. Chairman, I prepared last evening a brief summaryof the effect of the marihuana bill upon legitimate industrywhich I thought would be of interest to the committee. MR. CULLEN: If there is no objection, the statement referredto will be inserted in the record. MR. HESTER: The statement I have referred to is as follows All legitimate users of marihuana are exempted from theprovisions of this bill which imposes taxes upon transfers ofmarihuana and require such transfers to be made on order formsobtained from the collector of internal revenue, exceptpurchasers of marihuana seeds for use in the making of bird seed,or marihuana seeds as bird see, and purchasers of the floweringtops and leaves of marihuana for use in the making of the refineddrug product. These legitimate users of marihuana who are exempted fromthese transfer taces and order form requirements, are purchasersof the mature stalk of marihuana for use in the making of fiberproducts such as twine, purchasers of marihuana seed for thefurther planting of marihuana and the manufacture of oil, andpurchasers of such oil for use in the manufacture of paints andvarnishes. Although all of the above manufacturers or dealers who usemarihuana are exempted from the transfer tax and order formprovisions of the bill (with exceptions noted), they are,nevertheless, required to pay occupational taxes and registerwith the collector of internal revenue, with two exception:Dealers in paintt and varnish which contains marihuana; andmanufacturers of and dealers in fiber products manufacturedd fromthe mature stock of marihuana. Likewise, all producers ofmarihuna, whether they grow marihuana for hemp fiber, for seeds,orr for the drug, must register as producers and pay theoccuptational tax. I. Hemp. Since the definition of marihuana in the billexcludes the mature stalk of the plant and any product ormanufacgture of such stalk such as twine, all hemp, fiber, orcordage manufacturers and dealers would not be subject to anyprovision of the bill. It is possible too safely exclude all suchpersons from the purview of the bill because the mature stalkdoes not contain any of the harmful drug ingredient. However, anyperson who gros marihuana, even if for the sole purpose of slaeto a hemp manufacturer, would have to pay an occupations tac as aproducer. the reason for this is that such production cannot belimited to the mature stalks of such plant since the stalk cannotbe grown without also producing the flowering tops and leaves.Unles the legitimate producer transfers the tops and leaves to adrug manufacgturere, his product will not be subject to atransfer tax for the flowering tops and leaves are removed fromthe mature stalk and left on the field. II. Marihuana seed for planting purposes. - All persons whhoproduce marihuana for seeds must pay the occupational tax asproducers, but all transfers of marihuana seeds to personsregistered as producers for use by such persons for the furtherproduction of marihuana are exempted from the transfer tax andorder form provisions of the bill. III. Marihuana as used in the pain and varnish industry. It appears that there is some use of marihuana seeds for theproduction of oil which is sold to paintt and varnishmanufacturers, to be used as a constituent of their products. Thebill requires manufacturers and importers of oil, paint, andvarnish dealers in oil, to pay occupational taxes but exemptsfrom occupational taxes dealers in paints or varnishes. The reason why manufacturers and importers must pay theoccupational tax and register is that they will have rawmarihuana in their possession and the reason why their productsare exempt is because the drug cannot be extracted from theproducts. However, paiint and varnish and the oil to be used inpaint and varnish would be exempted from the transfer tax. Thus,a transfer of seed from a marihuana producer to a registered oilmanufacturer would be exempted as would a transfer of themanufactured oil to a registered paint manufacturer and atransfer off the completed paint or varnish to a dealer or by adealer to the consumer. IV. Marijuana for medicinal use. All persons who produce,manufacture, import, or deal in marihuana, or its byproducts formedical use, as well as practitioners, would be compelled by thebill to pay occupational taxes. All transfers to manufacturingchemists, druggists, and practitioners, woudl be sujbect to thetransfer tax and order form requirement but, such persons allbeing entitled to reigstry, the transfer tax would amount to onlyone dollar per ounce. the final dispensation by a practitioner toa patient in the course off his professional practice or bydruggists to the patients of such practitioners in pursuance of awritten prescription would, howevver, be exempted from thetransfer tax and order form provisions. Incidentally, it appearsthat the marihuana drug is not indispensable to the medicalprofession. V. Bird seed. Since marihuana bird seed contains the drug andis capable of being used by human beings for smoking purposes,and since, if negligently disposed of, itt propagates newmarihuana very rapidly, all occupaitional and transfer taxsesimposed by the bill are applicable with respect to bird seedcontaining marihuana. Since the ultimate purchaser of th birdseed could not register under the bill, a transfer to him wouldbe subject to the prohibitive $100 tax. thus the effect of thebill is tto prevent the use of marihuana seed in bird seed. MR. CULLEN: Who is your next witness, Mr. Hester? MR. HESTER: Mr. Chairman, I would like the committee now tohear Dr. Munch, a pharmacologist, from Temple University,Philadelphia. MR. CULLEN: Will you give the reporter your full name and theposition you occupy? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-86IA087-000625-B018-285http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/munch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044623 text/html 17301HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:46:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:20 GMTContent-length: 17083 Statement of Dr. James C. Munch Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, PHARMACOLOGIST, TEMPLEUNIVERSITY, PHILADELPHA, PA. DR. MUNCH: Mr. Chairman, my name is Dr. James C. Munch; I am apharmacologist at Temple University, Philadelphia. MR. MCCORMACK: Will you tell us about your education andprofessional background? DR. MUNCH: I am a doctor of philosophy. I have majored intoxicology (the action of poisons) and in pharmacology (theaction of drugs on animals and on man.) I was for ten years connected with the Food and DrugAdministration, during part of which time I was in charge of thepharmacology laboratory there. I am still a consultingpharmacologist for the Bureau of Biological Survey of the UnitedStates Department of Agriculture. I am also professor ofphysiology and pharmacology in the School of Pharmacology, TempleUniversity, Philadelphia. I ws the drector of pharmacologicalresearch for Sharp and Dohme; at present I am in charge of testsand standards, John Wyeth & Bros., Philadelphia Pa. MR. MCCORMACK: You are a graduate of what college? DR. MUNCH: Of George Washington University. MR. MCCORMACK: When? DR. MUNCH: In 1924. MR. MCCORMACK: Are you connected with the Government in anyway? DR. MUNCH: I am consulting pharmacologist for the Bureau ofBiological Survey in the Department of Agriculture. I have alsobeen interested in the work of the Narcotics Bureau, particularlyin the detection of the doping of racehorses, and in subjects ofthat type. MR. MCCORMACK: That is a rather interesting study by itself. DR. MUNCH: I find it so. MR. CULLEN: You may proceed with your statement. Dr. MUNCH: In connection with my studies of Cananbis, ormarihuana, I have followed its effects on animals and also, sofar as possible, its effects upon humans. I find that the doseswhich are capable of producing effects may be very nearlypoisonous doses; that is to say, small doses have little effect. The effect is directed first at the hind bain, or thecerebellum, leading to a disturbance of the equilibrium, so thata man will go temporarily into a state resembling alcoholism.Larger doses tend to depress the heart. Continuous use will tend to cause the degeneration of one partof the brain, that part that is useful for higher or physicreasoning, of the memory. Functions of that type are localized inthe cerebral cortex of the brain. Those are the disturbing andharmful effects that follow continued exposure to marihuana. I have found the active material lodged in male plants as wellas female plants. There are no chemical methods of standardization of thisvariable drug. In 1910, 1920, and 1930 the United States Pharmacopoeiarevision committee, the commttee that is charges with draftingstandards for drugs, considered those methods of standardizatioonin great detail. In 1910, the method of standardization by producing an effectupon dogs was introduced as the official method ofstandardization in an attempt to get a more uniform drug to usein medicine. First, small doses of thematieral to be standardized arehgiven the dogs and then larger doses until we find the dose thatproduce an effect. I have found in studying the action on dogsthat only abut 1 dog in 300 is very senistive to the text. Theeffects on dogs are extremely variable, although they vary littlein their susceptibility. the same thign is true for other animalsand for humans. MR. REED: Will you explain to the committee whether this drugaffecgts the nerves, or does it go directly into the bloodstream? DR. MUNCH: It does not matter whether it is absorbed bysmoking or swallowing; it goes into the blood stream; it iscarried to the brain by the bloood and produces its effects inthe brain. Animals which show a particular susceptibility, that is, whichshow a response to a given dose, when they begin to show it willacquire a tolerance. We have to give larger doses as the animalsare used over a period of 6 months or a year. This means that theanimal is becoming habituated, and finally the animal must bediscarded because it is no lobber serviceable. MR. MCCORMACK: We are more concerned with human beings thanwith animals. Of course, I realize that those experiments arenecessary and valuable, because so far as the effect isconcerned, they have a significance also. but we would like tohve whatever evidence you have as to the conditions existing inthe country, as to what the effect is upon human beings. Not thatwe are not concerned abou the animals, but the important matterbefore us concenr the use of this drug by human beings. DR. MUNCH: I was making the point to show that in 1910 and in1920 the Pharmacopeia accepted cannbis as one drug for use inhuman medicine, and that that is the method of standardization,because there was no other method by which this could bestandardized. When we considered the material for the Pharmacopoeia in 1930we found that this method of standardization was not useful. Wefound that the Intenrational Committe on Standardization of Drugsof the League of Nations had not admitted cannabis because it isnot used throughout the world. Therefore, that method of standardization was discarded, andso at this time the product which may be used is used withoutbeing standardized. But the use of it is definitely decreasing,as is shown by production statistics and surveys of prescriptioningredients. MR. REED: You say the use is receding? DR. MUNCH: It is disappearing; that is, its use in humanmedicine is decreasing. MR. REED: You do not wish to infer that it is decreasing inuse as a narcotic, do you? DR. MUNCH: Not at all. I am discussing the medicinal use. MR. VINSON: For what was it used? DR. MUNCH: I can only give you the literature. No physicianwith whom I am immediately acquainted uses it at this time. In the early days it was used in cases of sleeplessness and tomake your last moments on earth less painful when you were dyingfrom tetanus or rabies. There may be other uses, but I have notfound them. MR. VINSON: Is it ever used now for those purposes? I take itthere are several substitutes. DR. MUNCH: Yes; there are. So far as human beings areconcerned, we hve different types of treatment, such as thePasteur treatment. MR. VINSON: But you had the Pasteur treatment when you hadmarihuana, did you not? DR. MUNCH: Not in human medicine. DR. MUNCH: No, sir. MR. VINSON: How long have you had it? DR. MUNCH: Cannabis or marihuana was introduced into humanmedicine by OShaughnessey in 1838. MR. VINSON: When did Pasteur come on the scene? DR. MUNCH: The Pasteur treatment was developed about 1875. MR. VINSON: Then you had the Pasteur treatment between theperiod of 1875 until 1920? DR. MUNCH: Yes, sir. MR. VINSON: Did they use marihuana in that period for rabies? DR. MUNCH: Its use had been decreasing during that period. MR. VINSON: As I understood you, the use of marihuana was toease the last hours of a person in distress from excruciatingpain. DR. MUNCH: Yes, sir. MR. VINSON: I feel certain there are many substitutes thatcould have been used before and can be used now for the purposefor which marihuana, to some extent, was used. DR. MUNCH: Yes; That is true. Most of the modern drugs for theannulment of pain have been developed since about 1880 or 1890. MR. CULLEN: Is it used in dentistry? DR. MUNCH: It is one component of a prescription which hasbeen used from time to time in dentistry in assuaging pain, butthere again we have better drugs. At the time ------- MR. CULLEN: (interposing) So it is not used very much today indentistry? DR. MUNCH: That is my understanding. With the development ofdrugs lik novocaine, its use in dentistry has been decreasing. Its other use is in corn salves and corn plasters. Everyoneknows that they must be green and negative. Marihuana contains agreen component called chlorophyl. We have made experiments onmen as well as upon animals in which we have applied the materialdirectly through the skin, either normal skin containing a corn,and we find that it has no value in preventing pain. Cannabis ormarihuana it self will not decrease the pain of a corn. Salicylicacid causes the destruction of the corn tissue. Cannabis is used because it has a green color, but other greendyes will be just as effective as marihuana for this purpose. On last Saturday a paper was presented before thePharmacological Society in Memphis, Tenn. by Dr. Walton, who hasbeen making a special study of cannabis at this time. He said thethe cannabis grown in the neighborhood of New Orleans forpharmaceutical purposes was similar in chemical ingredients tothat which has been bought in India and elsewhere. MR. MCCORMACK: I take it that the effect is different upondifferent persons. DR. MUNCH: Yes. sir. MR. MCCORMACK: There is no question but what this is a drug,is there? DR. MUNCH: None at all. MR. MCCORMACK: Is it a harmful drug? DR. MUNCH: Any drug that produces the degeneration of thebrain is harmful. Yes; it is. MR. MCCORMACK: I agree with you on that, but I want to ask youthese questions and have your answers for the record, becausethey will assist us in passing upon this legislation. DR. MUNCH: I have said it is a harmful drug. MR. MCCORMACK: In some cases does it not bring about extremeinertia? DR. MUNCH: Yes, it does. MR. MCCORMACK: And in other cases it causes violentirritability? DR. MUNCH: Yes, sir. MR. MCCORMACK: And those results lead to a disntegration ofpersonality, do they not? DR. MUNCH: Yes, sir. MR. MCCORMACK: That is really the net result of the use ofthat drug, no matter what other effects there may be; itscontinued use means the disintegration of the personality fo theperson who uses it? DR. MUNCH: Yes, that is true. MR. MCCORMACK: Can you give us any idea as to the period ofcontinued use that occurs bbefore this disintegration takesplace? DR. MUNCH: I can only speak from my knowledge of animals. Insome animals we see the effect after about 3 months, while inothers it requires more than a year, when they are given the samedose. MR. MCCORMACK: Are there not some animlas on which it reacted,as I understand it, in a manner similar to its reaction on humanbbeings? Is that right? DR. MUNCH: Yes, sir. MR. MCCORMACK: Have you experimented upon any animals whosereaction to this drug would be similar to that of human beings? DR. MUNCH: The reason we use dogs is because the reaction fothe dogs to this drug closely resembles the reaction of humanbeings. MR. MCCORMACK: And the continued use of it, aas you haveobserved the reaction on dogs, has results in the disintegrationof personality? DR. MUNCH: Yes, so far as I can tell, not being a dogpsychologist, the effecgts will develop in from 3 months to ayear. MR. MCCORMACK: The recognition of the effects of the usse ofthis drug is not only of comparatively recent origin is it not? DR. MUNCH: Yes, comparatively recent. MR. MCCORMACK: I suppose one reason was that it was not usedvery much. DR. MUNCH: Yes, that is right. MR. MCCORMACK: I understand this drug came in from, or wasoriginally grown in Mexico and Latin American countries. DR. MUNCH: "Marihuana" is the name for Cannabis inthe Mexican Pharmacopoiea. It was originally grown in Asia. MR. MCCORMACK: That was way back in the oriental days. Theword "assassin" is derived from an oriental word orname by which the drug was called; is that not true? DR. MUNCH: Yes, sir. MR. MCCORMACK: So it goes way back to those years when hashishwas just a species of the same class which is identified by theEnglish translation of an oriental word; that is, the word"assassin"; is that right? DR. MUNCH: That is my understanding. MR. MCCORMACK: Is there any knowledge or information as to thegrowth of the use of marihuana cigarettes, or any other form ofthe drug by hman being for drug purposes, in recent years? DR. MUNCH: Mr. Young was formerly connected with the Bureau ofPlant Industry fo the Untied States Department of Agriculture. Heleft the Bureau several years ago and started a plantation in theneighobrhood of Florence, S.C. for the growth of marihuana formedicinal purposes. It is my understanding that because of thelack of commercial demand he has disconttinued that project aftertwo years. I am not certain but I think he stopped that in 1928or 1929 because of the lack of demand. If I may amplify that a little bit, let me say this: In 1932and 1933 an ingredient survey was made, a study of the componentsof 122,000 prescriptions. It was found that cannabis wasprescribed only four or five times per 10,000. MR. MCCORMACK: Can you give us any information about thegrowth in recent years of the use of it as a drug in connectionwith the purposes that this bill was introduced to meet? DR. MUNCH: You mean the illicit use rather than the medicinaluse? MR. MCCORMACK: Exactly. DR. MUNCH: The knowledge that I have in that connection isbased on contacts with police officers as they collectedmaterial, even in Philadelphia. They tell me that until ten yearsago they had no knowledge of it, but that now it is growing wildin a number of different places. I was in Colorado about three years ago, gooingg there as awitness in a prosecution brought under the Colorado act inconnection with the use of marihuana. The plice officers theretold me its use developed there only within the last three orfour years, starting about 1932 or 1933. MR. MCCORMACK: Has there ben a rapid increase in the use ofmarihuana for illicit purposes - and I use the word illicit todescribe the sitaution we have in mind? DR. MUNCH: It is my understanding that there has been. MR. MCCORMACK: There is no question about that, is there? DR. MUNCH: No, sir, there is not. MR. CULLEN: We thank you for the statemetn you have given tothe committee. Who is your next witness, Mr. Hester? MR. HESTER: I would like the committee now to hear Mr.Wollner, a consulting chemist in the office of the Secretary ofthe Trasury, who will speak on the chemical phase of thisquestion. MR. CULLEN: Will you give your full name and the position youoccupy to the reporter? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-87IA087-000625-B018-308http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/wollner2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044726 text/html 8176HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:46:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:00 GMTContent-length: 7959 Statement of Herbert Wollner Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF HERBERT J. WOLLNER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, OFFICE OFTHE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY MR. WOLLNER: Mr. Chairman, my name is Herbert J. Wollner; I amconsulting chemist in the office of the Secretary of theTreasury. MR. CULLEN: You may proceed. MR. WOLLNER: The acttive principle in marihuana appears to beassociated with an element which is located or found in theflowering tops and on the under side of the leaves of the plant.Until relatively recently the lack oof refined chemical tests hasbuilt up the traditional conception that it was only found in theco-called female plant. But that is untrue. We have discoveredthat it is present both in the male and female plant. To iluminate the matter I have brought with me some slides, ifyou care to look at them through the lenses, which I will be gladto submit for your examination. (The slides referred to were examined by the members of thecommittee.) Those are the flowering tops, and the plant is covered with atremendous number of very fine hairs. You will notice that at thebase of these hairs are little pockets, liike apertures, wherelittle sacks of resin are located. The resin contains aningredient which the chemical technologist referes to ascannabinone or cannabinol, alternatively. It is the invariantexperience that this material contains the active principle whichdoes the job. MR. VINSON: How do they get this into commercial use? I amtalking about the flowering plantt. Do they have to take it inits natural state? MR. WOLLNER: There are a variety of ways. In the early days,when they used hashish, they would jounce the flowering tops upand down in bags and then the resin would collect on the surfaceof the cloth and was scraped off and mixed with sweets and eath.At the present time in reefers and muggles there is noseparation. They smoke the stuff in toto, the leaves, theflowering tops, and everything. MR. VINSON: They use the whole thing? MR. WOLLNER: Yes. In the laboratory we extract this resin andthen identify it. MR. MCCORMACK: After that it is dried quicker? MR. WOLLNER: Yes, It goes through a process which is simlar tothe process through which tobacco goes. They are similar in thatrespect. MR. REED: As to this ingredient at the root of this hairlikesubstance, is that in the nature of oil? MR. WOLLNER: Yes and no. This active substance will beextractible from the resin. It is on the border line betweenresin and oil. If you raise the temperature slightly, it becomesfluid. The identification problems have been worked out very clearlyfrom the botanical and from the purely laborattory approach, andthat is in such shape right now that the transmission of thatinformation to police officers throughout the country would beperfectly possible. MR. CROWTHER: Is that the oil that the manufacgtureres used toproduce in considerable quantities? MR. WOLLNER: That is a different oil. That oil derives itssource from the seed of the marihuana plant. The seed of hteplant contains a drying oil which is in a general way similar tothat of linseed. Those seeds contain a small amount of thatresin, appparently on their outer surface according to quite anumber of investigators depending upon the age of that seed. The oil in the seed or the seed itself only contains theactive principle, apparently, where derived from an immatureplant. However, cerain investigators have found active principlesin smaller amounts even in mature seeds. MR. VINSON: It has been testified that the common manner ofuse is tthrough cigarettes. Is anyone manufacturing thosecigarettes for sale, or do you just roll them? MR. WOLLNER: As I understand it from our law-enforcmentofficers, both procedures are in common usage. It is also sold in the form of loose tobacco, either mized orstraight. MR. VINSON: Do you know of any concern that is manufacturingcigarettes with the marihuana content? MR. WOLLNER: I would not know of such a concern in the courseof my own experience. MR. VINSON: The addicts can roll their own? MR. BUCK: Does the oil from the seed contain any of thisdeleterious matter? MR. WOLLNER: That would in a large measure depend upon thecondition of the seed and the condition of manufacture, bit Iwould say in any event the oil would not contain a large amountof this resin. It may be that that quantity active principle which is in theoil was derived through contact with other parts of the plant. MR. BUCK: Would it contain enough to have any harmful effecton anyone, if taken internally? MR. WOLLNER: I would say no; it would not contain such anamount. MR. FULLER: As I understand it, you say the oil dos notcontain much, if any, of the drug? MR. WOLLNER: It does contain some fo the drug, but not much.It woudl appear, offhand, to be rather difficult to spearate, butprocesses might possibly be developed for that purpose. MR. FULLER: It would not be useful for the purpose for whichthey are using marihuana. MR. WOLLNER: No. MR. FULLER: So, so far as the oil from the seed is concerned,it is harmless, as far as human use is concerned. MR. WOLLNER: That is right. MR. CULLEN: We thank you for your statement. Mr. Hester, who is your next witness? MR. HESTER: Mr. Chairman, we have one other witness, Dr.Dewey, who was formerly chief of the fiber investigation of theBureau of Plant Industry in the Department of Agriculture. He isa botanist, and while he is noe in retirement, officials of theDepartment of Agriculture have referred us to him as the foremostexpert on the botanical aspect of this plant. MR. CULLEN: Is he now connected with the Department ofAgriculture? MR. HESTER: No, he is not, he is now in retirement. MR. CULLEN: We will be glad to hear Dr. Dewey. Will you giveyour full name to the reporter? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-88IA087-000625-B019-11http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044750 text/html 7269HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:47:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:20 GMTContent-length: 7052 Taxation of Marihuana - Hearing on H.R. 6906 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Taxation of Marihuana Hearing Before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Finance United States Senate Seventy-Fifth Congress First Session on H.R.6906 An Act to impose an occupational excise tax upon certaindealers in marihuana, to impose a transfer tax upon certaindealings in marihuana, and to safeguard the revenue therefrom byregistry and recording. July 12, 1937 Printed for the use of the Committee on Finance ------------ Committee on Finance Pat Harrison, Mississippi, Chairman William H. King, Utah Walter F. George, Georgia David I. Walsh, Massachussetts Alben W. Barkley, Kentucky Tom Connally, Texas Josiah W. Bailey, North Carolina Bennett Champ Clark, Missouri Harry Flood Bird, Virginia Augustine Lonergan, Connecticut Hugo L. Black, Alabama Peter G. Gerry, Rhode Island Joseph F. Guffey, Pennsylvania Robert J. Bulkley, Ohio Prentiss M. Brown, Michigan Clyde L. Herring, Iowa Robert M. La Follette, Jr., Wisconsin Arthur Capper, Kansas Arthur H. Vandenberg, Michigan James G. Townsend, Jr., Delaware James J. Davis, Pennsylvania Felton M. Johnston, Clerk ----------------------------------------------------- Contents Statements of ---- Anslinger, H. J., Commissioner of Narcotics, TreasuryDepartment Hester, C. M. Assistant General Counsel, Treasury Department Johnson, Royal G., Washington, D.C. representing Chempsco,Inc., Winoma, Minn, and Hemp Chemical Corporation, Mankato, Minn. Moksnes, M.G., Danville, Ill., Representing the AmhempcoCorporation Rens, Matt, Brandon, Wis., Representing the Rens Hemp Co. Woodward, Dr. W. C., American Medical Association, Chicago,Ill., letter from -------------------------------------------------------- Taxation of Marihuana Monday, July 12, 1937 United States Senate Subcommittee of the Committee on Finance Washington, D.C. The subcommittee met, pursuant to call at 10 a.m. in theSenate Finance Committee room, Senate Office Building, Senator Prentiss M. Brownpresiding. Present: Senator Brown (chairman), Herring, and Davis. (The subcommittee had under consideration H.R. 6906, which isas follows: H.R. 6906 An Act to impose an occupational excise tax upon certaindealers in marihuana, to impose a transfer tax upon certaindealings in marihuana, and to safeguard the revenue therefrom byregistry and recording. Be it enacted by the Senate and the House of Representativesof the United States of American in Congress assembled. (a) The term "person" means an individual, apartnership, trust, association, company or corporation, andincludes an officer or employee of a trust, association, company,or corporation, or a member or employee of a partnership, who assuch officer, employee, or member, is under any duty to performan act in respect of any violation of this act occurs. (b) The term "marihuana" means all parts of theplant Cannabis Sativa L., whether growing or not; the seedsthereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; andevery compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, orpreparation of such plant; its seeds, or resin; but shall notinclude the mature stalks of such plant, oil or cake made fromthe seeds of such plant, any compound, manufacture, salt,derivative, or preparation of such mature stalks (except theresin extracted therefrom), oil, or cake, or the sterilized seedof such plant which is incapable of germination. (c) The term "producer" means any person who (1)plants, cultivates, or in any way facilitates the natural growthof marihuana or (2) who harvests and transfers or makes use ofmarihuana. (d) The term "Secretary" means the Secretary of theTreasury and the term "collector" means a collector ofInternal Revenue. (e) The term "transfer" or "transferred"means any type of disposition resulting in a change of possessionbut shall not include a transfer to a common carrier for thepurpose of transporting marihuana. Sec. 2 (a) Every person who imports, manufactures, produces,compounds, sells, deals in, dispenses, prescribes, administers,or gives away marihuana shall (1) within 15 days of the effectivedate of this act, or (2) before engaging after the expiration ofsuch fifteen-day period in any of the above-mentioned activities,and thereafter on July 1 of each year, pay the following specialtaxes, respectively: ------------------------------------------- Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-89IA087-000625-B019-30http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044804 text/html 15563HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:47:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:15 GMTContent-length: 15345 Statement of Clinton M. Hester, Assistant General Counsel,Treasury Dept. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Statement of Clinton M. Hester, Assistant General Counsel, Treasury Department MR. HESTER: The purpose, Mr. Chairman, of H.R. 6906 s toemploy the Federal taxing power to raise revenue by imposingoccupational and transfer taxes upon dealings in marihuana and todiscourage the widespread use of the drug by smokers and drugaddicts. The flowering tops, leaves, and seeds of the hemp plantcontain a dangerous drug, known as marihuana. The drug is usedonly to a negligible extent by the medical profession. In fact,last year only 4 out of every 10,000 prescriptions containedmarihuana. The drug is prescribed as a sedative, but is used veryrarely by the medical profession because the effect of the drugis so variable that a physician cannot tell how his patient willreact to the drug and because there are so many bettersubstitutes. The plant also has many industrial uses. From the mature stalkfiber is produced which in turn is manufactured into twine, andother fiber products. From the seeds, oil is extracted which isused in the manufacture of such products as paint, varnish,linoleum, and soap. From hemseed cake, the residue of the seedafter the oil has been extracted, cattle feed and fertilizer aremanufactured. In addition, the seed is used as special feed forpigeons. Marihuana is often used illicitly by smoking it in crudelyprepared cigarettes which are readily procurable in almost allparts of the country at prices ranging from 10 to 25 cents each.Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed and allpower of directing and controlling thought is lost. SENATOR DAVIS: Do you mean that the cigarettes cost 25 centseach? MR. HESTER: They are manufactured illicitly and that is the pricethat the peddlers actually get for them. SENATOR DAVIS: That is per cigarette and not per package? MR. HESTER: That is per cigarette. SENATOR DAVIS: For one cigarette? MR. HESTER: That is right. Inhibitions are released. As a result of these effects, manyviolent crimes have been and are being committed by persons underthe influence of this drug. Not only is marihuana used byhardened criminals to steel them to commit violent crimes, but isalso being placed in the hands of high-school children in theform of marihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Itscontinued use results many times in impotency and insanity. Two objectives have dictated the form of H.R. 6906, first, thedevelopment of a plan of taxation which will raise revenue and atthe same time render extremely difficult the acquisition ofmarihuana by persons who desire it for illicit uses, and second,the development of an adequate means off publicizing dealings inmarihuana in order to tax and control the traffic effectively. This bill is modeled upon both the Harrison Narcotics Act andthe National Firearms Act, which were designed to accomplishthese same general objectives with respect to opium and cocaleaves, and firearms, respectively. Under the provisions of this bill all legitimate handlers ofmarihuana, are required to pay occupational taxes as follows:Manufacturers, compounders, and importers, $24 per year;producers, $5 per year; dealers, $3 per year; practitioners(doctors, dentists, veterinarians, and other of like character),and persons who use marihuana for experimental purposes, $1 peryear. These persons, in addition to paying the occupational tax,must register with the collector of Internal Revenue and fileinformation returns as to their dealings in marihuana. However, as an additional means of bringing the traffic inmarihuana into the open, the bill requires all transfers ofmarihuana to be made in pursuance of the official order formsissued by the Secretary of the Treasury, upon which the detailsof the transaction are set forth. In order to raise additionalrevenue and to prevent transfers to persons who would usemarihuana for undesirable purposes, a transfer tax is imposedupon each transfer of marihuana. Upon transfer to registeredpersons, this tax is $1 per ounce, while, upon transfers tonon-registered persons, who under ordinary circumstances will bethe illicit users of marihuana, a heavy tax off $100 is imposed.Heavy criminal penalties are provided for the manufacturing,producing, or dealing in marihuana without registering and payingthe special taxes, for transferring marihuana not in pursuance ofan order form, and for acquiring marihuana without payment of thetransfer tax. Thus, the bill is designed, through the occupational tax andthe order form procedure, to publicize legitimate dealings inmarihuana and through the $100 transfer tax to prevent the drugfrom coming into the hands of those who will put it to illicituses. The production and sale of hemp and its products forindustrial purposes will not be adversely affected by this bill.In general, the term "marihuana" is defined in the billas to include only the flowering tops, leaves, and seeds of thehemp plant, and to exclude the mature stalk, oil, and mealobtained from the seeds of the plant, and sterilized seed,incapable of germination. Under this definition of "marihuana" the hempproducer will pay a small occupational tax but his fiber productswill be entirely exempt from the provisions of the bill,including the order form and transfer tax provisions. SENATOR BROWN: This means the farmer will pay $5? MR. HESTER: That is right. SENATOR BROWN: That is all he will have to pay? MR. HESTER: That is all he will have to pay. SENATOR BROWN: And it makes no difference how extensive hisacreage is? MR. HESTER: No, $5 is the limit. SENATOR BROWN: It is $5 whether he cultivates an acre or 10acres? MR. HESTER: That is right. The same is true of seed produced by the hemp grower for salefor the further production of the plant, for the manufacture ofoil or for birdseed, except that such transfers will be madesubject to regulations designed to prevent diversion of the seedfor illegal purposes. Similarly, the manufacturers of oil and the byproducts ofseed, such as hemp seed cake and meal, will pay an occupationaltax, but their purchases of seed and sales of such oil, cake, andmeal will be entirely exempt from the provisions of the billexcept that the purchasers of such seed will be subject toregulation designed to prevent diversion. Manufacturers of birdseed will also pay an occupational tax,but their purchases of seed will be exempt from the transfer taxand order form provisions of the bill, if carried out inaccordance with regulations. Further, under the definition ofmarihuana, the bill will not apply to their sales of birdseed, ifthe hemp seed contained therein is sterilized so as to beincapable of germination. I might say at this point that this provision with respect tothe birdseed was worked out with the birdseed people, and thosewho appeared before the Ways and Means Committee approved thatprovision. Now, this is an important provision, this particular provisionright here that we are discussing. Notwithstanding, as already shown, that under the bill theproducers of hemp will only pay a small occupational tax and maketheir purchases and sales of seed subject to regulations, somesuggestion has been made that the producers be entirelyeliminated from the bill. Such an exemption, however, is believedto be impossible. The imposition of an occupational tax enables the Governmentconstitutionally to make it illegal to engage in the occupationwithout payment of the tax. Thus, unless the Congress in thisbill imposes an occupational tax on the producer of the hemp,Congress cannot make the production of hemp for illicit purposesillegal. Hence, if the occupational tax is not imposed uponproducers, marihuana may be legally produced for illicitpurposes. Furthermore, the imposition of an occupational taxenables the Government to require the taxpayer to furnishinformation in connection with the business taxed. This wouldpermit the Government to ascertain where the legitimateproduction of hemp is being carried on, and having thisinformation, it can stamp out the illicit production moreeffectively. Obviously, therefore, the legitimate producers ofhemp cannot be further exempted from the provisions of the bill.Otherwise, the bill cannot be enforced. Aside from the reasons stated as to why it is believed to beimpossible to further exempt the producers of hemp from theprovisions of the bill, attention is invited to the fact that theprimary purpose of this legislation is to raise revenue. That completes my statement, and we have witnesses present. SENATOR DAVIS: Do I understand you to say that the primarypurpose of the bill is to raise revenue? MR. HESTER: The primary purpose of this legislation must be toraise revenue, because we are resorting to the taxing clause ofthe Constitution and the rule is that if on the face of the fillit appears to be a revenue bill, the courts will not inquire intoany other motives that the Congress may have had in enacting thislegislation. This bill is modeled on the Harrison Narcotics Act and theNational Firearms Act. The Harrison Narcotics Act has beensustained by the Supreme Court, the first time by a 5-to-4decision, and a second time by a 6-to-3 decision. The SupremeCourt in March of this year sustained the constitutionality ofthe National Firearms Act, insofar as it related to theoccupational tax. SENATOR DAVIS: The Harrison Narcotics Act you say was beforethe Supreme Court twice. Was there a change in the judges betweenthe time of the first decision and the time of the seconddecision? MR. HESTER: I do not know whether there was a new judge placedupon the bench at that time or not, but the vote was 6-to-3 thesecond time. That was some years later. SENATOR DAVIS: What was the date of the 6-to-3 decision? MR. HESTER: 1927 SENATOR DAVIS: Justice Stone went on the Supreme Court at thattime? MR. HESTER: He went on the Court in the Coolidgeadministration. SENATOR DAVIS: That is right. MR. HESTER: Yes, he was on. SENATOR DAVIS: When was the first decision? MR. HESTER: The first decision was about 1918. I think it wasabout that time. SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Hester, will you give us a summary of thehistory of the state legislation respecting marihuana? MR. HESTER: Every state in the Union has legislationregulating the traffic in marihuana. SENATOR BROWN: Is there fairly uniform law on the subjectamong the states? MR. HESTER: Yes, it is fairly uniform. In some states theyprohibit entirely all production of marihuana. I think there aresix states that prohibit the production of marihuana, and itprobably could be constitutionally done by the Congress. SENATOR BROWN: That is, there could be a prohibition? MR. HESTER: That is right. But you would have to prohibit itentirely and of course you would put all of these legitimateindustries out of business. The Supreme Court has held that whereon the face of the act it appears to be a taxing measure, thefact that it happens to be prohibitive in character will notaffect the constitutionality of it. But we have tried throughoutthis measure not to interfere materially with the production ofmarihuana, but to permit it, and to do it in a manner which willenable the Government to stamp out this illicit traffic in thesale of it. SENATOR BROWN: Say you are in this situation: You have a plantthat produces several articles that are valuable commercially. MR. HESTER: That is right. SENATOR BROWN: At the same time, as a byproduct the leaves andthe seeds can be used for marihuana? MR. HESTER: That is right. SENATOR BROWN: That is the deleterious part of it. MR. HESTER: That is correct. SENATOR BROWN: As Senator Davis suggests, I think it would bevaluable if you would summarize the state legislation, firstinforming us as to what the fairly uniform general legislation isupon the subject, and then giving us the names of the states thathave prohibited the use of marihuana. MR. HESTER: May we present a memorandum for inclusion in therecord on that because we really do not have that at the moment? SENATOR BROWN: Yes. (included table) MR. HESTER: We have with us this morning CommissionerAnslinger, of the Bureau of Narcotics, who is in charge of theenforcement of the Harrison Narcotics Act, and who will havecharge of the enforcement of this act if this legislation beenacted into law. He is prepared to testify on the necessity ofthe legislation and the practical situations. SENATOR BROWN: All right. Thank you, Mr. Hester. We will hearfrom Mr. Anslinger. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-90IA087-000625-B019-55http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044817 text/html 38045HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:48:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:10 GMTContent-length: 37827 Statement of H. J. Anslinger, Commissioner of Narcotics Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF H. J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONER OF NARCOTICS, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS OF THETREASURY DEPARTMENT MR. ANSLINGER: Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of thecommittee, we are having a great deal of difficulty. Last yearthere were 338 seizures of marihuana in some 31 states involvingseveral hundred tons of growing plants, bulk marihuana, andcigarettes. The states are asking for our help. We are trying to give itto them, but we are rather limited in our ability at the presenttime. I have made a statement before the Ways and Means Committee,which is in the record, but since that time I want to point outto the committee an incident which occurred on June 28, atAbingdon, Va. There was a marihuana farm at that point, and theman who was growing those plants had been connected with a familythat was engaged in smuggling narcotic drugs into Atlantapenitentiary some years ago. When we heard Dewey Doss was engagedin the production of marihuana, we went after him, and we got thestate officers to make a case against him. We could not doanything about that, although the information came to us first. A month or so ago, down in Texas, a man was arrested on aMissouri Pacific train going north with a quantity of cannabis,and another man was arrested in the vicinity of this place,called Raymondsville, Texas. They had both stripped the plants ona hemp farm. SENATOR BROWN: You mean they had taken the leaves off? MR. ANSLINGER: They had taken the leaves off and the floweringtops. I received this letter from an attorney at Houston, Texas,just the other day. This case involves a murder in which healleges that his client, a boy 19 years old, had been addicted tothe use of marihuana. SENATOR BROWN: Shall we read this into the record? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; I shall be very glad if you will. (The letter is as follows:) Houston, Tex., July 7, 1937 H. J. Anslinger United States Commissioner of Narcotics Washington, DC Dear sir: Your article on Marihuana appearing in the July issue of theAmerican is very useful as well as interesting. this subject strikes close to home because of a client II havewho not so long ago murdered in a brutal way a man who hadbefriended him in giving him a ride. This client is a boy 20years of age and he explained to me he has been smoking marihuanafor several years. I would like to have about 1 copies of yourarticle and will gladly pay any necessary charges. I wouldappreciate an early reply. Yours Truly, Sidney Benbow MR. ANSLINGER: I have another letter from the prosecutor at aplace in New Jersey. It is as follows: The Interstate Commission on Crime March 18, 1937 Charles Schwarz, Washington, DC My Dear Mr. Schwarz: That I fully appreciate the need for action, you may judgefrom the fact that last January I tried a murder case for severaldays, of a particularly brutal character in which one coloredyoung man killed another, literally smashing his face and head toa pulp, as the enclosed photograph demonstrates. One of thedefenses was that the defendant's intellect was so prostratedfrom his smoking marihuana cigarettes that he did not know whathe was doing. The defendant was found guilty and sentenced to along term of years. I am convinced that marihuana had beenindulged in, that the smoking had occurred, and the brutality ofthe murder was accounted for by the narcotic, though thedefendant's intellect had not been totally prostrate, so theverdict was legally correct. It seems to me that this instancemight be of value to you in your campaign. Sincerely yours, Richard Hartshorne Mr. Hartshorne is a member of the Interstate Commission onCrime. We have many cases of this kind. SENATOR BROWN: It affects them that way? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes. SENATOR DAVIS: (viewing a photograph presented by Mr.Anslinger) Was there in this case a blood or skin disease causedby marihuana? MR. ANSLINGER: No; this is a photograph of the murdered man,Senator. It shows the fury of the murderer. SENATOR BROWN: That is terrible. MR. ANSLINGER: That is one of the worst cases that has come tomy attention, and it is to show you its relation to crime that Iam putting those two letters in the record. SENATOR BROWN: The first letter is also very interesting. MR. ANSLINGER: This first letter was from an attorney atHouston. In June of this year, at Geneva, an internationalcommittee of experts in going over the reports received from allover the world said that the reports thus far indicate that themedical value of cannabis derivatives is very doubtful. There isanother report here from Dr. Paul Nicholas Leech. SENATOR BROWN: That is, to make perfectly clear, its medicalvalue is not very great, and there are many other drugs that maybe used in place of it that are fully as good if not better? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; it is not indispensable. SENATOR BROWN: I think some medical men say that if we had nosuch drug at all the medical profession would not be very greatlyhandicapped. That is, medical science would not be very greatlyhandicapped. MR. ANSLINGER: I think they are pretty generally in agreementthat its use could be abandoned without any suffering. I have a few cases here that I would like to tell thecommittee about. In Alamosa, Colorado, they seem to be having alot of difficulty. The citizens petitioned Congress for help, inaddition to the help that is given them under state law. InKansas and New Mexico also we have had a great deal of trouble. Here is a typical illustration: A 15-year-old boy, foundmentally deranged from smoking marihuana cigarettes, furnishedenough information to police officers to lead to the seizure of15 pounds of marihuana. That was seized in a garage in an Ohiotown. These boys had been getting marihuana at a playground, andthe supervisors there had been peddling it to children, but theygot rather alarmed when they saw these boys were developing thehabit, and particularly when this boy began to go insane. In Florida some years ago we had the case of a 20-year-old boywho killed his brothers, a sister, and his parents while underthe influence of marihuana. Recently, in Ohio, there was a gang of very young men, allunder 20 years of age, every one of whom had confessed that theyhad committed some 38 holdups while under the influence of thedrug. In another place in Ohio, a young man shot the hotel clerkwhile trying to hold him up. His defense was that he was underthe influence of marihuana. SENATOR BROWN: When a person smokes the cigarette, how longdoes the influence of the drug continue? MR. ANSLINGER: From reports coming to me, I think it mightlast as long as 48 hours before the effects of the drug fullywear off. SENATOR BROWN: I do not know whether it was your article Iread, or an article from some other source, but I understand thatexperiments have been conducted, in which the persons smoking themarihuana have been kept under control after taking the drug. Doyou know whether or not that demonstrated how long the effectwould be felt? MR. ANLSINGER: As I remember it, the effects in those caseswere something like 48 hours, before they fully returned to theirnormal senses. Here is a case in Baltimore, where a young man committed rapewhile under the influence of marihuana. He was hanged for it.Last fall, about September, we uncovered a field of severalacres, growing right outside the city limits of Baltimore. Thosemen were selling it to New York, sending it all over the country,at $20 a pound. SENATOR DAVIS: And how many pounds to the acre? MR. ANSLINGER: That would depend, Senator. If they just tookthe flowering tops the yield would not be so big, but some ofthem strip off the leaves and the flowering tops and grind themup. SENATOR DAVIS: Do the leaves have the same effect as theflowering tops? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; one of the Treasury's chemists ishere who can verify that, sir. It has been proved by experts inother countries who have analyzed the leaves. They find that theresin is also present in the leaf. Our experiments have not shownthe presence of any drug in the mature stalks, though. A one timewe thought that the dangerous principle was only in the floweringtop, but that is not true. What led us to the study as to whetherthere was resin in the leaves was the fact that we had seen somuch of this stuff rolled up. In some cases only the leaves hadbeen crushed, and they seemed to be giving the effect. In NewMexico, officers sent us about 4 or 5 pounds of nothing butleaves, and some of that particular shipment had been the causeof the killing of a police officer, and also the killing of a manwithin the ring. Every day we have such seizures, reports. SENATOR BROWN: Is the cigarette that is made form theflowering top more potent than the one made from the leaves? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir, it would be, because the tops havethe resin concentrated. SENATOR BROWN: Do I understand that the seed is ground up,too. and used to any extent? MR. ANSLINGER: Well, we have heard of them smoking the seed.. SENATOR BROWN: Does it produce the same effect? MR. ANSLINGER: I am not qualified to say. We have not made anyexperiments as to that, but we do know that the seed has beensmoked. I think that the proposition of the seed peoplesterilizing the seed by heat and moisture will certainly do a lotto kill this traffic. I think that that one thing might cut thistraffic in half, because much of the trouble we encounter is dueto the trafficker going to a feed store and buying the birdseedand planting cannabis, and all due to the birdseed beingscattered during the winter. Hempseed is thrown out in the gardenor in the vacant lot. The following year you have a growth ofcannabis. That is what happened in Baltimore, and particularly inPhiladelphia. I know of a case there where the State officers gotover 200,000 pounds of growing plants, as the result ofdissemination by birdseeds. A lot of that growth was being usedillicitly. The traffickers knew where to get it. The plantreseeded itself. The action that will be taken under this bill by the birdseedpeople in sterilizing the seed should have a remarkable effect inkilling the traffic. SENATOR BROWN: The sterilized seed will not reproduce? MR. ANSLINGER: It will re-seed itself. SENATOR BROWN: I am referring to the birdseed. What are theygoing to do to the birdseed? MR.ANSLINGER: They are going to kill the germinating power. SENATOR BROWN: When the seed is then thrown out, what willhappen? MR. ANSLINGER: Nothing will happen. SENATOR DAVIS: Will it be of any use as a birdseed? MR. ANSLINGER: Oh, yes. It will still have food properties. SENATOR BROWN: The birds will sing just the same? MR. ANSLINGER: There is some question about that.Sterilization is a voluntary act by the birdseed people. SENATOR BROWN: That is not in this bill? MR. ANSLINGER: It is not in there. They voluntarily agreed todo that under this act. MR. HESTER: Yes, it is in the bill. SENATOR BROWN: I wan to bring out one fact that you have nottouched upon yet. As I understand it marihuana is not ahabit-producing drug, at least to the same extent that opium is,for instance. It is somewhat easier to break the habit in thecase of marihuana than it is in the case of opium smoking? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, you have stated that correctly, Senator.It is a very difficult matter to break the opium habit. However,this habit can be broken. There is some evidence that it ishabit-forming. The experts have not gone very far on that. SENATOR BROWN: There is the impression that it is stimulatingto a certain extent? It is used by criminals when they want toogo out and perform some deed that they would not commit in theirordinary frame of mind? MR. ANSLINGER: That was demonstrated by these seven boys, whosaid they did not know what they were doing after they smokedmarihuana. They conceived the series of crimes while in a stateof marihuana intoxication. SENATOR DAVIS: How many cigarettes would you have to smokebefore you got this vicious mental attitude toward your neighbor? MR. ANSLINGER: I believe in some cases on cigarette mightdevelop a homicidal mania, probably to kill his brother. Itdepends on the physical characteristics of the individual. Everyindividual reacts differently to the drug. It stimulates some andothers it depresses. It is impossible to say just what the actionof the drug will be on a given individual, of the amount.Probably some people could smoke five before it would take thateffect, but all the experts agree that the continued use leads toinsanity. There are many cases of insanity. SENATOR HERRING: Is it every type off hemp that contains thisdrug, or is it just some particular type? MR. ANSLIINGER: Yes, sir; there are different forms, but onlyone species. SENATOR BROWN: This thought has impressed me: I read with carethe supplemental statement which you placed in the record beforethe Ways and Means Committee, in which you brought out quiteclearly that the use, which will be "illicit" if we maydescribe it that way, in the event this bill becomes a law, hasbeen known to the peoples of Europe and Mexico and the UnitedStates for centuries. MR. ANSLINGER: That is right. SENATOR BROWN: Do you think that the recent great increase inthe use of it that has taken place in the United States isprobably due to the heavy hand of the law, in its effect upon theuse of other drugs, and that persons who desire a stimulant areturning to this because of the enforcement of the HarrisonNarcotics Act and the State laws? MR. ANSLINGER: We do not know of any cases where the opiumuser has transferred to marihuana. there is an entirely new classof people using marihuana. The opium user is around 35 to 40years old. These users are 20 years old, and know nothing ofheroin or morphine. SENATOR BROWN: What has happened to the new dissemination ofit? We did not hear anything of it until the last year or so. MR. ANSLINGER: I do not think that the way against opium hasvery much bearing upon the situation. That same question has beendiscussed in other countries; in Egypt particularly, where agreat deal of hasheesh is used, they tried to show that themarihuana user went to heroin, and when heroin got short hejumped back to hasheesh, but that is not true. This is anentirely different class. I do not know just why the abuse of marihuana has spread likewildfire in the last 4 or 5 years. SENATOR BROWN: Could you give us any estimate of the number ofpersons that are engaged in this illicit traffic? Please statethat as nearly as you can. MR. ANSLINGER: I can only give you what our records show,Senator. There were about 400 arrests throughout the States inthe year. SENATOR BROWN: That is for violations of State law? MR. ANSLINGER: For violations of State law. That would notinclude the arrests in California, where I understand they haveseveral hundred a year; but the figure I am giving you of 400arrests would be about the average number that are being pickedup now, under just a noncoordinated enforcement policy , everyState doing its own work, and bringing us in occasionally. Whenthey run into "dope" work, and bringing it to usoccasionally. When they run into "dope" we down andsay, "It is marihuana and you take the case." The state of Ohio recently seized what we call a"plant". It was a seizure of marihuana. These peoplehad a mailing list of 6,000 customers scattered throughout theStates. SENATOR DAVIS: How were they dispensing it? MR. ANSLINGER: They were selling it in lots from a pound down,just selling it by mail. SENATOR BROWN: There was nothing in the law to prevent a manin Columbus, Ohio, using the mail in selling it to a person inLouisville, Kentucky? MR. ANSLINGER: No, they are doing it every day. SENATOR DAVIS: Is there anything in the present bill toprevent them using the mail? MR. ANSLINGER: Under this bill it would have to be tax-paid,and all of that would be illicit, sir. SENATOR HERRING: You say there are several hundred arrests inCalifornia alone, and about that same number throughout the restof the United States? MR. ANSLNGER: There are about the same number in the rest ofthe United States. SENATOR HERRING: How do you account for that? Is it because oftheir state law? MR. ANSLINGER: It is because they have a state enforcementagency there. They vigorously enforce the law. I might say thatPennsylvania is doing important work also. SENATOR HERRING: It might be just as prevalent in otherstates; but for the fact that we do not have the law enforced asefficiently? MR. ANSLINGER: I would not say it is as prevalent, butcertainly the use has increased in the last few years. InPennsylvania the enforcement people are very active today,particularly in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, and the areconstantly calling upon us. SENATOR DAVIS: Are they endorsing the Harrison Narcotics Actin manner satisfactory to you? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; that is satisfactory, but they areasking us for help every now and then when they run into a ratherlarge situation. SENATOR BROWN: I think that while you are on that point youhad better make clear the need for Federal legislation. You saythe States have asked you to do that. I presume it is because ofthe freedom of interstate traffic that the States require thislegislation? MR. ANSLINGER: We have had requests from states to step inbecause they claimed it was not growing in that state, but thatit was coming in from another state. SENATOR BROWN: And they could not touch that? MR. ANSLINGER: And they could not touch it and we could nottouch it. There is need for coordinated effort. We are required toreport ot the League of Nations, under a treaty arrangement, allof the seizures of marihuana made throughout the United States.It is rather difficult to get, I would say, half of them. Oneparticular reason and one primary reason for this is -- usuallythese complaints come to us first -- that there is"dope" being used in a certain place, and that there isa supply of it on a certain street. Our men go and investigateit, and they find that it is marihuana. Well, we have to call inthe state officers and there is a lot of lost effort. Very oftenby the time the state officer comes the case is gone. I would sayin most of these cases we get the information first and turn itover to the state officer. Now, we want to coordinate all of thatwork throughout the states. By state and Federal cooperation wecan make a good dent in this traffic. For instance, all states had narcotics laws before theenactment of the Harrison Narcotics Act, but until the FederalGovernment stepped in no substantial progress was made. SENATOR BROWN: What have you to say about the extent of theproduction of hemp? May it be produced in practically any statein the Union? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir, it can be produced. SENATOR BROWN: There is climatically no reason why it couldnot be produced everywhere in the United States? MR. ANSLINGER: No. SENATOR BROWN: Growing as a weed could take place anywhere? MR. ANSLINGER: Anywhere; yes, sir. That has been demonstrated. SENATOR DAVIS: A moment ago I asked you what was the yield peracre, and you then told me so much of the flower and so much ofthe leaves. What is the combined yield per acre of both theflower and the leaves? MR. ANSLINGER: I would not be able to say that, sir. Thatwould be impossible. SENATOR DAVIS: Is there any way of getting that information? MR. ANSLINGER: We are growing an experimental crop over hereon the Agricultural Farm. We can find out that way, or we cantake a plant and strip the leaves and the flowers, and find outhow many plants there are in an acre and multiply it. I thinkthat would give a reasonably accurate estimate. I think I canfind that out. SENATOR DAVIS: I wish you would. SENATOR BROWN: Now, Commissioner Anslinger, I do not knowwhether you are the best man to answer this question, or Mr.Hester. What dangers, if any, does this bill have for the personsengaged in the legitimate uses of the hemp plant? MR. ANSLINGER: I would say that they are not only amplyprotected under this act, but they can go ahead and raise hempjust as they have always done it. SENATOR BROWN: It has been represented to me that the farmermight hesitate to grow hemp when he is not only subjected to a $5tax but also to the supervision by the Government, or what youmight call the "nosing" of the Government into hisbusiness. What have you to say to this proposition? MR. ANSLINGER: Well, I would say the answer to that is thefact that they are already controlled under state legislation. SENATOR BROWN: In practically every state in the Union. MR. ANSLINGER: Not all the states, but certainly in a lothemp-growing states they are controlled. In most of the statescultivation is prohibited but in some states they are regulatedby license. SENATOR BROWN: Administratively, it seems you have charge ofthe administration of the tax and the collection of the tax? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. SENATOR BROWN: Just what would happen? We will take a farmerliving the other side of Alexandria, over in Virginia. Just whatwould happen to him if he wanted to grow 2 acres of hemp? Whatwould he have to do? MR. ANSLINGER: He would go down to the collector of internalrevenue and put down his $5 and get a registration, a stamp tax.That would permit him to grow under the act, and at the end ofyear ---- SENATOR BROWN: That is a stamp tax similar to the one a doctorgets who uses a narcotic? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir, the same kind of tax. SENATOR BROWN: He would hang that up in his house? MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. At the end of the year we would justask how much he grew. SENATOR BROWN: Would you not go down and look his field over,to ascertain whether he was making any illicit use of theotherwise worthless byproduct? As I understand it, there is nolegislation about the use of the petals or the flowers or ofthese leaves. MR. ANSLINGER: So far very few of these hemp people have beeninvolved. Well, they have not been involved in the illicittraffic at all.. This case in Texas is the only case I know of.We were not going to supervise his crop. It would be impossible. SENATOR BROWN: I do not mean that, but suppose that somefellow come along and says, "I will give you $100 to let mego in and strip your leaves and top flowers from your hempcrop." How would you ever cover that? How would you meet asituation of that kind? MR. ANSLINGER: Certainly under the act, if the farmer agreedot that, they would both be guilty of conspiracy to violate theact. SENATOR BROWN: But you would exercise no particularsupervision over the growing of that crop? MR. ANSLINGER: The exercise would be in this way: If we seeMr. Dewey Doss, the photograph of whose place I showed you, go inand pay $5 to the collector, we would watch that. We would bevery careful to see what disposition he made of that, but wewould certainly know the sheep from the goats without any closegeneral supervision. SENATOR BROWN: I do not think that you would have any troublewith legitimate manufacturers, because they are dealing with theGovernment; but the farmer himself might be a little disposed notto grow the hemp, knowing the illicit use that might be made of apart of his crop. MR. ANSLINGER: It is just an information return. That is allwe would be interested in, unless he would conspire with someoneelse to have the crop stripped. But one saving feature about thiswhole thing so far as the farmer is concerned is that the crop iscut before the resin reaches the nth state. SENATOR BROWN: Before it reaches its greatest potency? MR. ANSLINGER: In other words, before it reaches its greatestpotency. There is some resin that comes up through the plant, butif he is a legitimate hemp producer he will cut it down beforethe resin makes its appearance. SENATOR BROWN: You had before the Ways and Means Committee twosamples of the plant. Do you happen to have any of those sampleshere? MR. HESTER: We do not have them here this morning. We can getthose samples for you. MR. ANSLINGER: The plant which I have in my hand now can beeasily distinguished as you go along the road. SENATOR DAVIS. You can see that along all the highways of thecountry. MR. ANSLINGER: Well, Senator Davis, that will grow up 16 feet. SENATOR DAVIS: How high? MR. ANSLINGER: Sixteen feet. SENATOR DAVIS: Sixteen feet? MR. ANSLINGER: Sixteen feet. Of course when they are smalllike that you cannot distinguish them. SENATOR BROWN: At what height are they usually harvested? MR. ANSLINGER: About 14 or 16 feet. SENATOR BROWN: At that height? MR. ANSLINGER: Not for hemp production. That is for resin. SENATOR BROWN: I mean for hemp production. MR. ANSLINGER: Oh, for hemp production, I would say around 10,12, 14 feet. But it is certainly before the resin gets up thereto do the damage. SENATOR BROWN: Are there any other questions that any memberwants to ask Mr. Anslinger? MR. ANSLINGER (sic): What is the return to the farmer peracre? MR. ANSLINGER: I do not know. The hemp people here could tellyou what the return is, but I understand it is around $30. SENATOR BROWN: Does it require intense cultivation? MR. ANSLINGER: I do not think so. SENATOR HERRING: It is a weed that will grow, is it not? MR. ANSLINGER: It will grow without any trouble. In fact, alot of these illicit traffickers will try to hide their fieldwith corn. They will grow corn all around it. Well, the hemp willshoot right up above the corn and will grow 4 or 5 feet higher. MR. HESTER: Before we complete our case I think we ought tosay one word on the regulations, if I may? SENATOR BROWN: Yes; we shall be glad to have that. MR. HESTER: From time immemorial it has been the policy ofCongress in imposing taxes and in providing exemptions undercertain conditions from the imposition of certain taxes, toprovide that the exemption will be made under regulations to beprescribed by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue. Take for example in this particular case, in the Revenue Actof 1932 they provided that automobile parts and accessoriesshould be exempt from taxes if the manufacturer sells them to amanufacturer who is going to make a complete automobile or truck. In order to get that exemption the manufacturer who is goingto sell that part of an automobile or truck to the othermanufacturer, who is going to make a completed truck, cannot getthat exemption except under regulations to be prescribed by theCommissioner of Internal Revenue. The Commissioner merely requires him to obtain a certificatefrom the other manufacturer that this part is to be used in themanufacture of a completed truck. In this particular we have exactly the same situation here,and we are simply following the practice, I say, that Congresshas followed from time immemorial in revenue acts. The farmerhere will not even have to go to the Collector's office. All hewill have to do will be merely to mail in his five dollars, andthey will send him the stamp tax and the registration. At the endof the year he will make an information return as to how muchland he has under cultivation and what disposition he has made ofit. When he wants to sell his crop off seeds all he will have todo under the regulations of the Treasury Department will be toobtain some evidence from the person to whom he sells it, thatthat person is entitled to the exemption. That is the situation with respect to the seed, which is theimportant item involved here so far as the domestic interests areconcerned. Of course, the fiber products are entirely out of thebill. That completes our case. SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Hester, what are you going to do withrespect to the large number of farmers who are not going to knowabout this law in its earlier stages of enforcement? It seems tome that with the lack of dissemination of information, a greatmany of them are going to engage perhaps in a legitimateproduction of it, not knowing of this law. Are you rather harshtoward those fellows, or can you be reasonable and generoustoward them? MR. HESTER: No, the bill will not become effective for 60days, and there are not a great many of the hemp producers in theUnited Sates. Of course the Treasury Department would doeverything it possibly could to notify these people. There wouldbe no hardship imposed upon them. This would be administeredexactly as any other revenue act is administered, and frequentlythere are excise taxes imposed where the individual does not knowanything about it. SENATOR BROWN: What legitimate uses are now made of the hempplant in the United States. That is, what causes the farmer toraise it? MR. HESTER: Some raise it for seeds. SENATOR BROWN: Do you mean birdseeds? MR. HESTER: Yes. They raise the seeds for use in themanufacture of birdseed. They make oil out of it. Most of theseed, however, that is used in the manufacture of oil is importedfrom Manchuria, but it may develop in this country. Then after the seed is used for the making of oil, they takethat seed and crush it, and make meal and meal cake, and that issold to cattle raisers. The oil is used in the manufacture of varnish and paint andsoap and linoleum, and then in the case of the mature stalk theyuse that for making fiber and fiber products. Of course, they areentirely outside the bill. SENATOR DAVIS: While primarily you are placing a tax, it isfor the sole purpose of getting and enforcement of the law, andgetting a plan for enforcing it? MR. HESTER: That is correct. SENATOR DAVIS: If it should be one dollar, what differencewould that make? MR, HESTER: Well, the situation is simply this: ------- SENATOR DAVIS: I am only talking from the farmer's point ofview, of charging him one dollar instead of five dollars. MR, HESTER: I am glad you raised that point, Senator Davis,.When the Harrison Act was first before the Supreme Court theoccupational tax was only one dollar, and the vote was 5 to 4. Inother words the Supreme Court said, "This is a revenuemeasure", although the tax was only one dollar. But the votewas five to four. After that Congress raised the occupational taxand then when the case came before the Supreme Court, the votewas six to three. and the Court said, "We now have morereason to sustain the constitutionality of this act that we hadbefore, because it is more of a revenue act than it wasthen." In the case of the producers, under the Harrison NarcoticsAct, although there are no poppies grown in this country, if theycould develop it so that they could raise poppies, so that theycould get opium from it, the farmer would have to pay $24, but inthis case the producer only pays five dollars. We have left the practicioner at one dollar, because that wasthe situation of the Harrison Narcotics Act, and that is the realreason why the figures are set in this bill at $24, $5, $3, andone dollar, so that we can have a real revenue raising measure. SENATOR DAVIS: You charge five dollars an acre under this? MR, HESTER: Oh no, a year. SENATOR DAVIS: I meant to say this: You charge five dollarswhether he produces on one acre of on one thousand acres? MR, HESTER: That is right. Senator Brown: Have you worked out the Canal Zone matter withthe Department? MR, HESTER: We have. They wish to be exempted, and they haveagreed not to propose their amendment providing for directregulation of marihuana in the zone because as I pointed out toyou the other day it might indicate on the face of the bill thatit is a regulatory measure, but they wish to be exempted, and wehave no objection. We are preparing to change that. SENATOR BROWN: Just one or two more matters. Why should theybe exempted? MR, HESTER: There is no legitimate business in the Canal Zone,and they say they have sufficient control over the marihuanaproblem in the zone at this time under existing legislation, andthey object to general legislation being applied. SENATOR BROWN: It would probably be considerable duplicationof effort down there. MR, HESTER: There might be some. The Harrison Narcotics Actapplies to the Canal Zone, and that is the reason why it wasincluded in this bill. But the Treasury Department has noobjection if the Canal Zone goes out. SENATOR BROWN: Will this entail any considerable increase inpersonnel of the Department? MR, HESTER: No, I do not think so. MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir. SENATOR BROWN: I understand this measure has the approval ofthe Treasury Department. MR, HESTER: Yes, oh, yes. it is strongly recommended by theTreasury Department. SENATOR BROWN: Is there anything further from the 'government?Do you desire to have a chemist testify? MR, HESTER: I think we have finished our case. SENATOR BROWN: Very well, Thank you, Mr. Hester andCommissioner Anslinger. The next witness on my list is Mr. Rens of the Rens Hemp Coo.of Brandon, Wis. We would be glad to hear from him. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-91IA087-000625-B019-75http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044834 text/html 26046HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:48:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:01 GMTContent-length: 25828 Statement of Matt Rens, Representing Rens Hemp Co.,Brandon, Wis. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF MATT RENS, REPRESENTING RENS HEMP CO., BRANDON, WIS. MR. RENS: We have no objection whatever to controllingnarcotics. Personally I am a producer, a farmer, and also a millowner, a hemp mill owner, and we grow this hemp solely for thepurpose of fiber. It is American hemp, which we sell to the Navyand to other industrials in the East, the spinning companies. We have prepared an interpretation of this bill as we see it,and also a general summary of the discussion and suggestedchanges and reasons for these changes. This is quite lengthy. Ido not know as you want to take the time for me to read it. Wemight have it ins the record and give it to you folks. SENATOR BROWN: We would be glad to have you present thestatement and put it in the record. (The memorandum presented by Mr. Rens. is as follows:_ Interpretation of H.R. 6906 -- Marihuana (Hemp) Bill This attempt to interpret H.R. 6906 is intended to helplegitimate hemp producers and processors to understand theseprovisions in H.R. 6906 that directly affect them. RELATTION TO PRODUCERS There are in the United States two rather distinct classes ofhemp producers; one produces hemp for seed; and the otherproduces hemp for the fiber that is in the stalks The same personmay produce for both purpose, yet the usual situation is forpersons to produce for one or the other purpose only. the billH.R. 6906, affects each class of producers alike so far as taxesand registrations are concerned. Occupational Registration of Producers Each producer of hemp, regardless of whether he is producingfor seed or for fiber, is required to register with the internalrevenue collector in the district in which the producer islocate. While the specific procedure is not stated in the bill,it is assumed that the producer will obtain the required formsfor occupational registration, and that the will execute theseforms and deliver them to the collector of internal revenue, whenthis is done and the required tax in paid , the producer is thenregistered. (Sec. 2a-5c) There is nothing in H.R. 6906 to indicate the exact procedure;such as whether the forms must be purchased, whether they may beobtained by mail; or whether they must be obtained in person.Neither is there any indication of the specific information thatmust be supplied; such as acreage grown, or to be grown; intendeddisposition of the harvested crop, or the like. Transfer Registration of Producers: The producer of hemp seed can transfer the seed which heproduced to any other registered producer without additionalregistration or tax, or without an order from the purchaser (sec.6b-5). The producer of hemp see. can also transfer to anynonproducer, who is a registered dealer, upon the presentation ofan official (written) order for; or he may sell to anunregistered dealer on the presentation of a properly executedofficial order form (sec. 6a) The producer can deliver this mature hemp straw (stalks) toany person without any additional registration or tax and withoutany order on an official form from the purchaser of the straw(stalks) (sec. 1b) Producers Taxes: Any person who grows hemp plants, regardlessof the purpose for which they The tax is paid to the collector ofinternal revenue of the district in which the crop is grown andthe amount as now provided in the bill is five dollars per yearfor each producer. (sec. 2a-2) RELATION TO DEALERS There are several classes of dealers, including registeredproducer-dealers, registered dealers, who are not producers, anddealers who are neither registered as producers nor registered asdealers. Also there are dealers in seed, and the dealers in hempstraw (mature stalks). Dealers in hempseed will be affected bythe proposed legislation while dealers in hemp straw (maturestalks) are exempted. Occupational registration of dealers: A dealer in hempseed whois also a registered producer of hempseed, is not required toregister (reregister) as a dealer (sec. 2a-5). Those notregistered as producers, who wish to deal in hempseed mustregister as a dealer (sec. 2a-5) Transfer Registration of Dealers: All dealers who purchasehemp seed, except registered producers, are required to useofficial order form (register each purchase) (sec. 6b-5) The foregoing means that, if anyone who is not a registeredproducer, wishes to purchase seed, he must execute and officialblank for each purchase which he makes and pay a tax in eachcase. this applies, regardless of whether or not the person fromwhom the seed is purchased is a registered producer. The officialforms (order blanks) are bought from the collector of internalrevenue and must be prepared (filled out) by the collector (notby the dealer) (sec. 6d) The foregoing indicates that dealers, not registered asproducers, who wish to purchase hempseed, must visit the internalrevenue collector, supply him with whatever information isrequired, and the collector must enter this information on theorder form. Dealers' Occupational tax: Any persons dealing in hempseed,who is not a registered producer must pay and occupation tax ofthree dollars per year. this is paid in connection with is registration (sec. 2-5) Dealer's Transfer Tax: Any person who deals in hemspeed andwho is not a registered producer pays a transfer tax. This is inaddition to his occupational tax. The amount of the transfer taxis one dollar per ounce. The foregoing means that anyone who is not a registeredproducers and wishes to purchase (transfer) hempseed is requiredto pay a tax of one dollar per ounce. It is also provided in the bill that any person, who is notregistered either as a producer or as a dealer, can purchasehempseed from a registered producer or dealer by presenting anofficial and properly executed order form, and by paying a tax of$100 per ounce. GENERAL SUMMARY AND DISCUSSIONS The utilization of hemp fiber is an old, well established, andlegitimate industry in the United States. Every person engaged inthe hemp industry would be affected by the proposed legislation.The farmer-producer of hemp for fiber -- the person who plants,grows, and harvests the fiber crop-- would be obliged to registeras a producer and to pay the producer's occupational tax. Hewould probably register and pay the tax at the time he obtainsthe seed. The seed would be distributed to him by the hempmilling company. The producer of hemp for fiber would be obligedto submit to no other registration, nor pay any additional tax,in order to distribute all of his hemp straw (mature stalks) tothe hemp company; thus the procedure for growing and handling thecrop for fiber is reasonably clear cut and understandable. Hemp companies in order to obtain the seed and distribute itto the farmer-growers would be obliged either to qualify as aproducer or as a dealer. To qualify as a producer, the hempcompany would be obliged to grow hemp on its own account and toregister as such and to pay the producer's occupational tax. Toqualify as a dealer, a hemp company would be obliged to registerand pay the dealer's occupational tax, and in addition sell onlyagainst properly executed order forms. Relative to the requirements concerned with the producing,distributing. and purchasing hempseed, the proposals in the billare decidely complicated and involved. In an attempt to trace theprocedure from the producer of hempseed to the final consumer,who plants the seed for fiber purpose, we arrive at thefollowing: The person who grew hempseed would be obliged toregister and pay an occupational tax of five dollars. 'As aregistered producer, he could sell seed to any other registeredproducer without any further registration, or payment of taxesfor the crop year concerned. If he were to sell to any personother than a registered producer then the person to whom he sellswould be obliged to present a properly executed order form (aform filled out by the collector of internal revenue). Thispurchaser would have to register and pay a dealer's occupationaltax of three dollars and in addition pay a tax of one dollar perounce for the see purchased. This of course, means that no on,except those registered as producers, could do business inhempseed. In other words, this means that the only persons whocould buy and sell hempseed would be those registered asproducers; thus a registered fiber hemp grower in Illinois orWisconsin would be obliged to buy his hempseed from a registeredhempseed grower in Kentucky. This would exclude all legitimatedealers in hempseed other than those who are producers as well asdealers. It would also exclude hemp milling companies from actingas dealers unless they want to qualify as producers. Relative to the proposed tax on producers, there appears to beno good reason why the amount should be five dollars per year foreach producer. Such a tax would force all small producers out ofthe business of growing hemp and the proportion of smallproducers in considerable. The tax should not be more than onedollar per year for each grower, SUGGESTED CHANGES IN H.R. 6906 These suggestions are proposed in the interests of thosepersons only who are connected with the legitimate hemp industryin the United States, including hem fiber milling and processingcompanies, farmers who produce hempseed, and farmers who producehemp for fiber. 1. I ever instance in which the word "marihuana" isused in H.R. 6906, the term "Cannabis" should besubstituted. 2. Viable hempseed should be excluded from the definition ofCannabis (marihuana); thus excluding all transfers of hempseed,but not excluding producer of hemp seed (sec. 1b) 3. the definition of "producer" should be clarifiedso that there can be no misunderstanding as to what persons areproducers. (sec. 1c) 4. The occupation tax for producers should be reduced fromfive dollars per year to one dollar per year (Sec. 2-2) REASONS FOR PROPOSED CHANGES 1. As used in the bill (H.R. 6906) the term"marihuana" is synonomous with true hemp, thescientific name of which is Cannabis sativa L. The chemicalsubstance found in hemp which produces the narcotic effects hasbeen officially termed "Cannabis indica", and is knownthroughout the world as Cannabis indica. Since botanists nowrecognize hemp as consisting of one species, the term"indica" should be discontinued; thus in referring tohem in a narcotic sense, the term "Cannabis" is mostappropriate and more universally understood. There can be no goodreason for using the term marihuana, which is purely a localizedterm of Mexican (Indian) origin, and has no more generalsignificance and is no more universally recognized that"bhang", "hashish", and similar local terms.Furthermore, in all national narcotic acts and in all statenarcotic acts the term Cannabis is used. Also in the Senate bill(S. 326), introduced in the 75th Congress on January 25, 1937 theterm "Cannabis" is used. 2. By excluding hemp seed from the definition of cannabis(marihuana) no registration or tax will be necessary by those whotransfer, import, or otherwise deal in either viable orsterilized hemp seed. No evidence has been obtained, either byscientific investigation or by practical observation to indicatethat hemp seed, as handled in the trade, contains an appreciableproportion of the chemical substances which cause the narcoticeffect. The substances producing the narcotic effect have neverbeen specifically isolated or discovered. No one knows whatspecific chemical compound or compounds produce the narcoticeffect. Biological tests on experimental animals are thereforenecessary. A recent and thorough-going inquiry indicates thatthere are no biological tests or other researches which show thatnarcotic-producing substances are present in the seeds themselvesin a sufficient proportion to be harmful, in fact, there isnothing that shows that true seeds cause any of the narcoticeffects. The technical evidence given in the hearings on H.R. 6385shows that the seed does not contain an appreciable proportion ofthe narcotic substances. The hearings also show that the seed wasconsidered so harmless as to warrant omitting sterilized hempseed from the definition of marihuana; thus in H.R. 6906sterilized hemp seed is excluded (compare sec. 1 b, H.R. 6385with sec. 1 b G.R. 6906.) There is also no evidence, eitherpractical or technical, to show that hemp seed has ever been usedto produce the drug effect. All of the foregoing indicates very clearly that hemp seed assuch is not a source of marihuana. The requiring of registrationand tax payment by producers who transfer hemp or dealers whotrade in hemp seed must be construed as for the sole purpose ofobtaining information concerning where and by whom hemp as aplant is being grown. It seems reasonable to assume that littleor nothing would be accomplished by registering and taxing thetransfer of hemp seed; that seed which would thus be registeredis not the source from which illegitimate producers of handlerswould obtain their supply; that those who use hemp for illicituse would not report such transactions nor is it likely that anytransactions that such persons would make would be detectablethrough the registering and taxing of legitimate dealers in hempseed. Illicit producers either carry over the seed from year toyear, or obtain it from others who deal in the same traffic, orobtain it from plants that grow in a wild state in practicallyall sections of the United States. Another thing, hemp plants arenoticeably conspicuous. They are large and readily observable,and thus wild patches and all other areas can be easily detectedif any attempt is made to do so, and it seems reasonable toassume that the use of Cannabis as an illicit drug will not becontrolled unless there is a thorough-going surveillance of thegrowing plant. In consideration of the foregoing, it is sincerely contendedthat any tax or registration required of those who deal in hempseed to be used for legitimate purposes would not reduce to anyextent whatever the use of hemp for producing Cannabis(marihuana). 3. The term "producer" as defined in H.R. 6906includes both the persons who cultivate and grow the plants as acrop, and also those who transfer (sell or deal in) use,compound, process or consume Cannabis (marihuana). In the definition there is no distinction between a trueproducer and a dealer, yet the tax on a producer is differentthan that on a dealer and the whole set-up of the bill ratherdefinitely distinguishes between the producer and the dealer. It is urged, therefore, that the term "producer" belimited to include only those persons who plant, cultivate,harvest, or in any way facilitate the natural growth ofmarihuana. There should be no mention in connection with the term"producer" of such functions as transferring, or makinguse of the plant. If it seems proper to include volunteer hemp(which grows without planting); then the definition shouldspecifically include such hemp. (sec. 4b) 4. In H.R. 6906 it is proposed to tax each producer of hemp(Cannabis or marihuana) five dollars per year. The tax proposedfor dealers is three dollars per year. and the tax proposed forphysicians, dentists, and the like is one dollar per year. Nowthere does not seem to be any good reason why a producer shouldbe taxed any more than a physician, dentist, and the like. Itcannot be contended that a tax of five dollars would be necessaryin order to finance the enforcement of the bill because theincome obtained, if producers were taxed five dollars per year,would not be greater than $3,500 per year. A reasonably accurateestimate of the number of producers in the United States in 1937shows that there are approximately 300 in Illinois, 120 inWisconsin, 50 in Minnesota, 200 in Kentucky, and 10 in Texas -- atotal of 680, which if taxed five dollars each, would provide anannual revenue of $3,400. Now, this clearly indicates that, as asource of revenue, a tax of five dollars per grower would be oflittle consequence. On the other hand, individual growers in manycases would be severely taxed, for in some sections it is commonpractice for farmers to grow very small acreages. In the Kentucky River bottom, where hemp is grown for seed, anacreage per grower of less than one acre, and as little asone-fourth acre, is not unusual. Also in Wisconsin, where hemp isgrown for fiber only, farmers may grow as little as one acre andthey frequently grow as little as four acres. For such smallgrowers, the tax would amount to from $1.25 per acre to as muchas $20 per acre. Thus, this bill, if enacted, would eliminate allsmall growers. Thus it seems reasonable, fair, and in every wayin keeping with the intention of the proposed legislation thatthe occupational tax for producers of hemp should not be morethan one dollar per year per individual producer. CONCLUDING STATEMENT It is maintained that the foregoing proposed changes would innowise defeat te purpose of the bill or weaken its effectiveness.Sufficient authority is contained in section 10a to allow theTreasury Department to prescribe legislation covering reports,records, and the like. In addition, the proposed changes if madewould permit those now engaged in the legitimate phases of thehemp industry to continue as heretofore without any seriousdisturbance. SENATOR BROWN: With the general purposes of the bill you arein agreement? Mr. Rens: Yes SENATOR BROWN: You suggest a few modifications to it? MR. RENS. Yes, sir. SENATOR BROWN: Have you discussed that with Mr. Hester oranyone in the Treasury Department? MR. RENS: We have written to Mr. Anslinger, and we have sent acopy of this to Mr. Edwards, of the Division of Cotton and OtherFibers, of the Bureau of Standards. He has a copy of this also. SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Rens, unless you have something else topresent you are excused and we thank you. MR. RENS: No, not particularly, I think this covers it. As afarmer, I am interested. SENATOR BROWN: We will take this into consideration. MR. RENS: The reason I would state for reducing the fee fromfive dollars to one dollar is this, that there are so manyfarmers in Kentucky especially that grow this. That is where weget our seed, in Kentucky. They have perhaps one-eighth or aquarter of acre. It would discourage those farmers from growinghemp SENATOR BROWN: How much would they get from say an eighth ofan acre in way of total return? MR. RENS: Perhaps 12 or 14 bushels. SENATOR BROWN: What would that be worth? MR. RENS: They may get two or three dollars a bushel. I do notthink they get more. We have to pay more. We have to pay the manover there, the dealer. SENATOR BROWN: That is all he would get at his farm? MR. RENS: Yes, and another thing, the fiber, our farmers willhesitate. It will hurt us in getting the acreage for the mill. Wehave 600 acres, personally; that is, the mill has; and we havesome 60 growers. Now, the tax I think we will have to pay for thegrower will come to one man. The grower will hesitate. SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Hester, do you hear what he says to theeffect that farmers in Kentucky that produce for his mill, someof them grow as small an amount as one-eighth of an acre andtheir total return at the farm would be somewhere from twelvedollars to fifteen dollars? MR. RENS: Bushels -- bushels per acre. SENATOR BROWN: How much in dollars? MR. RENS: Sometimes the yield will be less -- maybe from $20to $30. SENATOR BROWN: $20 to $30? MR. RENS: An acre; yes. SENATOR BROWN: Well, of course, taking $5 out of $20 -- is ahigh percentage. MR, HESTER: They would just have to add that five dollars taxonto the price that this gentleman would pay for it. MR. RENS: Then you have first the price of the seed, and thenyou have your transfer again. Another thing is the transfer ofthis. If the man that buys it from Kentucky is a delaer, and nota producer, that will mean one dollar an ounce. That man is outof business. SENATOR BROWN: I do not follow you there. MR. RENS: As we see this bill, the interpretation of that isthat the dealer, who is not a producer ---- MR, HESTER: Let me say this. I think I can case the committeetime on that. We did not know until you have just made thestatement there, and I think Mr. Johnson brought it to ourattention, that there are some dealers in this country who act asa broker for seeds. Now, we have no objection to an amendment inthis that would take care of that situation. SENATOR BROWN: Exempting them? MR, HESTER: Yes, so there will not be any transfer tax. SENATOR BROWN: Will you take care of that? MR, HESTER: Yes. We will take care of that so they will savethat. MR. RENS: I see no reason why growers should be charged fivedollars and the dentists or the doctors one dollar. They use thedrug which you are trying to prohibit, which you are tryng tocontrol. Now, we harvest our hemp in the state when it is still green,with no seed in itt and we field-wet it. All these leaves aregone. There is no marihuana drug there in the way we handle it inWisconsin, and still the grower must pay. We often have growerthat only have say, two or three acres of hemp. SENATOR BROWN: Do you think, Mr. Hester, an arrangementwhereby you would cut that five dollars down one dollar forfractions of an acre would be any serious impediment? MR, HESTER: Just how do you mean, Senator Brown? SENATOR BROWN: Suppose you made it five dollars for an acre ormore, or something like that, and one dollar for fractional partsof an acre. MR, HESTER: The question would arise then as to whether thatwould be a proper classification under the due process clause ofthe Constitution. SENATOR BROWN: Will you give that consideration? MR, HESTER: We will be very glad to look into that. SENATOR BROWN: I can see something in your point there. MR. RENS: Personally I have grown 100 acres or better. Well,that is five dollars. but I have men that have two acres or threeacres. SENATOR BROWN: It is the fellow as you said who has a quarteror an eighth of an acre who has a small amount, who will have tobear a proportionately heavier burden. MR. RENS: The real purpose of this bill is not to raise money,is it? SENATOR BROWN: Well, we are sticking to the proposition thatit is. MR. RENS: It will cost a million. SENATOR BROWN: We thank you, Mr. Rens. The next witness will be M.G. Moksnes. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-92IA087-000625-B019-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044846 text/html 8435HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:48:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:52 GMTContent-length: 8218 Statement of Mr. Moksnes, Superintendent of the AmhempcoCorpora Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Statement of Mr. Moksnes, Superintendent of the Amhempco Corporation, Danville, Ill. MR. MOKSNES: I happen to be the superintendent of the AmhempcoCorporation, at Danville, Ill. SENATOR BROWN: I want to say that Congressman Meeks wrote meabout your problem. MR. MOKSNES: This company was organized three years ago byBell Bros., of Muncie, Ind, and the Sloan Interests, who aretextile people in New York. They had in mind developing a processwhereby a fiber that is now being used for rope and cordage couldbe further processed to go into textiles, and also that the hurdor the woody part could be processed and made into plastics.Three years ago we planted 4,200 acres, last year 1,200 acres,and this year 7,000 acres., and we are in operation. The capacityof the plant is 15,000 acres. We have to contract our seed from the growers in Kentucky,that was covered by Mr. Rens, and their acreage runs anywherefrom a quarter of an acre up, and we have no objection to thebill. In fact, any attempt to prevent the passage of a bill toprotect the narcotic traffic would be unethical and un-American.That is not the point, but we do believe that a tax of fivedollars is going to be prohibitive for the small dealers as wellas the man that grows the hemp; not only the seed dealer, but theman that grows the crop, because he will average -- I do no knowwhat the average will be, but they raise as little as two acres. SENATOR BROWN: As I understand it, Mr. Hester can take care ofthe dealer. MR, HESTER: The dealers, yes. SENATOR BROWN: That will be generally agreed, that he will beexempted from the tax.. MR, HESTER: From the transfer tax. he will be exempted fromthe transfer tax. MR. MOKSNES: That is the deal. That is the transfer tax, buthow about the grower of the seed? SENATOR HERRING: The man who only grows one-eighth off an acrewith a $20 or $25 crop cannot be harmed much. he does not havemuch at stake. MR, HESTER: He would have to add the occupational tax on tothe price that he sells to the dealer in the city. SENATOR HERRING: Of course, that would make it prettydifficult for him to compete with the producer who had 10 or 15acres. MR. MOKSNES: You see we are dependent on the small growersdown in the Kentucky 'river bottoms to furnish our seed. Thereare small growers who probably do not have over 10 or 15 acres ofland, distributed among several crops. If has to pay five dollarsan acre - -- MR, HESTER: Not five dollars an acre, five dollars a year. MR. MOKSNES: I mean five dollars a year, and he has only aquarter or half an acre, that tax is going to be prohibitive, weare going to lose the small growers, and it is the combination ofgrowers that we have to depend on. SENATOR BROWN: According to our understanding, the Treasurywill endeavor to see if they can cover that problem, and we willdo our best about it. We are not certain what we can do about it,but we will do the best we can. MR. MOKSNES: That is fine. Now, on the other had, the growerof the stalk -- well, with 15,000 acres, that is $7,500. SENATOR HERRING: How is that? It is five dollars and nor moreno matter what the acreage is. MR. MOKSNES: I mean, 7,500 acres. We have to have about 600growers. That is the way it will average up. That is $3,000. I amquite sure that we are going to have trouble getting the farmerto pay a five dollar tax. We will have to stand that ourselves. Another point, where are we classed as mill men? We are notclassed as producers,. In fact, we have no classification. MR, HESTER: What is your business? How do you operate? MR. MOKSNES: We contract the seed from the seed grower oncontract. He raises so much. We pay him so much per bushel. We inturn take that seed and sell itt to the hemp grower, the growerof the straw, at cost, on a book charge, and it is deducted inthe fall when he delivers his crop. MR, HESTER: It seems to me you would be a seed dealer. MR. MOKSNES: A seed dealer? MR, HESTER: A seed dealer. SENATOR BROWN: You are also a manufacturer? MR. MOKSNES: We are also a manufacturer. SENATOR BROWN: As I view it under section 2 you would pay one$24 tax only. MR. MOKSNES: As a seed dealer? MR, HESTER: As a manufacturer. SENATOR BROWN: As a manufacturer, and as one who sell, dealsin the product. MR. MOKSNES: The $24 would cover --- SENATOR BROWN: The $24? MR. MOKSNES: Yes, the $24 would cover - - SENATOR BROWN: That is a hasty summary on my part. Is thatright, Mr. Hester? MR, HESTER: That is right. MR. MOKSNES: That is right. SENATOR BROWN: I think on page 2, section 2, in subdivisions(a) and (a-1) you would be covered. MR. MOKSNES: That point has been in question with us, as towhere we would fit in the picture, so far as a millman isconcerned. We did not want to be expected to ---- SENATOR BROWN: That section reads: Every person who imports, manufactures, produces, compounds,sells, deals in .. . It would seem to me that you would pay one $24 tax. Well, we will do our best to meet those problems. MR. MOKSNES: As we interpret this bill, of course, not knowingwhere we were classified, we did not know whether we would expectto pay one dollar an ounce for the seed or $100 an ounce. MR, HESTER: I think we might save the time of the committee ifthis gentleman would let us sit down with him and explain thebill to him. We have not had an opportunity to do that. I thinkwe would save the time of the committee by doing that. MR. MOKSNES: That will be fine. SENATOR BROWN: You will do that some time today? MR, HESTER: Yes, we will be glad to, immediately after thecommittee adjourns. SENATOR BROWN: Is there anything else that you want to presentat this time? MR. MOKSNES: Nothing else. SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Johnson. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-93IA087-000625-B019-107http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044859 text/html 14309HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:48:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:47 GMTContent-length: 14091 Statement of Royal C. Johnson, Attorney, Washington, DC Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF ROYAL C. JOHNSON, ATTORNEY, WASHINGTON, D.C., REPRESENTING CHEMPSCO, INC. OFWINONA, MINN. AND HEMP CHEMICAL CORPORATION OF MANKATO, MINN. MR. JOHNSON: Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I amrepresenting Chempsco, Inc. of Winona. Minn, and the Hempchemical corporation of Mankato, Min.. These people and those associated with them in Minnesota had2,200 acres of hemp last year, and they use only the fiber andthe stalk. I want to say in the beginning that they are heartilyin favor of this bill. They think the use of marihuana ought tobe prohibited and they feel further that these legitimateindustries dealing with hemp and the stalk owe a duty to theGovernment and to the Treasury to cooperate in every way. I wouldeven go so far as to say that f the do not cooperate they couldreadily visualize themselves as entirely out of business, becauseno industry, legitimate or otherwise, has any right in theirviewpoint and in mine to be so conducted in the United States asto aid in the dissemination of any narcotics of any kind. We have no dispute whatever with Mr. Hester and Mr. Anslinger.or the Government. We have gone over the testimony carefully, andwe find that the testimony of Mr. Hester and others shows ratherdefinitely that there is not deleterious matter or property inthe stalk of the fiber. As I showed the chairman the other day,the leaves and the seeds are the part of the plant that containsmarihuana. The fiber, stalk, or hurd has nothing in it and the fiber inwhich we are interested is an important part of the industry. Itis used in the making off fine papers, condenser tissues, carbonpaper, bible paper, and all other types of papers, includingcigarette papers. As there is no marihuana, and no resin in the stalk, we thinkthe phraseology should be changed in the bill to some degree, notto change the merits of the bill, but the phraseology. so that itcan be made clear that there iis no deleterious property in thestalk or in the fiber. Very great industries can be worked up inthis country. I can readily visualize without much difficulty25,000 or 30,000 or 40,000 acres of hemp with 2000,000 acres offlax being used in the paper industry and in the plasticindustry, concerning which the gentleman just testified. I would like to suggest a change in subsection (b) at the topof page 2 in the bill. I do not think the use of the word"marihuana" belongs in this measure, because it is aword that came up from Mexico and attached to those cigarettes. Isee no use in it. This is hemp that is being grown, notmarihuana. I am going to offer these suggestion. I have handed acopy to Mr. Anslinger, and I wish to offer these suggestion. Ihave handed a copy to Mr. Anslinger, and I wish to read it forthe committee. Amend section 1, subsection (b) to read asfollows: The term "marihuana" means such parts of the plantCannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, which consists of theleaves of the plant, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted fromany part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt,derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, orresin; but shall not include ---- SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Johnson, as I understand it the petals ofthe flower are the most dangerous. MR. JOHNSON: Yes; which eventually become the seeds. Theflower becomes seed. SENATOR BROWN: It is used, as I understand it, as a petal. Itis not ground up? MR. JOHNSON: The leaves. SENATOR HERRING: Is not the bloom used the same as theleaves.? MR, HESTER: Oh, yes, the flower on the tops. MR. JOHNSON: The flower and the seeds. SENATOR BROWN: It seems to me that you did not cover theflowers. MR. JOHNSON: I tried to copy in detail the words now in thebill. I am copying the bill at this time, except as to theinsertion of the word "such" where they say"all" in the first line. they have not said"flowers" so I did not say "flowers". SENATOR BROWN: "All parts of the plant" wouldinclude the flowers? MR. JOHNSON: Then flowers could be inserted. SENATOR BROWN: I think so. MR. JOHNSON: The leaves or the flowers of the plant"; Iconcede that, because I have wanted to cover it all (reading): Such . . . plant, its seeds or resin; and shall not includeoil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any compound,manufacture,, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of maturestalk, oil or cake of the sterilized seed which is incapable ofgermination. And then for the purpose of clarification I wanted to insertthis: Specifically excluded are mature stalks known as hemp stalks,which contain no resin or harmful properties, which are used forvarious legitimate commercial purposes, and which are grown byproducers under contract with licensed processors ormanufacturers. Now, getting down in the practical part of the measure; no onehas any business growing this hemp in any quantity whateverexcept under contract with someone who is using it for alegitimate business. They have no more business growing it onone-tenth of an acre than I have growing sweet potatoes on myfront lawn. Anyone who uses the seed or who uses the stalk -- thehurd -- or uses the fiber is a manufacturer, a processor, whowill contract to pay a man a good price to grow it for him; andthese other people ought to be simply barred, and I am in favorof licensing them. I think the small producer is going to beeliminated, this man that sticks in 0one-tentth of an acre. Anwhy shouldn't he be? He is doing no good to himself or anybodyelse. But here is a great industry where men will put in 10, 20,30,40, one gentleman will put in 10 acres, and the people Irepresent have planted 2,200 acres and expect to plant 20,000acres. This has been experimented with in South Carolina, in Oregon,and all over the country, because these big industries that usethe fiber and use the hurd have to take into consideration cropfailures, and therefore cannot confine themselves to justMinnesota or to South Carolina or to Oregon. Some of these peoplehave already expended $300,000 in the last few years, trying towork out in big industries the use of this fiber, and they feelthat it should be so stated in the law that the farmer who isgrowing the stalk and growing the fiber knows definitely that heis not growing anything that has marihuana in it. He does notwant to grow marihuana and yet we might lose an industry purelyby the phraseology of the measure. I think I have said all I could say on that. I could say muchmore, but I have stated it in a few words. Now, on this question of the tax, and the constitutionality ofthe law, I am firmly convinced that the farmers can be reduced toone dollar and this law be sustained. This is not the sort ofmeasure that people here are saying it is, a regulatory measureunder the guise of a tax measure. We do not need to run aroundthe corner to the hemp in order to stop the sale of the flower orof the leaves. it can be taxed like the automobile industry, likethe cosmetic industry, like the fur industry, and we o not needto use any legal sophistry in this to sustain this statutebecause hemp is produced in the United States and I would say inthe presence of this committee that I am sure and would almostguarantee that Mr. Hester and Mr. Tipton could go before theSupreme Court and get a unanimous decision, if they would arguealong the lines I am suggesting. This is not like narcotics wherethere are no poppies grown, nothing like it. An my judgment a onedollar tax on the farmers is sufficient. To my mind this industryis going to be more affected by the regulations, but I have nodoubt Mr. Anslinger and the gentlemen associated with him, withtheir wide experience and with their desire to do justice, willwork out regulations far more important than the law which willbe fair to industry and the farmer. Now, I want to say further a little more on this industryitself. If there are abuses by the legitimate producer --- SENATOR BROWN: Just let me ask one question there. You say youwant the farmer to be made to realize that he is not growingmarihuana? MR. JOHNSON: In the stalk and fiber. SENATOR BROWN: In the stalk and fiber, but of course he cannotgrow the stalk and fiber without growing the resin plant? MR. JOHNSON: That is right. SENATOR BROWN: How are you going to leave that out? I do notsee. MR. JOHNSON: Because he is going to have to sell his product.He will have to sell this to a manufacturer. Now, as a matter offact the people making paper, and the finest grades of paper,which you cannot make in this country without the use of hemp atthe present time, and which is being imported -- even a greatdeal of the paper that goes into our money is being imported --must have hemp fiber. It is just a ridiculous situation becauseit can be made out of our local products in this country. Thepaper manufacturer, when he gets the plants simply blows theseleaves away. They disappear when dried. They are gone. As amatter of fact these people in Minnesota did not know until twomonths ago that the hemp which they grew there containedmarihuana. Until this agitation came up they did not dream of it,and the were as much surprise and anyone else. Now, they will have some little difficulties, just as theliquor people had some difficulties, eventually and the man whodoes not recognize that, the producer or manufacturer, is goingto be put out of business in my judgment, because there is aproblem with marihuana. I will concede these licenses are right,but I do think that the farmer's license fee ought to be reducedto one dollar. I have no fear whatever but what the law will bedeclared constitutional. I would like to see such amendments inthere. SENATOR BROWN: Of course, you must have a situation where thefarmer is made to realize, it seems to me, just the opposite ofwhat you say. He has got to be made to realize that in growingthis legitimate product and fiber it can be put to illegitimateuses. Therefore I think the bill should place in the farmer aknowledge of that fact. Otherwise he will be just as your clientswere, ignorant of the fact that he is growing on his farm adecidedly dangerous and deleterious product. MR. JOHNSON: Mr. Chairman, do you not think that thought thatthat section 2 could be rewritten so it would say definitely that"in the flower, in the leaves" and so forth, there is aharmful product? SENATOR BROWN: Yes, that is all right. MR. JOHNSON: So that it is clear, make it clear to him then,but also make it clear in the bill that there is no harmfulproduct, which is agreed to by everyone, in the hurd, fiber, andin the stalk. In other words, I do not think we have anydifficulty. If we would sit around the table for five minutes, Ithink this could be worked out so we could do exactly what thecommittee wants to do, and that there would be no oppositionwhatever to this bill, except a desire on the part of everyone tostrengthen it and make it stronger in every possible way againstthe illegitimate use of this hemp. MR, HESTER: If I may say a word there, we will be very happyto sit down with you Mr. Johnson. I am sure that if you shouldask our recommendation on his amendment that we would agree torecommend it, but we would be very happy to sit down and study itwith him. SENATOR BROWN: Is that all, Mr. Johnson? MR. JOHNSON: That is all, and I thank the committee very much. SENATOR BROWN: We have Mr. Olman, I think as the onlyremaining witness. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-94IA087-000625-B019-137http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044940 text/html 4538HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:49:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:41 GMTContent-length: 4321 Statement of O.C. Olman, Representing Juneau Fibre Co.,Juneau, Wis. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF O.C. OLMAN, REPRESENTING JUNEAU FIBRE CO. JUNEAU, WIS. MR. OLMAN. From what I have heard here, and from has beenremarked by Mr. Hester, I do not know as I shall take any time ofthe committee at all, because I am in the same both that Mr.Moksnes is, and Mr. Johnson is. I would like to mention just one or two things, Mr. Chairman,and that will be all, but I think we can iron it out with Mr.Hester, for instance, the discussion as to what is a matureplant. Now, we cut the plant before that, in the pollen stage.They are not mature according to our understanding. This is one point I would like to ask Mr. Hester. Anotherpoint, of course is the definition of "producer", so wecan qualify as a producer. We are "dealers" under thefill, but we would like to qualify as "producers". Then another thing is that for instance a farmer wants to grow2 acres or 4 acres of hemp, and he has to go before the collectorof internal revenue and give such information as is wanted, andthen get his permit. Now, I think that can be ironed out. If hehas to do that, 60 or 70 off our farmers will have to drive 70miles to Milwaukee. SENATOR BROWN: I think you can work that out. MR, HESTER: No, they just write a letter to the collector,that is all. MR. OLMAN: And, of course we were afraid of the transfer tax,and so on. I was interested in the question you asked the doctor, Mr.Chairman, and that was with reference to supervision orinspection. I believe that we are in a position to give theGovernment a great deal of help in supervising and inspecting andreporting the growth of hemp. SENATOR BROWN: For your producers? MR. OLMAN: In our vicinity. I thank you. MR, HESTER: Fine. SENATOR BROWN: How long a time will you gentlemen want tosubmit to the committee such representations as may be agreedupon? Would Wednesday morning be about right? MR, HESTER: That would be fine. SENATOR BROWN: Suppose, Senator Herring, we agree on 10o'clock Wednesday morning for an executive session on thismeasures, unless there is a serious disagreement. If there is yougentlemen, who are in disagreement, can come in. MR. OLMAN: I am sure there will not be. MR, HESTER: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-95IA087-000625-B019-163http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045016 text/html 5634HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:50:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:38 GMTContent-length: 5417 Letter from the American Medical Association - MarihuanaTax Act Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Letter from the American Medical Association Re: H.R. 6906 SENATOR BROWN: Before we adjourn, I desire to place in therecord a letter regarding the pending bill addressed to SenatorHarrison by Dr. William C. Woodward, of the American MedicalAssociation, Chicago, Ill. American Medical Association Bureau of Legal Medicine and Legislation Chicago, July 10, 1937 Hon. Pat Harrison Chairman, Committee on Finance, United States Senate Washington D.C. SIR: I have been instructed by the board of trustees of theAmerican Medical Association to protest on behalf of theassociation against the enactment in it present form of so muchof H.R. 6906 as relates to the medicinal use of cannabis and itspreparations and derivatives. The act is entitled "An Act toimpose an occupational excise tax upon certain dealers inmarihuana, to impose a transfer tax upon certain dealings inmarihuana, and to safeguard the revenue therefrom by registry andrecording." Cannabis and its preparations and derivatives are covered inthe bill by the term "marihuana" as that term isdefined in section 1, paragraph (b). There is no evidence,however, that the medicinal use of these drugs has caused or iscausing cannabis addiction. As remedial agents, they are used toan inconsiderable extent, and the obvious purpose and effect ofthis bill is to impose so many restrictions on their use as toprevent such use altogether. Since the medicinal use of cannabishas not caused and is not causing addiction, the prevention ofthe use of the drug for medicinal purposes can accomplish no goodend whatsoever. How far it may serve to deprive the public of thebenefits of a drug that on further research may prove to be ofsubstantial value, it is impossible to foresee. The American Medical Association has no objection to anyreasonable regulation of the medicinal use of cannabis and itspreparations and derivatives. It does pretest, however, againstbeing called upon to pay a special tax, to use special orderforms in order to procure the drug, to keep special recordsconcerning its professional use and to make special returns tothe Treasury Department officials, as a condition precedent tothe use of cannabis in the practice of medicine. in the severalStates, all separate and apart from the taxes, order forms,records, and reports required under the Harrison Narcotics Actwith reference to opium and coca leaves and their preparationsand derivatives. If the medicinal use of cannabis calls for Federal legalregulation further than the legal regulation that now exists, thedrug can without difficulty be covered under the provisions ofthe Harrison Narcotics Act by a suitable amendment. By such aprocedure the professional use of cannabis may readily becontrolled as effectively as are the professional uses of opiumand coca leaves, with less interference with professionalpractice and less cost and labor on the part of the TreasuryDepartment. It has been suggested that the inclusion of cannabis into theHarrison Narcotics Act would jeopardize the constitutionality ofthat act, but that suggestion has been supported by no specificstatements of its legal basis or citations of legal authorities. Wm. C. Woodward, Legislative Counsel Whereupon at 11:37 AM Monday, July 12, 1937, the subcommitteeadjourned. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B21-96IA087-000625-B019-216http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/1938_mhc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045058 text/html 220759HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:50:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 06:04:25 GMTContent-length: 220542 1938 Marihuana Conference Marihuana Conference HELD DECEMBER 5, 1938 in the UNITED STATESBureau of Internal Revenue Building (Room 3003) Washington D. C. CALLED BY THE BUREAU OF NARCOTICS OF THE UNITEDSTATES TREASURY DEPARTMENT PRESIDED OVER BY MR. H. J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONEROF NARCOTICS, AND MR. H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTINGCHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT MARIHUANA CONFERENCE INDEX 	Page Conferees Present:	2 - 3 OPENING STATEMENT OF H.J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONER OF NARCOTICS, containing Review of Proceedings of Sub-Committee on Cannabis of Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium, League of Nations:	4-16 STATEMENT OF DR. A. H .WRIGHT, PROFESSOR OF AGRONOMY, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN, relating to growthof Hemp, where seeds are produced, and Hemp is grown in United States:	16 - 27 STATEMENT OF MR. FRANKLIN, CHIEF OF DRUG CONTROL, STATE OFNEW YORK, as to growth of Marihuana in that state.	27 - 29STATEMENT OF DR. B. B. ROBINSON,BUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, relative to experiments as to World Production of Hemp, and quantity of Production in United States and Growth and Production of Cannabis, and Comparative Results obtained from Seed obtained from various Countries:	29 - 49 STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, CHIEF CHEMIST, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, as to Tests made from Seeds of Hemp in various Countries:	42- 43STATEMENT OF MR. HENRY FULLER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, as to his Experience in Growth of Cannabis:	49 - 55MARIHUANA CONFERENCEINDEX -(Continued)	Page STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, PROFESSOR OF PHARMACOLOGY, TEMPLE UNIVERSITY, relating to Effects of Marihuana on Organs of Body:	55- 60 STATEMENT OF DR. S. LOEWE, PHARMACOLOGIST, CORNELL UNIVERSITY MEDICAL COLLEGE, as to Bio-Assay of Marihuana	60 - 65 STATEMENT OF DR. WALTER BROMBERG, SENIOR PSYCHIATRIST, DEPARTMENT OF HOSPITALS, NEW YORK CITY, relating to varying Effects of Marihuana in various Classes of Individuals:	65 - 88 Discussion on Pharmacological Phases of Marihuana Problem:	89 -133 STATEMENT OF H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT:	133 -137 STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. BLATT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY, Relative to Survey of Chemical Constituents of Cannabis Sativa:	137-143 STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, TREEASURY DEPARTMENT, containing Report of Department of Attacks on Marihuana Problems:	143 -151 STATEMENT OF DR. JOSEPH LEVINE, CHEMIST, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, as to Tests for Identification of Marihuana	152 -160STATEMENT OF MR. LOUIS BENJAMIN, CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT, as to Tests:	160-1643MARIHUANA CONFERENCE..... INDEX -(Continued)	Page STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, as to Tests:	162-164 STATEMENT OF DR. H. M. LANCASTER, CHIEF DOMINION ANALYST, CANADIAN GOVERMENT, in relation to Tests:	165 -l70STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES COUCH,PATHOLOGICAL DIVISION, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE:	170 -173General Discussion:	173-1782 BY COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I want to express to you the appreciation of the Treasury Department for giving your valuable time in an effort to assist the Government in this important work.I will now introduce the conferees in attendance:DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, Chief Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics DR. JOSEPH LEVINE, Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics LOUIS BENJAMIN, Chemist, Treasury DepartmentDR. B. B. ROBINSON, Bureau of Plant Industry,Department of AgricultureDR. HERBERT O. CALVERY, Chief, Division of Pharmacology, Food & Drug Administrs.tion, Department of AgricultureDR. ROBERT P. HERWICK, Food & Drug Administration, Department of AgricultureDR. LAWRENCE KOLB, Division of Mental Hygiene, Public Health ServiceDR. JAMES COUCH, Pathological Division, Bureau of Anlmal Industry, Department of AgricultureDR. A.H. BLATT, Professor of Chemistry, HowardUniversityDR. S. LOEWE, Pharmacologist, Cornell UniversityMedical CollegeDR. A.H. WRIGHT, Professor of Agronomy, University of WisconsinDR. WALTER BROMBERG, Senior Psychiatrist, Department of Hospitals, City of New York3DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, Professor of Pharmacology, Temple UniversityMR. H. M. LANCASTER, Chief Dominion Analyst, Canadian Government, Ottawa, CanadaMR. HENRY FULLER, Consulting Chemist, Washington, D. C.MR. FRANK SMITH, Chief of Drug Control, State of New York.DR. JAMES HIBBEN, Geophysical Laboratory Carnegie Institute of WashingtonMR. FRED T. MERRILL, Foreign Policy Association Washington, D. C.MR. PETER VALAER, Chemist, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S. Treasury Department, Washington, D. C.DR. W. V. LINDER, Chief, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S. Treasury Department, Washington, D. C.MR. PAUL W. SIMONDS, Assn. Chief, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S. Treasury Department, Washington, D. C.MR. MORRIS KAPLAN, Office of the Chief, Division of Laboratories, U. S. Bureau of CustomsDR. S. T. SCHICKTANZ, Chemist, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S. Treasury Department4Commissioner Anslinger:I assume the press will be after us. The Treasury Department has not as yet publicly announced this meeting. The Department will do this subsequently. I hope therefore, that none of you will be drawn into discussions with reporters until the meeting is concluded. The Treasury Department will issue a statement on the meeting.I want all of you to freely express your opinions on every phase of the subject under discussion; and if you differ on any point, we hope you will not hesitate to present your side of the picture.I want to give you a brief review of what took place at Geneva, Switzerland, last spring at a meeting of the Sub-Committee on Cannabis, of the Advisory Committee on traffic in opium and other dangerous drugs of the League of Nations. I think this a fitting way to open the Conference. It will illustrate the international significance of the Cannabis problem and show the current status of some of the excellent work that is being done by other nations on the question.This work I think was very important, and I want to give you the reports of the experts of the various countries which will give you an idea as to the points on which the authorities still remain in doubt.5The Secretariat of the League referred to various points submitted to the Experts in a questionnaire drawn up for their use in January, l936, and used as a basis for the Sub-Committees work. He described the research work being undertaken.The Sub-Committee endeavored to indicate on what phases of the Marihuana problem agreement exists, and on what points there is a divergence of views which has formed the subject of exchange of information between the Experts whether on chemical and agricultural questions, or on the medical and pathological questions.Since the Advisory Committee's last session, Mr. J. V. Collins, Government Analyst, Ceylon, on January 12, l938, notified the Committee of his acceptance of the Advisory Committee's invitation to act as an Expert on Cannabis in place of the late Dr. Symons.The Committee received important documents from two of its Experts, Dr. Bouquet and Dr. de Myttenaere.Dr. Bouquet has for many years done a vast amount of work on Cannabis. He is the Inspector of Pharmacies in Tunis.Dr. Bouquet submitted reports on the following points:I	Vegetable products wrongly designated as hemp.II	Microscopic examination of samples of Cannabis.III	Physiologically active resin in the staminate Cannabis plant.6IV	 New variety of Cannabis.V	Influence of drought on the growth of Cannabis.VI	Medical uses of Cannabis and drugs with a Cannabis base.VII	Use of animal charcoal. VIII	Dr. James C. Munch's Reaction.IX	Is light petroleum the only solvent of the active element of Cannabis and its preparations? X	Addiction by certain solanaceae.Then the report is supplemented by Dr. Bouquet regarding the following points:I	Are the light petroleum extracts of Cannabis the only ones that are physiologically active?II	Observations on document O.C.1542 (z) (Report on the research conducted by the Treasury Department of the United States of America, in cooperation with the Department of Agriculture, in connection with studies on the chemical identification of Cannabis Indica (Cannabis Sativa).III	Identification test for Cannabis resin, proposed by Dr. de Myttenaere.IV	Method of identifying resin, proposed by Dr. H. J. Wollner.V	Procedure for experiments.VI	Observations on the causes of Cannabis addiction in North Africa.Dr. de Myttenaere submitted to the Secretariat a supplement to the third note on Indian hemp, and a fourth note on Indian hemp, including a study of the published work which has appeared since May, 1937, giving observations of Mr. Wollner's experiments in the United States.Apart from these contributions from Experts of the Sub-Committee on Cannabis, the Secretariat received a Study of the Chemical Identification of Marihuana (Cannabis Indica)" by Dr. Rafael Plasencia, Government Chemist of Cuba, and a reply concerning the same subject from the United Kingdon Representative. It also received information regarding experiments on the chemical identification of Cannabis indica communicated by the United States Government. This is the report covering the investigation conducted by the Treasury Department in cooperation with the Department's Agriculture.The United Kingdom also submitted to the Secretariat a communication concerning the question as to whether Cannabis stalks used commercially for the production of fibre still contained resin. That point was also discussed.As to the American documents, we usually summarize all work that has been done on Cannabis, incorporate it into one document and submit it to the League of Nations.As to Dr. Plasencia's experiment; he has followed up Beam's experiments and elaborated a new method which he8states is absolutely and specifically suitable for Cannabis and constant for all the varieties tested, even Merck's extract of Cannabis indica with which Beam's reaction gave no result.Our Government has submitted observations on this paper.The United Kingdom Representative also transmitted an opinion by the Government Chemist who suggests certain modifications in this method. These modifications consist of an attempt to separate the substances responsible for the characteristic color in Beam's test on the assumption that it is a phenol.All of these documents are available in the United States Treasury Department for anyone who would like to study them.It would seem that Dr. de Myttenaere and Mr. Wollner have different opinions on the point as to whether light petroleum is the best solvent for Cannabis. Dr. de Myttenaere considers that so far as is known at present, light petroleum is the best solvent for the extraction of the active principles of Cannabis, and hence the only one suitable for Beam's test; and he has carried out experiments as to whether ethyl acetate should be substituted, or is preferable as a solvent for petroleum ether.9In the report there is also given the list of vegetable products wrongfully designated as hemp,We have a little trouble with that in this country, as it is frequently designated as Cannabis, New Zealand hemp, hemp of the Americas, Bombay hemp, African hemp, etc.It has been found that these were all wrong designators used by various persons interested in the problem.NOTE.--Until very recently. the definition of Cannabis sativa (marihuana) was based upon the traditional conception that the active principle of the drug, technically known as cannabinol or cannabinone, is present only in the female or pistillate plant and present there only in the flowering tops. Since the development of more refined chemical tests, it has been discovered that the active principle is contained in the leaves of the pistillate plant as well as the leaves of the staminate plant. This brought about the advisability of makihg the definition all inclusive in laws for control of the drug found in the male as well as the female plant. It will therefore be necessary to change the definition in the League of Nations Treaty of 1925.Dr. Bouquet, while investigating this question, found that it always has been acknowledged that intoxicating resin could be obtained from male Cannabis plants but in10such small quantities that for practical purposes this source of production is not utilized at present. He realized, however, that it might become worthwhile for traffickers to turn their attention to it, and recommended that the free handling of the vegetative parts of both male and female Cannabis plants should be prohibited.That work was started in America by the laboratory of Parke-Davis some years ago.Then the question of the production of the fibre, the condition of development, depending on the meterological factors of the crop area was discussed. In this respect differences have been noted between the height of the plant, and the length, consistency and toughness of the textile fibres.The growing conditions of the plant also affect the output of its resin, which depends directly on the degree of temperature; on the dryness of the soil; and probably on the amount of sunshine encountered.In the annual report for Turkey for 1937, there is brought to the attention of the Committee data concerning a variety of Cannabis sativa having long stalks. It is grown for industrial purposes in various parts of Anatolia; the fibre is used for manufacturing ropes and sacks; and its resin content is so slight it could not be used for11the extraction of a narcotic drug.That seems to be the answer to our prayers, if true. As to the psychical and psychopathic effects of Cannabis, the literature on this phase of the subject tends to confirm the analysis as to the psychic effects of hashish made as long ago as 1845 by Dr. Moreau de Tours in his book, which incidentally is still the standard work on the subject.Also, Dr. Brottaux in his book on Hashish published in 1934, which I think is considered a veritable "bible" on the subject today, has followed up and in the main confirmed Dr. Moreau's analysis.Then there was discussed the relation between Cannabis and insanity. There was reference to the work of Dhunsiboy, the Director of one of the Hospitals for Insane in Indiain which he points out that the prolonged use of Indian hemp leads to insanity.The work of Dr. Bouquet was discussed; and also the work of the British Indian hemp Commission which carried out an inquiry in 1893 and 1894 into the relationship of Indian hemp and lunacy.Colonel Chopra did some work in India which was discussed. He found that in India a special form of mental disease classed as toxic insanity had direct relation to the excessive use of hemp drugs.12All of these experts laid stress on "excessive use."Then there was a proposal discussed to authorize the sale of ganja to the Indian population in Burma.As you probably know, in India. the Government maintains a Monopoly, and various narcotic products are sold across the counter tax-paid.The League of Nations wanted to point out to the Committee the various points that were raised in connection with the proposal to sell hemp.To meet the allegation concerning the increase in insanity due to the use of ganja, a table prepared by the Inspector General of Civil Hospitals in Burma has been added showing that as far as the mental hospital at Tagadale was concerned, the percentage of mental cases attributable to the use of ganja and its derivatives varied during the years between 1928 and 1937 from 0.87 to 4.35; and that in 1936, out of a total of 296 admissions there were ten such cases, the corresponding figures for 1937 being 356 and ten respectively.The Sub-Committee was urged to examine the still-controversial question of the relationship between addiction to hemp drugs and the spread of insanity.The work of Dr. Stringaris on Hashish was discussed. He is an authority on insanity due to the use of Hashish13in Russia. He maintains that a further increase can be expected in the ravages caused by Hashish in Asiatic Russia.Then the question of the relationship between the abuse of narcotic drugs and alcoholism arose. It is still a mixed question, and considerable recommendations were furnished.In Algeria, Dr. Bouquet has noted that Heroin addicts were recruited from the Hashish addicts, and Dr. Stringaris in Asiatic Russia has found that to be the case there also.In conclusion the Secretariat pointed out that, as a result of concurrent investigations, progress has been made on chemical studies and research, while fresh information has been gathered in other spheres; at the same time, certain points still require clarification, especially in connection with the physiological, psychological, and psychopathic effects of Cannabis and with the relationships between Hashish-addiction and insanity, and between Cannabis-addiction and crime.After considering all of the recommendations furnished by the League of Nations, the Sub-Committee then made the following report, which is very pertinent in the light of the points we want to discuss here."In discussion of the matter before it, the Sub-Committee divided consideration of the subject as follows:14(l)	Commercial uses of Cannabis (2)	Medical uses of Cannabis (3)	Effects of the abuse of Cannabis (4)	Methods of detecting the presence of Cannabis(5)	Legal definition of the term "Cannabis.The discussions developed the fact that the Committee still lacks complete information concerning the commercial uses of Cannabis. The Sub-Committee would welcome further information concerning the physiological, psychological and psychopathic effects of abusive use of Cannabis and the relation between Cannabis-addiction and crime.Dr. Bouquet pointed out that percentages of resin content in the hemp plant raised in different countries should be ascertained with a view to deciding whether it is necessary to prohibit or merely to control the cultivation of Cannabis for industrial purposes.The value of the Beam test for detecting the presence of Cannabis appears to have been confirmed by a further series of experiments, the results of which are before the Committee, including those attained by the employment of several different modifications of that text.Dr. de Myttenaere said that his experience enabled him to state that the Beam alkaline reaction and its modifications indicated the chief element in the various15components of Cannabis resin which was the cause of Hashish addiction, i.e.the alcoholic group.Dr. Bouquet informed the Sub-Committee that a test based upon new principles had recently been devised which will form the subject of a thesis to be presented by Messrs. Duquenois and Hassan Negm Mustapha at the University of Strasbourg in July, 1938, a brief description of which will be circulated to the Opium Advisory Committee.The question of modifying the incomplete definition of Indian hemp in the Geneva Convention of 1925 was discussed, but no definite conclusion was arrived at. It appeared upon examination that such modification would affect not only Article 1 of the Convention, but also Articles 4 and 11 and would necessarily involve complicated adjustments in the Convention itself. It was therefore decided to postpone further consideration of this matter until the next session of this Sub-Committee when it is hoped that more time will be available for the work.Up to the present time, the work of the Sub-Committee has consisted almost entirely of collecting information in regard to the various phases of the Cannabis problem, and, until the Sub-Committee has before it more data than it has at present, it would scarcely be considered advisable to undertake definite recommendations."16We would like to take inventory of our research and see what is needed.The Federal Government did not get into this picture until after all 48 states had adopted legislation controlling Marihuana in greater or less degree. The Marihuana Tax Act went into effect a little over a year ago, and since that time we have destroyed some 16,000 acres of the plant throughout the various States; most of it in the Middle West. About l,000 violators have been arrested by the Federal Government.I am not trying to sell this book, but I want to call your attention to the work on "Marihuana'a written by Dr. Robert P. Walton, Professor of Chemistry, University of Mississippi, with a foreword by Dr. Geller who is a distinguished pharmacologist connected with the University of Chicago.I would like to start with the agricultural phases of this problem, which will also include the industrial and economic phases.I am therefore going to call on Dr. Wright of the University of Wisconsin and ask him to discuss some of the questions that seem to be troubling us.STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. WRIGHTProfessor of Agronomy University of Wisconsin17DR. WRIGHT: Gentlemen, let me say to you in the first place that while I am connected with the University of Wisconsin, so far as the hemp work is concerned, the hemp being Marihuana, I am working as an agent and in cooperation with the Bureau of Plant Industry here in Washington.I had better assume that you are about the agricultural side like I am about chemistry, that you do not know very much about it. Therefore, suppose I sketch briefly the practical every day procedure by which hemp is handled in the United States and Canada, not mentioning anything about the European situation, and as Dr. Robinson is going to review something about the history of hemp, I will leave that out entirely.In the United States hemp is an annual crop produced from seed planted each year, planted in the Spring the same as small grains are planted, the same as corn is planted.It has been grown during recent years almost exclusively in very few sections; Kentucky, Illinois, Wisconsin and Minnesota.It is planted en masse thickly as small grain, in other words, it is drilled in.It is planted on very good soil in order to be a profitable production. It is a crop limited to good soil18for profitable production most every where in the world, and it is seeded about a bushel to the acre on soil, prepared as for small grain.After it is planted, there is nothing left to be done except to wait for it to be harvested, and it is harvested in the latter part of August, throughout September, and sometimes extending into October depending on the section of the United States or Canada.The seed is usually produced in Kentucky, and in the North American Continent, very rarely any other place. In the sections where it is grown for fibre or industrial uses, seed is not produced.The usual, or arbitrary way of determining when to harvest a crop is when it is well in blossom, we will say rather late blossom when the pollen is being fairly cleared, depending from that time on how circumstances work out, but that is when it is begun.It is generally harvested now by special machinery which has been developed during the last few years. It is cut and spread in swaths of even length. It is left in the stuble, spread out for retting.Now, the exact procedure varies in different sections of the country. This retting period, that is the period when the so-called fibre portion of the stem is released19from the woody portion, varies from two weeks to, in certain cases, two months.After it has reached that stage where the fibre can be removed from the straw by being dressed, it is gathered and bound in bundles and shocked. Then it is put in stacks, usually in hemp mills or processing plants.From these stacks it is sent to the dryer, and dried to what is commonly called in the trade bone-dry condition and which would mean 8 or 9 or 10% moisture.Then it is crushed by the breaking process, that is the fiber is separated by the usual process called scutching, and it is divided into two kinds of fibre, one the long stretch, and the other tangled, and then it is inserted in bales.That, I believe, is the agricultural procedure of the handling of the hemp.There is a little variation in Kentucky because of the weather conditions. It is not retted immediately, but shocked until later in the season when the retting conditioning can be done.In the northern part of the country, it is spread on the ground and the retting is done immediately.Now, I want to avoid going into the acreage and that phase of the work for Dr. Robinson is going to cover that.20I would like to inject this thought here for I am sure it will do no harm, and that is that hemp has been an American industry ever since Colonial times It is not a large industry. It has had its ups and downs, but it has been an American industry since Colonial times, and it is one of the oldest crops that we have in the United States.It is used, as you know, from an industrial stand-point for textile purposes, and to a minor extent for other purposes and Dr. Robinson will develop that.Now, there might be perhaps some questions right now. One or two other items I want to take up before I am through.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Go right ahead.DR. WRIGHT: You know I might not have another chance to say anythingCOMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: You will be given a chance. Go right ahead, Dr. Wright.DR. WRIGHT: I was just wanted to throw this into the pot, and that is, of course, that we who work with the commercial producers, and the industry naturally collectively, and I suppose we are justifiable in that, our prejudices are on that side. I do not think we would be human if we were not, and I do not claim to be other than human. We have a small industry in the United States that21has had its ups and downs over a long period of time. We still produce commercial hemp and fibre. Those in the industry are naturally concerned. They have a stake in that they have what little they have invested in the business. They are not concerned about this last law because I believe they were given a very square deal in the national legislation on the matter. What they are concerned about is the public position, that indefinite intangible thing, public feeling about growing hemp at all. They have already been subjected to some rather embarrassing situations. Now, just suppose that as a result of the agitation, warranted or not, and there are probably two views on that, and I am open to both views, the extensive publicity that has been given in the hemp states, particularly Wisconsin where there is much agitation, that some kind of a legislation will come up to put out or eradicate the production of hemp under the Weed Control Department or the Legislature appropriating money to do it. I will not bother you long on that, but I just want to mention that and show what problem we will be called on to face. Those men have managed to keep their mouths22shut and have expressed no views concerning Marihuana in public, for we feel we are not in a position to do so, and we would like to be sure of our ground before doing it.Of course, having worked with eradication procedures and eradication programs, unless you would convince us otherwise we would oppose the eradication program in Wisconsin as we see it now with the immense cost and the things of that sort.Now comes the other phase of it. We have been trying, in cooperation with the Bureau of Plant Industry, and Dr. Robinson and the Division of Pharmacy of the University of Wisconsin and Dr. Link who is head of the Bio-Chemistry Department of the University of Wisconsin to begin a study of Cannabis in relation to hemp as a crop. Without going into details, I think I have told you my story for the present.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We thank you very much, Doctor. Before we go on to Dr. Robinson, I think there were various points brought up that our conferees would like to discuss.There is one point about commercial hemp. We did not make a survey in your State, but we did make a survey in the State of Minnesota, and some of the hemp that was harvested in 1934 is still on the ground.23DR. WRIGHT: That is right.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: It is giving us a great deal of difficulty. The farmers up in Minnesota in some of the sections have been subjected to various promotion schemes. Due to the existence of stacks of the old 1934 and 1935 crop of harvested hemp in Southern Minnesota, which is a menace to society in that it has been used by traffickers, we have arrested a gang who took a truck load of this Marihuana into New York.I will say that the farmers up there have been cooperating with us 100%. If they see anybody around that section who looks like a trafficker, they bring out their old shot guns, and he is soon disposed of. We have very little trouble from the farmers up there.It is said that every stack contains a plentiful supply for smoking purposes.Allegations have been made that if it was on the ground three years there would not be any resin left. Mr. Wollner can tell you how much resin some of the experts reported after Marihuana had been lying on the ground three years. It seems that the traffickers can find it. Our own chemists have found it.We feel that the farmer is entitled to a reasonable return for these old crops. He planted the crop in goodfaith; he has no desire to violate the law, and we have24been assured that the removal of the harvested crops is very desirable. It is a very difficult situation.Have you any observations to make, or any discussion on the question?DR. ROBINSON: As to thw commercial procedure, tha plant is spread out on the land, and left there until the stalks are retted, and some of the leaves are gone. It is shocked and taken into the hemp mill. The grower is uncertain as to where he stands, and whether the leaves that are associated with the straw are in the legal sense Marihuana, referring, of course, to that particular clause in the law which refers to dry stalks.Now this is done as follows: the straw is left on the land in the stubble for varying times, as I say, from two weeks or longer during this retting process. It is subject to the action of rains and bleaching and decomposition with the various effects of bacteria and fungi, but when it is taken in, it still retains a trace of the leaves. That is what affects the folks up there in Minnesota.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I notice the term "hurds" referred to.DR. WRIGHT: That is the non-fibrous material crushed and taken away from the fibrous. It is the residue. It25would be the same as shives in flax.MR. WOLLNER: I am afraid to say that the experiment with Minnesota hemp is rather inconclusive. As I understand it the hemp was bundled before it had been permitted to ret for an extended period of time.It may be we will find that if the hemp is permitted to ret before it is stacked, a further decomposition of the drug will ensue. However, we do know that the Minnesota hemp of 1934 is active.DR. WRIGHT: It would be active.MR. WOLLNER. It is active but whether the activity was retained by improper handling of the hemp, I don't know. As I understand it they were advised to bunch their hemp before it was retted.DR. WRIGHT: It was never rotted or retted. The plan of handling in Minnesota was unauthorized. In other words, it was contrary to the usual procedure. They put the green hemp or the semi-green hemp in a bundle, and at a later stage it would be known in the trade as green hemp. That was never used for textile purposes. It was not suitable for textile purposes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Then, Dr. Wright, your opinion is that if harvested properly most of the leaves avould remain on the ground and not adhere to the stalks?26DR. WRIGHT: I will be perfectly frank in telling you that will vary in seasonal conditions, and so we are much concerned about that. There are leaves left. As to the condition of those leaves, we don't know. They are left, and there is no use in denying that. There are considerable left on the straw. There are not a great deal, but there are leaves left.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Then prompt harvesting would reduce this danger we are now confronted with? DR. WRIGHT: It would.DR. MATCHETT: What about the hemp stacked green in Kentucky; doesn't that mold more than that left on the ground?DR. WRIGHT: Hemp is left in the shock in Kentucky. You will correct me Dr. Robinson, if I'm wrong, because it has been fifteen years since I was down there, but it is my impression that it is shocked. It is first spread and allowed to wilt on the ground.DR. MATCHETT: Then there is no molding?DR. WRIGHT: If properly handled there will be no molding. MR. WOLLNER: From our point of view that would be improper handling; there would be no decomposition of the resin.27DR. WRIGHT: The general weathering we would get would be during the curing stage.MR. WOLLNER: How long, about, does that take?DR. WRIGHT: Now, after it is shocked, cured and stacked, later it is spread on the land again and retted.DR. MATCHETT: But, during this period, of course, it would be in excellent condition for smoking, - that is, relatively dry in the stack.DR. WRIGHT: From the time it is cut until it is rotted, whatever leaves there are should be suitable for Marihuana.MR. SMITH: While we have not found in New York State a large agricultural growth, we do find that the largest part of our growth, instead of being on good soil, is on poor soil.For the past two years when I have been looking for wild growth, I have found it in dumps or soil that has a high content of ashes or cinders, and I have found it trying to grow it in my own garden but the growth does not begin to compare with that of the cinder growth, and as a matter of fact we have found that most recently the wild growth seeks that kind of soil.That does not prove anything, of course, except we have probably most of our wild growth coming from ashes28and cinders and public dumps. This did strike me very forcibly, and what struck me more forcibly was that we had some of the biggest growths in Brooklyn where it was almost a clear cinder dump.Our experience in New York State so far has not produced anyone who desired to be licensed as a cultivator.I think some of that might be offset if the public was assured that the cultivator would have to be licensed, after proper investigation, and that definite qualifications exist to establish control.DR. WRIGHT: As to your first statement about hemp growing on cinder beds, wild hemp, - it is not a fibrous hemp. As all of you who are familMWith the middle west know, you will find blocks that were formerly even cinder beds, but fibrous hemp will not grow there.MR. SMITH: The point I was chiefly interested in was the public interest, where it was grown, whether being produced by chance or design.DR. WRIGHT: We are hopeful we can clarify this situation. Since legislation may be introduced to eradicate or to bring pressure upon the legitimate producer, I appreciate your suggestion. I think it is a good one.MR. SMITH: We have also in New York State given some consideration to definite measures for removal, but so far we have operated under difficulties acting under nuisance laws. Under the Public Health laws in New York, we can fix a penalty for maintaining a public nuisance. We have in a few instances removed Marihuana from private property where the owner wouldn't undertake it himself, and then assessed a lien against the property within the Public Health law on the ground that we have removed a public nuisance.DR. WRIGHT: It might be construed to apply to Marihuana under our Public Health regulations in Wisconsin. I do not know whether it has been discussed or not.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Robinson, we would like to hear from you.STATEMENT OF DR. B. B. ROBINSONBUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.DR. ROBINSON: If fibres produced from plants were ranked in accordance with their world production in tonnage, hemp would occupy a position of probably third or fourth. It would be surpassed by cotton and jute produced in India, and in some years by flax. That gives you some idea of where it stands in relative importance.Dr. Wright mentioned a mattor that many of you are familMWith, the fact of the importance that hemp played in our earlier Colonial days before the introduction of30the cotton gin.The culture of hemp in the United States, I might ay has decreased because of the cheap competitive fibres which are produced by cheap labor in foreign countries, and it is because of this cheapness that they are substituted for hemp in many cases, and not because of the fact that they have characteristics that are better than hemp for cordage or textile purposes.The average world production between the years 1930 and 1954 for hemp was about 750,000 tons. And now, during that same period in the United States in this small industry we have produced about 500 tons. The world production was produced mainly by Russia where I think 56% of the fibre is produced, followed by Italy, Yugoslavia, Rumania as other producing countries, During the past year or two we imported for domestic consumption about 700 to 800 tons a year, so our total consumption, including domestically produced fibre, and imported fibre runs about from 1500 to 2000 tons.Now, many of you here may wonder why such a small industry as that should be favored to continue on, particularly in the light of the detrimental character of certain parts of the plant used illegally.In the first place the United States is dependent31upon the foreign production of fibres other than cotton. The United States imports annually about 300,000 tons of fibre used for cordage and textile purposes. The estimated value last year was about $35,000,000. That does not include some importations of India twine.I do not mean to infer that if hemp were grown in this country, it could substitute for all of this 300,000 tons imported, but it is the principal fibre which we can get in the United atates, which could be substituted in many cases if conditions arose to make it necessary.The United States, is very thoroughly taken care of at present in reference to supplying our own needs on this cordage fibre.Another argument for the hemp industry is the adaptability of the hemp plant to various regions of the country and because of suitability for mechanical handling, and these are some of the reasons why the office with which I am connected in the Department of Agriculture is interested in seeing this small nucleus of hemp industry continued each year until it is capable of supporting itself under economic conditions. I am speaking more of the industry in Wisconsin rather than the promotional attempts to grow hemp in Minnesota which one might speak of an unorthodox processing. But this industry we have is capable at the32present time of supporting itself if public opinion does not force it to be shut doan, or additional restrictions hamper it.So, this industry could be benefited we naturally think, if this Marihuana stigma could be removed. However, the Wisconsin operators are not opposed to adjust themselves to the conditions and are very much interested in trying to overcome this drug problem.A couple of years ago when this problem was brought to the front more vividly than in the past, the Department of Agriculture was naturally interested in it, and the main way we could see to combat it was as to how to get around it [sic]. Naturally there might be less restriction on the production of hemp in this country if we could prove that in certain sections of the country, because of climatic conditions, the drug was not active, or if we could possibly get plants of varieties that lack the drug, which is probably an Utopian view, or that had it in low concentration.As a result we cooperated with the Bureau of Narcotics, in setting up some experiments. The Bureau of Narcotics has conducted all of the chemical work, and Dr. Marchett later on will speak of these tests. I do not want to go too much into his field. But, we have attempted under33this cooperative work to remove or reduce the resinous substance from commercial hemp.You gentlemen who are chemists and pharmacologists can assist the Agricultural program by furnishing the Agriculture Department some working tools or some tests by which we can tell the presence or absence of this drug, or its activity. It may be said that I am throwing it all on the chemists. I am not trying to do that, but we do need something to work with.So far we naturally have resorted to the Beam tests, the significance of which we do not know with certainty, but in the work we undertook last year, it was the only simple tool which we could work with.Now last summer out at Arlington farm close by, we planted a field in which there were 98 small plots of hemp that were set up in conformity with the statistical method of analysis of variances by a man named Fisher.We obtained statistically significant differences between the varieties using the alkaline but did not obtain it using the acid test. The question may arise, then, as to which is the most accurate of the tests in measuring the presence or absence of the drug.In reference to that, the question of the region of the hemp may play some importance. The native home of34hemp is supposedly in central Asia, and the hemp of Chinese origin which has been distributed throughout the world has practically always been used for fibre purposes.The hemp that has come from India has been of the narcotic type and has not been cultivated generally for fibre. It has been cultivated for the drug. I wish I knew the history of this a little better, but from what I have been able to learn from others, hemp does not appear to constitute a narcotic problem in China. That is of a fibrous variety, and there is a great difference between that hemp and the hemp that came from India. With reference to our test at Arlington, the narcotic chemists selected samples at three different periods for the acid and alkaline test. We got a difference, mathematically significant between those tests. That is, the first sampling which I think was in the early part of June, was different from the later two samplings in that it was lower in that characteristic of activity, the numbers they gave on the Beam test.Actually, the last test was a little lower than the middle test, but it was not significantly lower.We arranged 8 different fertilizer treatments for the various plots and found that the fertilizer used had no effect on the strength or incidence either the35acid or alkaline test.Because of the fertilizer result it would appear that soil vs. variations that occurred probably did not produce any differences or that the soil does not play a part.With reference to climate, so far we have not made a test for we have only had the work at Arlington.  But we plan next summer, if things go well at Arlington, to conduct a test in Wisconsin. We have some cooperative agents in Mississippi and we thought we could get a test farm there. It has been suggested that we try to get one other region, Arizona or New Mexico, or out in that section.  So far, we have not made arrangements, but, if we could get these various locations in the United States, then we could have a set-up whereby we could evolute [sic] climatic conditions in reference to certain tests, the Beam test or some other one if you can furnish it. These are the results which we have obtained so far in the agricultural program to get away from this drug.There have been several reasons I have not brought out as to why we thought we could get somewhere.  We know by handling the plants that some of them are very resinous, and some are not.So, we are receptive to the work you men will do to give us some means of testing our plants so as to allow36us to produce agriculturally some results which we hope will help the industry.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Thank you very muck, Dr. Robinson. You recall what I said about the Turkish annual report for the year 1937 in which it is said that Cannabis sativa with long stalks is grown for industrial purposes in various parts of Anatolia; that the fibre is used for the manufacture of ropes and sacks, and its resin content is so slight that it could not be used for the extraction of a narcotic drug. It might be interesting to get some Turkish seed. MR. WOLLNER: We have not had a great deal of success as regards those statements. We obtained some seed submitted by Dr. Bouquet and I believe Dr. Robinson planted some of them, without any success.DR. ROBINSON: We planted them under favorable conditions last spring. Roughly we may have gotten in the field 200 or 300 plants, and after our first Beam test it was estimated we had about 100 left. About the first of August, I came back from a trip to the west, and we el-iminated about two-thirds of the remainder leaving only about 40. I have harvested about 20 of these one-half were males, and we sent 10 from that collection over to Dr. Matchett to run an alkaline Beam test on. I was37able to obtain out of that .about one-third negative and the rest positive.MR. WOLLNER: Was the amount of resin in these plants comparable to that in other plants?DR. ROBINSON: In harvesting these plants, we merely stripped the seed in the field to keep the birds from getting it and I would say that the African plant was more resinous than the Manchurian plant. It may be that the African plant was later in maturing, but still, by comparison with the Manchurian plant, it had more resin. My hand was simply caked with resin in stripping the plant for the seed.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: The Indian Government report for 1934 shows that where they did not have this type of hemp all of the resin was imported from Central Asia.It is stated that the hemp cultivated in Europe does not carry the intoxicating properties of Indian hemp. While it is believed that the European hemp does not contain as much resin as is to be found in hemp usually produced in Asia, the production of the active resin is particularly variable, and there are some times great differences in quantity depending on the altitude of the place of cultivation.Are there any questions that you care to ask, Dr.38Robinson?DR. HIBBEN: I would like to ask if you made any experiments artificially in the new varieties by radiation?DR. ROBINSON: We had a program for a number of years on hemp, and my predecessor, Mr. Dewey, who unfortunately could not be here this morning, reached retirement age three years ago, and our hemp program was interrupted.So far we have not gone into that, but to some extent we have considered it. These other methods we have approached seemed to have possibilities of results if the tests mean anything.I think this next spring, we should be able to plant these negative seeds we have, and those which have tested negative three different times and have been pollinated by plants in three different tests, and we should be able to give the chemists something definite to test.DR. MUNCH: It is my recollection, when Mr. Dewey made a test of the original plants growing in Arlington back in 1922, we found different physiological portents in the male and the female but, at that time, Mr. Dewey had seed he had obtained from various parts of the world, and it is my impression that after about three years of cultivation at Arlington, the growth characteristics of all of these plants tended to the same type. In other39words, they all tended to hemp of a certain height, as I say that occurred after three years of cultivation.DR. ROBINSON: I think that more or less that result is obtained. Professor Wright who may have had a little closer touch with the problem could answer you better. Wouldn't that be your opinion, Professor Wright?DR. WRIGHT: Yes, under the method used of applying open pollinating, that was the tendency as far as our observation went,that they were more or less alike.DR. ROBINSON: In reference to that, these stalks of hemp we obtained last year from these various sources, have all been isolated, so they have not been cross pollinated.DR. MUNCH I do not know where Mr. Young of Florence, South Carolina, got his idea for the raising of Cannabis for a medicinal purpose -DR. ROBINSON: He got it from Mr. Dewey.DR. MUNCH: There was a material decrease in the material before he finally abandoned that project.DR. ROBINSON: I do not know how he obtained it all, or that he obtained it all from Mr. Dewey, but as I recall, he did.DR. MUNCH: There is one other question, and that is as to the method by which the seeds themselves were ob-40tained,-is that of any interest to you?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes, Dr. Wright, can you give us something on the that?DR. WRIGHT: Commercial seed used for commercial planting?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes.DR. WRIGHT: I do not have any notes on that. The seed are grown from plants cultivated principally for seed; I mean the ordinary hemp which has been planted for seed similar to corn. It is planted in rows, all harvested by hand, and put in large shocks like those in Kentucky. It is harvested in the latter part of September or the first of October in the section in which it is grown. Then the shocks are dumped over on large canvasses, smoothed out on the ground, and the stubble removed and beat out with sticks in the old fashioned method. This is the only place in the United States producing this commercially.DR. MATCHETT: Isn't most of the seed planted here produced in foreign countries?DR. WRIGHT: I do not get the question.DR. MATCHETT: Aren't most of the seeds produced in foreign countries?DR. WRIGHT: Most of the seed produced for Commercial purposes originated in China, central China or towards41the south part of China and was carried here for cultivation.MR. WOLLNER: I believe what Dr. Matchett means is the commercial crop that is grown for instance in Wisconsin, does that originate from seed grown in Kentucky, or the Far East?DR. WRIGHT: All of the hemp planted in the United States for commercial purposes comes from Kentucky. That is, all of the legitimate hemp comes from seed grown in Kentucky. Does that answer the question? DR. MATCHETT: Yes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Matchett, you have been collaborating with Dr. Robinson in these experiments at Arlington. Can you tell us what results you obtained? Dr. Robinson has told us quite a lot about the results, but I think you can probably elaborate upon them.DR. MATCHETT: First of all I might state we made these tests in the manner that was published by us last year, and in the treatment we divided the tests into six categories, according to the depth of color that we obtained, beginning with zero for negative plants. These plants which, gave us only traces of color, which we felt should not be overlooked, but which we also felt would not constitute wholly satisfactory identification of the42plant, were designated number one.Those plants characterized as 2, gave strong responses, definitely positive, and those as 3, 4, and 5 responded with increasing intensity in that order.Briefly we found on variety No. 1, a Rumanian variety 97.5% of the plants tested would have been satisfactorily identified by the Beam test. That is assuming for the moment the single test would be sufficient, which I believe is generally understood not to be so.Variety No. 2, another Rumanian variety, gave us 100%.Variety No. 3, the third Rumanian variety, 87% of satisfactory response.Variety No. 5, Manchuria, 22.9% satisfactory response. Variety No. 6, Chinese, 13.8% satisfactory. Variety No. 9, Italian, 98.1%There is a very decided difference between the Chinese, and Manchurian varieties on the one hand and the Rumanian and Italian varieties on the other.Now there were some very interesting things in reference to the differences between the three test periods.It is true that there was one rather decided change, particularly in the second test, but there was not as significant difference between the number of negative plants, nor was the difference worked with reference to43category No. l.The interesting thing was where we had many in category 2 in the first testing, in the next testing a considerable increase appeared in category 4, with a corresponding decrease in category 2.The actual number of negative plants was not significantly different. I believe the first test gave us 36, the second test 32, and the third test 40.During the course of our activities we found that molding had no apparent effect on one alkaline test response of either negative or positive plants. We permitted them to mold in a. very moist place for a period of five weeks. There was no change in the Beam test.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I want to ask Dr. Wright a question. In harvesting the plant, Doctor, we understand that the farmer usually harvests it before the resin reaches its highest stage. Is that true?DR. WRIGHT: I will say yes, not knowing when the highest stage of the resin is reached myself, but from what I could gather from talking to Mr. Wollner and Dr. Link and those most familiar with the subject. It is cut in the mid-blossom stage, and from what I understand the plants are usually expected to have a high content of resin at that time.44COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our eradication program, 16,000 acres have been gone over, and as I understand it we will also have to go over that same acreage during the coming year, and probably the third year. Do you know how long that seed will remain dormant in the soil? DR. WRIGHT: I can only give you some guess on that. It is quite variable, and how long the seed will remain in the soil is simply my guess. If it is harvested the first year, before pollination occurs I would expect that to handle the situation under most circumstances. I am basing that on practical observation and experience, but if there is a repetition and the plant does become a volunteer plant, if the same process as followed for two years we could expect almost complete eradication. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: What seed could replace the hemp seed as bird food? There is a lot of growth throughout the country due to the casting about of bird seed. Now, however we require sterilization of hemp seed. We have not reached the 100% point in sterilization but the seed people tell us they should sell the seed in 5% mixtures; but even 5%, mixtures if the seed is not properly sterilized, might produce some wild growth. Have you any suggestions on that?45DR. WRIGHT: I believe that these gentlemen here from the animal biology department might be better able to judge of that than I am.DR., COUCH: As a matter of fact, I do not know anything on that point, and we have not gone into it at all. I am extremely interested however.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think there should be some discussion as to the relative activities between the male and the female plants.DR. BLATT: May I ask a question of Dr. Robinson? As I understand it, the average production is about 500 tons a year. Is that 500 tons of fibre?DR. ROBINSON: Yes. This past summer, we had 1300 acres of hemp produced commercially in this country, and it has been running about that acreage with the exception that in 1934 and 1935 this acreage appeared in Minnesota, and in 1936 and 1937 we had a big acreages in Illinois, but those were acreages planted, you might say, for other purposes than the ordinary use, for there was an idea of producing fibre as a substitute for a wool and various things of that nature. Those industries that attempted to do that, for one reason or another, have dropped by the wayside, and 1000 to 1500 acres is the normal hemp production each year in the United States.46MR. WOLLNER: Professor Wright, you heard Commissioner Anslinger's question for information on the relationship between male and female plants. You are undoubtedly aware of most of the discussions in the past years on the subject of Marihuana, and that it has centered around the female plant. As a matter of fact, I believe the United States Pharmacopoeia refers to the flowering type of the female plant, and it is stated that Marihuana comes mostly from the female plant. I wonder whether historically that might not have arisen from the fact that possibly the male plant flowered at an earlier period than the female plant in the growth of the plant itself, and at the time of harvesting by force of circumstance they were limited to harvesting female tops.DR. WRIGHT: Not actually knowing it, I could not say, of course, but I am sure that is the answer. In the male plant the leaves drop off long before, the female plant, and when the traffickers have reached the plant the leaves have practically all gone from the male, but the females are luxuriant.MR. LEVINE: Is there any distinction between the fiber of males and females?DR. WRIGHT: You see, in fibre, they are cut at an early stage when the female plants are just forming the47bud, and the male plants just shedding the pollen.MR. WOLLNER: Then the male plant would grow as tall as the female plant.DR. WRIGHT: Yes, they do usually reach the same height.MR. WOLLNER. When produced for fibre, the plant does not reach the height we experienced in Arlington.DR. WRIGHT: It has reached its full height when cut for fibre. You planted it in rows, too, which would add to the height.MR. HERWICK: I should like to ask Professor Wright a question as to whether or not there was any quantity of Cannabis raised in this country for commercial drug purposes.DR. WRIGHT: I cannot answer that question.DR. ROBINSON: Undoubtedly there are others here who could furnish that information. I do not know of a single case where any of it has been furnished companies for that purpose, but I think there are companies that get it for that purpose.MR. SMITH: There was a concern that grew it in Indianapolis several years ago for their own purposes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Most of the pharmaceutical houses before enactment of Federal Marihuana Legislation48obtained their Cannabis supply from the Middle West. There was relatively little importation of Cannabis for medical purposes.DR. COUCH: In the Food and Drug Administration, we occasionally see a questionnaire sent to the importers more or less of the patent medicine type, and also some well known pharmaceutical houses where cannabis is still found in the formula for certain products. Under the Pure Food and Drug Act, we have some requirements on that, and we are informed what the source of it is, whether gotten in this country or through importation.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think the stocks of some of the larger houses who are still putting this out are sufficient to carry them over for a considerable period of time. Some of the firms transferred or sold their product to other houses, but I know of a number of occasions where raw material was obtained in this country for the local trade.DR. WRIGHT: I have been informed by Doctors that they did get a considerable amount of their prepared processed material from Mexico. I was wondering if there was any processing plant in Mexico.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I did not know they imported it for medical uses from Mexico.49DR. MUNCH: Many of the commercial manufacturers have grown it, but because of the extreme variability of the potency of the material they were growing themselves, they attempted to import it from Madras or Bombay. But the material imported was often weaker than that grown in this country. So the next step was to purchase from Mr. Young at Charleston, South Carolina, or the general neighborhood of Lexington, Kentucky, or Nantou, Illinois. But, those sources folded up within the last ten years and there has not been any substantial production of material in the United States since then. I tested most of the material grown in this country that has been offered.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I suppose that seed came from Kentucky, which in turn came from China.DR. MUNCH: That is true, but I have tested material grown in the United States commercially that was more potent in its physiological aspects than that imported from India.MR. FULLER: I think that came about as a result of the interest that developed in the production of it during the war, or just before we got into the war, because at that time I was in the field myself and grew it com-mercially for four or five years in Virginia from that same stock of seed that Young used in South Carolina, and50which was obtained from the Bureau of Plant Industry. I do not know whether he got it from Dewey or not.The plan we adopted was to cull out as much as possible the tall plants for purely commercial reasons. We could not get so much material from the tall plants. In other words, bushy plants grew up six and seven feet high, giving much more drug than those that grew up taller but not so bushy, When we considered it the proper time, you would grab hold of it. It felt like a sponge. We collected enough material then to produce a drug very much more potent than any imported material that came into the country.It was our experience that it really did not make much difference where the hemp came from, after it had been grown here and become acclimated to our conditions you could select bushy plants from it, and it was just as potent. It did not make any difference where it came from. We used to cull our plants, particularly the male plants. I used to think it did not have much effect, but be that as it may, that was what we did. I do not think we could have ever used the male plants anyway for, in stripping, the amount of material obtained was so small.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: How did you strip the plant?MR. FULLER: It was a very easy process. It was done by women, and they used gloves. In all of the years we51were producing that material as far as we knew, there never was a case of where anybody used it for illegitimate purposes. In fact at that time, I do not think there was any Marihuana used. But, it did not pay us to go on.I think a great deal of the Cannabis sold in the drug trade came from the wild materials that grew in the Middle West and one of the largest dealers in drugs handled that crop. I knew him very well, and he told me at the time.DR. BROMBERG: What further preparation was there after stripping for medicinal purposes?MR. FULLER: We just baled it and sold it.DR. BROMBERG: Any other processing necessary?MR. FULLER: In the manufacturing of medicinals, it has to be extracted usually with alcohol end concentrated down to a solid extract. There was no attempt, and I do not think there has been any attempt made, to separate for commercial purposes the active principle, for even with all of the work done, we do not know what it is.MR. WOLLNER: Did you find, Mr. Fuller, in your growth of the plant commercially, that arid seasons or drier seasons would increase, or produce an increased quantity of resin?52MR. FULLER: I do not think we noticed any difference. Now, I was in that portion of Virginia very near to Washington on the first plateau, six or eight miles out, and some of those summers were very dry. We would get sometimes six weeks without rain, and it did not seem to affect the yield at all. One season, I recall particularly, there was a great deal of rain, and the crop was just about the same.MR. WOLLNER: I would like to offer this thought to the Department of Agriculture. The statement is invariably made by people in Europe and the Far East and Near East that the amount of resin produced by a plant is in a measure proportionate to the rainfall, and the less rainfall the more resin. I wonder whether we are actually dealing with the question of the variation in the amount of resin produced as against the amount of resin exuded. That is to say, isn't it possible as a result of a condition, all that happens is the plant structure, so to speak, shrinks to evaporation and greater amount of resin appears on the surface, but the absolute quantity contained by the flowering tops and the leaves is the same ?DR. ROBINSON: I think your point is well taken, and it was my intention to go into some of those points53in those tests throughout the United States. We collected material over at Arlington Farm last summer at various stages for the purpose of making a microtome test of these little pockets. So far we have not had time to do very much on that, and there are gentlemen here who have done more. We actually found those pockets present in pants two weeks old and on varying specimens which we have in our office. We want back to plants that were less [than] three weeks old and we found there hashish material. Now in older plants in some of the specimens we have of Indian hemp, it seemed to be exuded from the cells all over the surface, and I imagine in such plants as that, if it exuded if you touched it, much more would come off than if it had not exuded. Is that what you mean, certain climatic conditions would cause cells to erupt, and the viscosity of the exudate would be such that it would spread.MR. WOLLNER: I am thinking in terms of opium or the poppy. You can get opium from the pod without scarifying, and the thought struck me, in the case of Cannabis, since the leaf is always extracted in this country, and since in the past the process has been of rubbing it from the outside, in the East, they get more resin than we do, due to the fact that more has exuded but not54more produced.DR. HIBBEN: There is another factor involved in the question about rainfall, and the formation of resin, and that is perhaps the production of resin would depend upon the amount of sunshine, and the more rainfall, the less sunshine. In tomato plants for example, the Department of Agriculture has done a great deal of experimentation as to foliage, and [it] has been shown that the quantity of foliage depends greatly upon the duration of sunshine the plant has received.MR. WOLLNER: I had not thought of that. DR. HIBBEN: Some plants require a great deal of sunshine. DR. WRIGHT: May I ask you this question, - I was interested in the fact that you selected the bushy plant believing it more profitable to do that. MR. FULLER: Yes.DR. WRIGHT: Did you have any observations at all to indicate they were more potent or more satisfactory to the purchaser than the more slender plants; have you any reason to believe there is a difference between the two?MR. FULLER: No, I do not think there is any difference, for the green leaf from the male plant yields resin, and as far as we could determine, the resin was just as55potent as the female. You do not get so much per plant. That was what we were interested in, but, as far as quality is concerned, I do not think there was any difference.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: And now, Gentlemen, if we have no more questions on the agricultural phase of the problem we will proceed to a little more controversial subject. The pharmacological phase. I would like to have Dr. Munch give us a little history of the pharmacology of Marihuana.STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCHPROFESSOR OF PHARMACOLOGY TEMPLE UNIVERSITYDR. MUNCH: So far as the external effects are concerned of the fluid extract of Cannabis, the effects are hyperesthesia, fomication, and cold extremities. These cause increase in intensity. It is not local.So far as the gastro-intestinal tract is concerned, there is no effect upon the taste. There is a tendency towards an increase in thirst and appetite, and large doses will cause nausea, emesis, vomiting, and the drugs produced diarrhea or constipation.So far as the effect on the brain, I am only going into that to this extent, to say that in connection with USPVIII which was thirty years ago we were interested56in knowing whether the American grown plant could be used as well as that which had been imported from India. The study made by the American Drug Manufacturers Association and by others at that time led the USP official Committee to the stand that either the Indian or the American grown material would be comparable for medicinal purposes so long as it was tested and found to have a certain physiological effect, and from a number of bio-tests that were made in which the material was administered to dogs, there were three different effects produced, one effect being to cause the dog to sway from side to side, and back and forth, and finally not to be able to stand erect at all. It was then that satisfactory material was produced which would produce such a response.When it became necessary to prepare revised standards for world use of the Cannabis, we standardized the standards. First, we obtained material from various manufacturers in this country representing the ordinary strength or potency of the product and then many of these manufacturers told me of the material of ten or twenty or thirty years before, and they gave me the products or materials which were of the same commercial strength as they have always been marketing.Then through various means, we obtained drugs and57standardized those products, that is thirteen different products of this series of drugs. Those products were then mixed, and constituted the USP fluid extract of Cannabis, which was officially recognized in USP X.Then as to the method of bio-assay. Contrary to much of the published literature we find that dogs vary as greatly in their response as do humans. On. some 500 dogs I have used, fully one-half were very insensitive, and were discarded immediately. The nervous type or short-haired dog is usually a satisfactory animal but not necessarily the best.Going back to the pharmacological action, so far as the causes, and effect on circulation, a small dose causes rapid beating of the heart which may be followed by less than normal. The blood pressure is usually unchanged, or there is a slight fall.So far as the blood is concerned, there is a definite increase in the hypoglycemiacal content. At the same time, there is a definite increase in the blood sugar. Enormous doses have produced death by cardiac failure, but the doses were 100 to 200 times doses, which produced a tremendous physiological effect.If smoked, there is a tendency to choking or coughing, and all doses tend to decrease the respiratory needs.58So far as the muscles are concerned, the muscles show a definite confusion, and with very large doses there are shown flexor spasms. But not with a therapeutic dose.So far as the pupils of the eyes themselves, there is a very definite contraction of the conjunctiva, and usually but not always a dilation of the pupil.So far as the effect on the glands, there is probably a double diuretical effect. There is a question, and the production of the diuretic effect is unsettled.It has been reported there is a sexually stimulating effect. Some say it does and some say it does not exist.So far as antidotes are concerned the thought is, if it has been swallowed, the administration of an emetic, caffeine or acid drinks in general.So far as the habituation is concerned, it has been claimed and denied, and so far as elimination is concerned, I have not been able to detect it in the urine. So, I do not believe the active principle is eliminated by urine.In the general pharmacopoeia developed by O'Shaunessy in 1843, which reached its peak ten or fifteen years later, it was clinically recommended for all sorts of diseases and later found worthless.There is a definite decrease in the central Indian59drug which stimulated further work done by Casparis and others, after which it appears to have gone into innocuous desuetude until it began to be criminally exploited, which led to the present burst of study.Pharmacology is right I think, when it is said it does not have the same effect, or one effect on the brain, and I may be sticking my head out when I make a suggested answer that the cause of the awful intoxication is largely due to the difference in the rate of absorption, whether the material is smoked or given by solution or in capsules and taken into the stomach, or given rectally, and also the susceptibility on the brain, because in many instances we have given the same material to humans or dogs. Some of the animals it has shown no effect upon, others it has shown an enormous effect with the same dose. So far as animals are concerned, we have made a comparative study and find that dogs and rabbits have proven most suitable for quantitative assays but none can be relied on for qualitative accuracy, that is 10 to 12%. That is a complete change from what I said in my book,1 but it is possible, by running from 14 to 20 bio-assay, to obtain results accurate within plus or minus 11 to 20%. But, it never has been done commercially and can only be done in connection with research.60Through what channels does the active principle find its way into the nerve centers? I should say through the blood.So far as the effect on the blood pressure, I have attempted to cover those reflex changes. It has been stated and denied that there are significant lesions in the brain of humans. Dogs I have used for some years, in some instances showed certain types of brain changes. Whether those are connected with Cannabis, I do not know. I am trying to complete that now and perhaps within the next five years I can answer the question.Regarding the other questions, I would rather refer those to Dr. Bromberg.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Before we enter into a general discussion, I would like to call on Dr. Loewe of Cornell University to give us a statement on the bio-assay method.STATEMENT OF DR. S. LOEWEPHARMACOLOGIST CORNELL UNIVERSITY MEDICAL COLLEGEDR. LOEWE: The bio-assay, in my opinion, is the point where the pharmacologist has to enter this manifold picture at which we arrive in this conference for a very significant reason.61The reason is that all the manifold aspects of Marihuana are focused around and makes the existence of an active principle in this drug, active principles which are chemically not known, and as long as an active principle is not chemically known, it can only be determined from its action, that is, biologically, which can only be by bio-assay.Dr. Munch has thoroughly depicted the many aspects of the pharmacological action of Marihuana. That is what we can call the pharmacological spectrum of this drug, But it must be emphasized, that the spectrum of the drug as such and not on one certain active principle necessarily, for nobody knows the active principle, and nobody ever knows whether there is only one active principle or more than one active principle.It can be assumed from the beginning that there is more than one active principle but this must not necessarily concern the Marihuana interests, because the problem is narrowed to that active principle among possibly many active principles which produces the narcotic or "dope" action in humans.Even with respect to this point, of course, we are not one hundred percent sure that this is the action of one principle or more than one.62Quantitative bio-assay of the active principle of Marihuana, of course, tends or aims to determine that one active principle or a complex of active principles, which is interesting from the human point of view, the narcotic principle. May I mention right here that as long as we do not know how many active principles there are, we have to assume primarily that every action is carried by a separate active principle, and with this assumption, may I speak for the definite ataxia principle, which is the principle which can be bio-assayed in the drug which produces the main action stored in the dog. There is another action in the drug, which I may call the depressant action, the cataleptic action, and then there is the anesthetic principle which can be studied in the rabbit, using the depression of the corneal reflex. The depressant action in the mouse, manifested by prolonging the hypnotic action, is an action which I have observed and used to bio-assay this one active principle.Now, bio-assay has to start, therefore, with this, which one of these actions is preferable for the Marihuana problem for studying the narcotic principle, important for humans?We have much evidence that the ataxia action is fairly well related to the narcotic action.63In detail, there is not much to say. Walton has elaborated the previous effects and experiences of the bio-assay of the drug in a fairly good manner. There are details, and certainly it is necessary to bio-assay a large number of animals due to the individual natures and non-susceptibility which complicates the actions, and action can only be compared in one and the same animal, and only for comparison in a single animal, and the consequence is that a large group of animals has to be used.The mode of administration has been emphasized by Dr. Munch. I would prefer and do prefer, for bio-assay, intravenous administration because the Marihuana action has a very long period of latency without the means of elimination from the system, so that the results seem to be fairly well comparable.Now, I am of the opinion, just like Dr. Munch has emphasized, that the bio-assay method of the drug is not definitely eliminated. I have the impression that the method will result in fairly good accuracy, but it is an accuracy of plus or minus 15 or 20%, and which will suffice, I suppose, for the period in which bio-assay is necessary.It is the unfortunate situation of the pharmacologist that in certain periods of development of active princi-64ples he is available for the purpose, and in a certain sense he is the man charged with the entire problem.  But, his unfortunate situation is that just when he has developed this method and applied it, it is always finally inherent that he is out of the picture for, as soon as the chemist comes into the picture, and the bio-assay is not any more necessary, the pharmacologist can be dropped.  If I may mention this at random, all of these points of view are true also as to the chemical test.  Before the chemist has developed the active principle, the chemical method of identification of much or great importance to the country, and they may be of much or less importance for identifying the active principles than are the bio-assay methods, but only after the discovery of the active principle and its chemical properties, the problem of the chemical test, the importance of the Beam test can become clear.I know of another example where a greater activity of a certain drug was found, and the drug was not white but yellow, and this, of course, introduced many beliefs that yellow colors and opticals would be an easy expedient for getting a quantitative activity.  So, there was developed a number of tests for this drug, going into this problem, but finally it turned out what general color65of the narcotic or commodity was and the reason for the high activity of the drug.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Well, Doctor, we are going to have the chemists confer among themselves, and they will then give us some of their views. I think we can reserve the general discussion for the afternoon.We will now hear from Dr. Walter Bromberg, Senior Psychiatrist of the Department of Hospitals, City of New York.STATEMENT OF DR. WALTER BROMBERGSENIOR PSYCHIATRIST DEPARTMENT OF HOSPITALS, CITY OF NEW YORK.DR. BROMBERG: To start with, my interest in this Marihuana problem began in 1933 when I reported at Bellevue Hospital a group of 11 cases of mental reactions induced by smoking Marihuana and I reviewed the literature and medical knowledge at that time. Also, the experience which I obtained was at the Psychiatric Clinic of the Court of General Sessions over a period of six years. Persons showing overt mental symptoms were brought to the hospital by interested relatives and occasionally on a magistrate's order. For that reason, the vast majority of Marihuana smokers did not reach the hospital. Cases which came before the Clinic had passed through the Court of General Sessions and had been arraigned, indicted and66convicted of a felony.There has been considerable literature on the intoxication and insanity-producing effect of Cannabis, in papers from Asia, Europe, and the United States. To sum up this material concisely, it can be said that the several types of syndromes recognized fall into three groups: (a) intoxication, (b) toxic psychosis with or without admixture of other types of mental reactions (schizophrenia, manic-depressive) and (c) according to Eastern European and Asiatic observers, chronic dementia and deterioration following prolonged use of the drug. Apparently this latter type of deteriorating process has not been observed in American clinics.Our experience with mental conditions following Marihuana indicate to us that there are two categories of mental reaction. The following classification is suggested:Acute intoxication (Marihuana Psychosis) Containing sensory, motor and subjective elements, lasting hours to several days, often with anxiety or hysterical reactions, and panic states and depressions of transient nature.Toxic Psychoses (a) in which there are many admixtures of disturbed sensorlum, delusional and emotional reactions amounting to psychosis, but with the common characteristic67toxic signs and (b) functional psychoses of a typical variety, initiated by Marihuana or colored by Marihuana in their symptomatology, but which continue in the form of the underlying psychosis. In these cases Marihuana represents an incipient stage in the psychosis, apparently.There were 14 cases of Acute Intoxication and 17 of Toxic psychosis.The point at which the line is drawn between acute intoxicating due to Marihuana and psychosis due to Marihuana depends on the degree and severity of the symptoms. Acute intoxications, induced by smoking one to four cigarettes, bring about after an interval varying from one-half to five hours in the individual one or all of the following symptoms: an increase in motor activity, a feeling of excitement, mental confusion, disorientation, crowding of perception, elementary visual illusions and hallucinations, euphoria and talkativeness. In addition to these symptoms, numerous subjective experiences occur, such as increased speed of thought processes, a feeling of intellectual brilliance, change in time perception, various somatic feelings, dizziness, hunger, a feeling of swelling of the head, lightness of the extremities, a sensation of walking on air, lengthening of the limbs and sexual illusions. More often sex excitement consists68in the fact that the possible sexual objects in his environment become extraordinarily desirable. There is abundant evidence in our clinical and experimental material to show that the stimulus for sexual interest and activity derives from the aesthetic enhancement of objects in the environment. It is not so much a matter of increased potency on the part of the user as increased reaction to sexual fantasies and illusions. One of our patients said: "I saw black and white women lying in bed with legs separated, as if expecting men . . . some women in the park with nothing on, doing nasty dances, moving their hips. I chased after them." Others state women appear amazingly beautiful. Another patient said: "In the subway I felt very sexy. I wanted to touch every woman that passed."The speeded-up physical motility has its counterpart in rapid speech. There is a feeling on the part of the individual that he is witty, even brilliant; his ideas flow quickly and words come readily to the tongue. Conclusions and answers seem to come to mind ready-formed and surprisingly clear, without the effort of thinking. This feelings of clarity is, of course, spurious. Actually the productions of the intoxicant are hard to follow, for when he wishes to explain what he has thought there is69only confusion. The rapid flow of ideas gives a subjective impression of brilliance of thought and observation. The sense of increased speed of thinking apparently has an effect on memory - hence the confusion that appears on trying to recall what was thought during the intoxication.The smoker finds it pleasant to be with others and to impart his experiences to them. This is reflected in the fact that Marihuana is ordinarily smoked at parties or in groups. It is felt that this need for a social setting is a reaction to an inner anxiety arising from the threat of bodily destruction implied in somatic illusions induced by Marihuana In the ordinary case of smoking Marihuana, especially with one who is used to the drug, this threat becomes converted to euphoria which develops to uncontrollable fits of laughter. Nevertheless inquiry shows that almost every smoker is aware of definite uneasiness at the outset of the intoxication. The description from smokers in Harlem and from experimental subjects agrees on this point. In the words of a user of two years' standing, initiates "shrink together, feel tight inside and get frightened." After they smoke it more than once, the reality of these frightening somatic illusions becomes less. In occasional instances, and these are the cases70which are apt to come to medical attention, the fear of death, of insanity, of bodily deformity and of bodily dissolution are startling. These patients are tense, nervous, frightened, they may develop a state of panic. Often suicide or assaultive acts are the result of these emotional states. The anxiety state is so common in patients admitted to the hospital for uncomplicated Marihuana psychosis, that it can be considered part of the intoxication syndrome.Notes taken on experimental subjects who were psychologically trained illustrate these points:Subject l. Two cigarettes were smoked within 40 minutes. Immediately after the second a feeling of lightness in vertex of head was felt. Head was expanding; there was a feeling of mild excitement. Now the head felt heavy and there was a definite feeling of lengthening in the legs and a tension in the back muscles of the thigh. Head felt alternately light and heavy. There was a sensation as though the top of the head were lifted with about four inch increase in height, accompanied by optic images of skulls and skeletons. Feeling of the arms rising up in the air.Subject was aware of a feeling of confusion. Suddenly he saw images of legs and arms in a dissecting71room which were terrifying.Subject 2. "I felt a little euphoric at first, but with the first draw my heart feels faster, my eyes a little heavier. I feel myself perspiring all over, and shaking. I can feel a slight dizziness. I feel weak; the dizziness has left and I am perspiring (Asked to walk around the room. Refuses to do so and becomes negativistic).On looking back I remembered that I had sexual thoughts during the time of the experiment. Time seems to pass in a peculiar way, there being a combination of fastness and slowness. I took my first inhalation a few minutes after 9 and when I looked at the clock and saw it was 10 after 9. I was very much surprised because it seemed like hours. The whole experiment seems now as if it lasted much longer than it did. Walking home I walked slowly in front of oncoming cars and felt a sense of recklessness connected with not being able to walk faster and not caring."It is remarkable how much anxiety is developed when one looks for experimental subjects among laymen. The drug is popularly supposed to release aggressive and sexual impulses beyond the point of control; it is also regarded as being habit-forming. The legendary history and social connotation of hashish smoking may help to de-72velop in those who have had no experience with the drug, a series of anxieties masking sexual fantasies and aggressive impulses. This has come almost to the point of mass hysteria. Some public officials are unwilling to allow the use of Marihuana cigarettes for experimentation purposes, on the ground that it may be "immoral," tending to foster the development of drug addiction among the public. This frequent anxiety concerning Cannabis may have as its source the feeling of dissolution and other somatic changes induced in smokers which is communicated somehow to the non-smoking public.In clinical material as indicated, Marihuana effects may range from mild intoxications to transitory psychoses which require psychiatric aid. The effects vary and not all the symptoms occur in every case. Illustrative of the Marihuana psychosis with anxiety reactions, and somatic sensory distortions:A 31 year old white man, admitted March 27, 1934, with a history of having smoked just one cigarette. On admission the patient was depressed, retarded, apprehensive. He admitted smoking Marihuana. Was oriented and memory showed no defects. Physical examination was negative. The patient states, "My hand began to feel blue all of a sudden. I felt like laughing and I felt73funny in my head. it was the queerest feeling I ever had. I felt like I was kind of fainting away like. I sweat and then Id get kind of chilly. I got the scare of my life. I thought I was going to die and everything else. I knew what was happening all the time. I thought my hands were beginning to get blue. My throat began to get kind of dry. It was a little better than getting drunk. I did not want to step down from the curbit seemed to be so high. I was sitting down and was afraid to get up." Patient improved and on the second day was less apprehensive, was pleasant and cheerful. He was discharged as recovered, after two days.This case demonstrates visual illusions, which recall the megalopsia (perceiving objects larger than they are), and more common micropsia, which has been reported experimentally and clinically. It is this type of illusion, induced by hashish, that may have been the basis for the story of Aladdin who saw the tremendous genie emerge from his lamp spout in the Arabian Nights' tale.A 32 year old Irish-American, admitted September 17, 1937, with a history of smoking Marihuana cigarettes two hours prior to admission. He felt dizzy, wanted to commit suicide by jumping out of windows, bumping head on the wall, floor, etc. On admission was uneasy, ap-74prehensive, impulsive. Said, "I feel sick. I'm going through hell. I saw trucks coming at me getting larger and I wanted to open the door of the cab and jump out." He was discharged as improved in his own custody about 12 hours after admission.A common type of intoxication is indicated in the following case:A 38 year old Negro, admitted April 13, 1934, with history that he had run out of the house poorly clad and that he had smoked "artificial" cigarettes. He was confused on admission, was dazed in appearance and disoriented. He described a lightness of the head, dizziness and seeing star-shaped figures before his eyes after smoking a "doped" cigarette. He was apprehensive on examination. On the second or third day after admission, apprehension had disappeared and he was discharged as recovered, being clear, composed, but unable to account for his earlier excitement.It is not uncommon to find the history of admixture of other drugs or alcohol in Cannabis intoxication. Frequently alcohol intensifies the Cannabis symptomatology.A 27 year old man of old American stock, admitted on June 18, 1933, at his own request. He had been a chronic alcoholic and displayed definite evidences of psycho-75pathic makeup; had marked inferiority because of his eyes and body structure. On admission he appeared to be apprehensive, a little excited, spoke coherently and relevantly. His experiences were rather clearly set forth--"I was down on the water-front. A fellow gave me an Egyptian cigarette to smoke . . . it was hashish. About an hour afterwards I began to see things. I'd see things flying in the air. This made me laugh and I'd laugh at things not worth laughing at. Then I began to see green and other colors flowing before my eyes. Then things got black. I imagined people were following me and I screamed in my hotel and got kicked out. I still see red lines in front of my eyes and other different colors all stuck together. Then I began to hear bells that would get fainter and fainter and then start again. Imagined someone was after me all evening. I thought I heard footsteps and saw people ducking in and out of doorways behind. me. At the time I said to myself maybe it all affect my eyes. I seen a big splotch in front of me  it was scarlet very bright, exceptionally bright. It contracted, then faded away. I knew all the time it was due to hashish."The second group comprises cases of toxic psychosis due to or initiated by Cannabis. There may be other76toxic agents present, as alcohol, other drugs, infective or other endogenous elements. Disordered sensorium, excitement and agitation, retardation, blocking with emotional rigidity, hallucinations, sensations of somatic change, delusional experiences may appear in the toxic psychosis. The psychosis lasts from weeks to months. Often the mental picture crystallizes out into a schizophrenic or manic depressive psychosis after several weeks or months (see paradigm). At the onset .of the illness what can be considered characteristic Cannabis symptom-atology is discernible. As the underlying functional psychosis develops, the toxic elements recede.A boy of 16, admitted February 27, 1934, with statement from the family that for two months he had been depressed, apprehensive, worried, scratching his hands in a nervous manner, prayed constantly. He complained that somebody read his thoughts. On admission was well developed and showed no physical signs. Patient was agitated, depressed, talked constantly in a bizarre manner about the devil influencing him, etc. Said: "I felt lightly when I was walking - as if I weighed only 10 pounds. I felt like running my whole body was light. I felt like jumping. As if I was walking on air. I felt happy. Then I saw yellow lights all around me. I saw blue and green77too. The colors were more bright than usual. There are just masses of colors - sometimes I see a black cross with everything red behind it. That means there is a God. He is helping me. The devil knows the evil thoughts in me." This agitated condition improved and patient was discharged about 3 weeks after admission as a psychosis due to drugs; acute hallucinatory episode.Patient was readmitted August 1st of that year with a picture of a depression with schizoid features. On this admission there were no evidences whatever of the sensory illusions and somatic feelings that he had previously when he smoked Marihuana. He was transferred to the state hospital, where he remained four years, being diagnosed as Paranoid Schizophrenia with Catatonic Features. There he was restless and overactive. He had a marked push of speech, expressed ideas of reference and religious delusions and was manneristic. Said: "I figured the devil was trying to pull me away from God so I cut a cross on my arm. Physically I am the same, but mentally I am another person. ...I feel that people influence me by touching me - like injecting dope." Later he was manneristic, grimaced, was untidy, repeated practically all questions asked, answered briefly and usually vaguely and would say, "I don' know exactly," or "I don't78know." He remained dull, apathetic, indifferent and mute until the present time.The personality factor is of undoubted importance in this group of individuals. After the toxic state passed off in these patients in whom the intoxication reaches deeply enough into the personality, a basic psy-chotic state developed. At times, the toxic features are in the background, the personality reactions being pre-dominant. What the inner relationship is between Cannabis and the onset of a functional psychotic state is not always clear. From our observation, the inner reaction to somatic sensation seems to be vital. Such reactions consisted of panic states which disappeared as soon as the stimulus (effects of the drug) faded. It is generally known in psychopathology that when the perception of our own bodily sensations is disturbed we are liable to be profoundly affected psychologically. Disturbances in perception of the body-model (Korperschema), which is built up of kinesthetic, tactile, visual and other stimuli, and integrated into the core of the personality, elicit some type of reaction. Such disturbances act as a blow to the ego, invoking defensive reactions of anxiety, apprehension, projection, etc., which approach or are schizophrenic in their clinical manifestations. The79following case illustrates these points:A 20 year-old colored man admitted February 22, 1936. He is said by his mother to have been "nervous" for some time, said he wanted to die, wanted to kill himself. Prior to admission his mother caught him with a bottle of lysol. He had been depressed and despondent. He was a boy of superior intelligence as measured by the Army Alpha test. On admission he stated that he used Marihuana for several months and during this time he had heard people talking about him They said' "Oh, what an ugly boy. How mean-looking he is." For four months, August to October, 1935, he smoked three to four cigarettes a day until he began to feel ill. At first Marihuana made him happy. Then he felt that he made a peculiar noise in his throat; ate once a day; was unable to sleep; and experienced auditory hallucinations. The hallucinations started four months ago and increased gradually. He thought his face was changing. He looked thin, mean, and ugly; he became self-conscious. He felt that every-one in the neighborhood knew it. He stated at times he seemed speeded up, but his mind was keenly alert with the development of the ideas of reference, he became self-reproachful, apprehensive and fearful.He was then transferred to a state hospital on March8013, 1936, where he stated his hallucinations had disappeared and his emotional reaction improved. After three months he was discharged to his home; within five months he was readmitted to Bellevue Hospital, where he had gone in a state of panic, and from where he was re-committed to a state hospital. He was tense, uneasy, still retained ideas of reference, acted oddly at home apparently in response to his delusions. Diagnosis on second admission to State Hospital was Dementia Praecox Paranoid Type, which was made about two years after the onset of the original illness.Some cases showed the manic-depressive reactions, but these were in the minority. It is perhaps to be expected that schizophrenic-like psychoses are more common because individuals who take to drugs have some deep inadequacy to start with. The cyclothymic personality is less prone to require the drug.A man of 28 who was brought to the hospital by his mother on February 13, 1938, with the history that he had been smoking reefers for some time. A year ago he had an episode, was not hospitalized and improved from it. On admission patient was confused, restless, apprehen-sive. He engaged in violent daydreamings. At times he appeared to be reacting to hallucinations. He said he81"had a big head." He became talkative, euphoric, elated and overactive after a day or so. He said: "The best thing for me to do is. . . you look fine. I've got to look like you . I know what it is . . . when a Buick and a Packard get together." His speech was distinctly flighty, his behavior panicky; was constantly restless. Would cry, sing, talk.He was transferred to a state hospital on February 24, 1938. There his condition persisted and he became somewhat depressed, but showed promise of recovery a few months after admission. Diagnosis at State Hospital was Manic Depressive Psychosis, Manic Type.Mixed reactions merge with the toxic psychoses. These reactions vary clinically, some occurring in chronic alcoholics, some in schizophrenics and some in psychopathic personalities, and in all of them Marihuana usage was a factor. It can be clearly seen that aside from the direct toxic effect of the drug, the personality of the patient plays a tremendous role in psychotic states following Marihuana usage.A Cuban, age 34, who was admitted on March 6, 1938, to Bellevue Hospital. He had been taking Marihuana for one and a half years. He had jumped in front of a south-bound subway train without injury. He was very depressed, dull, lackadaisical, despondent in attitude.82He was definitely under productive but still strongly suicidal. He described taking one cigarette every day of Marihuana for a year and a half because it took his worries away. For some time he had been conscious that people were looking at him He feels that his body is heavy all the time. Sometimes he hears deceased persons talking to him. He sees lights at times. At times he sees a photograph of a strange person.His friend corroborated the history, stating that he had been in this depressed condition for 3-4 years. He had a work-house sentence for 2-3 months for Marihuana. He was transferred to a state hospital March 18, 1938. At that time he was dull, preoccupied, but lost his hallucinatory and delusional trends. The State Hospital diagnosed him as Schizophrenia, Hebephrenic Type (?) and he was released after two months.In some cases the drug makes relatively little difference in the content of the psychosis. It is for the clinician to determine how much Marihuana influences the clinical picture. In South Africa, where dagga (equivalent of Marihuana) smoking is very widespread, a diagnosis of Marihuana psychosis is made in any "toxic psychosis where there are very good grounds for assuming addiction to dagga smoking." It is felt that there should83be more exact criteria, as we outlined above, for a diagnosis of Marihuana psychosis, by which we mean the presence of disordered sensorium, characteristic colored visual hallucinations, time changes, subjective and somatic feelings. One is apt to over-estimate the place of Marihuana in the causation of a psychotic picture.A white man of 28, admitted January 23, 1938, to Bellevue Hospital with a history that he was in a state hospital in Arizona for 3 months about two years ago and one in Indiana for 9 months four years ago. "I was smoking this Marihuana weed (at time of admission to State Hospital in Arizona). I ran around the desert for a time, ran out nights and one day knocked on a door and told a woman I was Dillinger. I tried to see how much water I could walk in. I was just like hypnotized and walking in my sleep. Sometimes I feel like something's controlling me. Sometimes I feel just like I'm talking to somebody with my mouth closed. I just ask them a question with my brain and they answer. Sometimes it's a man, sometimes it's a woman's voice; it just works in my temple. I think it's imagination. It's just like a dream. People stare at me. Sometimes I see different colors. I had that years ago - just like a light coming towards me; it's not a light, it's an arc.84His effect was flat and he was dejected and slow-speaking. Showed blocking and evasiveness on. sex experiences. Had ideas of reference and persecutory ideas.He was transferred to a state hospital, where he was noted as being preoccupied, under productive and somewhat dissociated. He stated that he had some sort of seizures that were not really fits, but that when he had them if he had a sword he would not mind cutting everybody's head off. He also believed if anybody got killed near the place where he worked he would be blamed for it. Said that when he looks in bright lights he sees visions like all sorts of different colors, blues, whites, and these seem to blind him. A diagnosis was made of Dementia Praecox, Paranoid Type, and he was still in State Hospital after five months.In psychopathic personalities, those with deep inferiorities, use of drugs is a method of supporting the ego. In these cases Marihuana does not always produce the desirable effect. Apparently it is not strong enough to affect the problems which have involved deeper layers of the personality. Such individuals adopt heroin or morphine very soon after a short experience with Marihuana. The experience of drug addicts seen at the Court of General Sessions confirms this. Persons addicted to85heroin, morphine, cocaine or opium never return to Cannabis. Such individuals are admittedly psychopathic in that they need an increment of drug to make their lives tolerable, In the next case, the use of Cannabis represented the attempt of the patient to overcome his sexual inadequacy. In this respect the social psychology of the drug is a factor, since Marihuana is popularly supposed to free sexual inhibitions.A white man, age 23, admitted to Bellevue Hospital on March 31, 1938, with a history that he felt unworthy and thought he had a venereal disease. He held ideas of infidelity against his wife and was assaultive. Threw a four month old baby across a room. He turned gas jets on. On admission he was rambling, talkative, evasive, depressed, self-absorbed and had somatic complaints.He said: 'I was sentenced to the Workhouse for 4 months for smoking Marihuana. I knew then I was not satisfying my wife and I thought it might help. A year ago some friends gave me the weed, I smoked several. I felt calm and liked to listen to music - very happy - exhilarating feeling - that's all."In the hospital he was talkative, discussed his problem in detail and showed some depression, which improved. The infidelity ideas and his sexual inadequacies concerned him most. He was transferred to a state hospital with a86diagnosis of Psychosis with Psychopathic Personality; Cannabis usage a factor.Often Cannabis intoxication represents a stage in the incipiency of a psychosis. The patient who is developing a functional psychosis strives in the incipient stage to overcome the unconsciously perceived difficulties. In this sense Marihuana usage represents a healthy reaction tendency, even though the mechanism may be unknown to the patient. The next case illustrated this problem. A boy who had made a successful adjustment on a moderate level of social attainment began to show schizoid behavior shortly after the usage of Marihuana. The process continued to a psychotic state. What role did the drug play? Could the psychosis have begun without the drug? Was the use of Cannabis the patient's attempt to cure his developing psychosis? These are problems needing careful judgment and study and wide clinical experience.A young Negro, 20, admitted October 2, 1936 to Bellevue Hospital with a history of having been dull, indifferent for some time. Insisted upon keeping the windows closed, would not leave the house, but denied he heard voices. Would masturbate openly and made sign with fingers, and actions were decidedly peculiar. Mother states she caught him. smoking a sweet-smelling87cigarette with a white man and soon after got a history from his playmates that he had been smoking Marihuana cigarettes for a long time.Observation in the hospital confirmed his withdrawn, retarded attitude. Psychometric gave an IQ. of 75 with rating of Borderline to Dull Normal Intelligence. Was pre-occupied on ward; difficult to obtain his attention; evasive; offered many excuses for closing window and putting out lights. About 10 days after admission he appeared a little more alert and cheerful. He was discharged in custody of mother as Incipient Schizophrenia (?) or Psychoneurosis, Reactive State, on October 13, 1936.He was readmitted a year later, October 15, 1937. At that time mother gave a statement that for past year, since he left hospital, he had been dull, staying in the house in a "deep study." He seems to listen; does not say anything'. At one time he beat up an old man in the house who, he said, called him names. Prior to admission he had attacked a woman for no apparent reason. Sleeps day and night. Often looks as if he is in a dream, Changed personality reactions for more than a year. For two weeks distinctly worse.On admission he was sluggish, dull and lethargic, spoke in a quiet, low voice, showed empty affect, but was88intact in intellectual functions, memory, comprehension, orientation. He was transferred to the State Hospital on October 20, 1937, where he was evasive and dull. He showed no interest in the surroundings and did not mingle with the other patients. He expressed mild ideas of persecution and of electricity, was evasive and suspicious. He said some people called him bad names across the street. Believes that an attempt was made to harm him. "I sometimes have a funny feeling in my legs (electricity)." Their diagnostic impression included the possibility of Dementias-Praecox, Paranoid Type.Gradually he acquired an interest and socialized with other patients. At all times he was neat and tidy in personal appearance and habits. He improved after five months and was ready for parole.Now, so much for the psychopathic. We now come to the criminology.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I thought we would cover that in another subject.We will now adjourn for lunch and come back at 1:30.(Thereupon at 12:20 oclock p.m., a recess was declared, the conference to resume discussions at 1:30 p.m.)89AFTERNOON SESSION.The conference was resumed at 1:30 o'clock p.m., pursuant to the taking of a recess at noon.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Gentlemen, the Conference will be in order. We may very well start with the general discussion on the pharmacological phases of the problem, and you can direct your questions to Dr. Munch, Dr. Loewe, or Dr. Bromberg.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Munch, I would like to ask you, in respect to the statement made by Dr. Walton that Cannabis has been used as a relief during labor in the Far East, are you familiar with that general picture?DR. MUNCH: Yes. I think that the product that is actually used there is not Cannabis itself, but one of these peculiar mixtures of datura and opium and hashish and other things.Some of the reports refer to the women smoking the cigarettes for a period in labor, but they are not in agreement with the information I have gotten from the Mexicans or out in Nevada, for example, where they have tried it and found it of no value.On the isolated tissues the solutions of the drug have no effect, or have a very mild, quieting action.If I remove the alcohol, they have little effect,90which means that the active principle is not sufficiently soluble in water to produce an action. So that I do not believe the action is very definitely therapeutic. It is more psychological, I believe, than it is physiological.MR. WOLLNER: Who is Willis? One of them refers to the fact that Willis recommends its use in tedious labor where the patient is restless.DR. MUNCH: Let me look at my copy of this book. MR. WOLLNER: It is on page 156.DR. MUNCH: Did you say "Willis", Mr. Wollner?MR. WOLLNER: Yes. On page 156, "EFFECTS DURING LABOR". It starts out, "Willis recommended".DR. MUNCH: Willis has written a book on obstetrics and gynecology, but I cannot give you the reference to it right now.MR. WOLLNER: All right.DR. MUNCH: But he is one of the authors in that field. However, the work I was referring to more particularly was done by Watt (?) and Breyer-Brandwijh, which [sic] I believe is the co-author of the publication on poisonous plants in South Africa.I have had correspondence with Watt along that line.91He refers to it in the last paragraph there after South Africa.MR. WOLLNER: The reason I ask you that question is because of Dr. Bromberg's remarks, which I interpreted as being indicative of the production of a hypersensitivity. Am I wrong in that, Dr. Bromberg? DR. BROMBERG: A hypersensitivity?MR. WOLLNER: On the part of an individual who uses Marihuana; that is, an increased agility.DR. BROMBERG: The effects I refer to are on a motor activity. You refer to those, I presume? MR. WOLLNER: Yes.DR. BROMBERG: By which we mean the promptness to move either aimlessly or purposefully; that is, in acute intoxication the smoker is apt to dance around and move or wave his arms, or go through movements that are more rapid than he would move ordinarily; move his chair, knock it across the room, talk to people, show a general output of activity.Many of those prisoners whom I have contacted state that they rather slow up or would rather be quiet during this period. There are two effects, in other words.The hyperactivity is not universal. The great, ex-92treme activity results in assault, throwing people around. This is similar to what you see in certain types of alcohol intoxication, so-called pathological intoxication, where a few drinks set a man off into a rampage, breaking things, throwing things around, and fighting.I think maybe men come in on that more than women because of the basic physiological pattern. They are more active anyhow. This refers to women, does it not? MR. WOLLNER: Yes, sir.DR. BROMBERG: Certainly the effects are not uniform and cannot be counterbalanced.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Doctor, regarding these 31 admissions out of 100,000, I think it would be interesting to know just what period they cover. Are they of recent origin, or are they scattered pretty well throughout the years?The reason that I bring that up is that the mental hospital at Burma showed, with the increased illicit traffic in Marihuana, the total admissions of insanity cases rose from .87 to 4.35%. I am wondering whether we can expect an increase in such cases, and also whether these 31 cases are more or less of recent origin.93DR. BROMBERG: I can answer that by saying that the admissions already in the past four years of this type of Marihuana insanity is almost twice that which it was during the first four years of our observation, that is, three years of our observation period.Of course, you can realize that many other cases go to private hospitals which pass off without regulatory medical treatment, and there are other factors so great that I would not put much reliance on these figures. I merely give them to you as true data so far as we have available.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have been getting some reports from various sections of the country showing cases of alleged insanity due to Marihuana which have been brought to light.For instance, there were interesting developments in a case in Findlay, Ohio, concerning a fifteen-year-old boy who showed signs of being insane.When asked about his condition he made statements that he had been smoking cigarettes, and an investigation developed the information that there were two defendants, who were brothers, who were in charge of a playground, and they had been selling drugs that is, Marihuana cigarettes, to boys around there; and we found about sixteen pounds concealed above a garage owned by them. These fellows had94stopped selling the drug, because they noticed signs of the boys acting queer, and they became frightened. They were particularly alarmed because of what they thought was an unusual appetite for the drug.We have a questionnaire whereby we ask Marihuana users involved in our cases, all sorts of questions. As a matter of fact, I would like now to revise that questionnaire, after what I have heard here.One-fourth of those users when asked what effect the drug has on them, say, "It gives me a good appetite." "The first cigarette makes me feel hungry." They become hungry after they smoke, have a heavy and exceptionally good appetite. That is their answer without prompting. Yet that question does not appear in the questionnaire.We ask them --- of course, we have to take their word for what they say --- whether they notice any permanent physical or mental effects, and they make statements which confirm the opinions of Dr. Munch and Dr. Bromberg. The answers are:"I believe it has affected my nerves.""I can not keep my mind on one thing long enough to think clearly.""Loss of memory"; "Very bad on nerves"; "Produces twisted thoughts"; "Affects my brain"; "Dulls my head."95"Causes me to become deaf"."I think Im more intelligent.""Makes me tired".  "Hard to think"  "Headache and weakness".  "Seemingly dulls senses"; and so on. Then the question is asked:  "What effects do you obtain from smoking Marihuana?" I think most of the answers confirm what has been said about the distortion of space, time, vision and hearing.The auditory sensibilities are affected.We are running into a great deal of cases which have to do with illicit traffic among musicians.The next question is,  "Have you acquired tolerance?" Quite a number of the users have developed a craving for Marihuana.  Some of them stop after smoking few cigarettes, and there is no sign here that they increase the number that they smoke in a day.Some of them vary between one cigarette and twenty cigarettes a day. Others have smoked it once; some have smoked it for ten years.MR. WOLLNER:  I was wondering whether it would not be better, unless there are other specific questions, to postpone this portion of the Conference, which relates to bio-assay, which pertains to a chemist, because all of those questions are related, and go on with the rest of96the program.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: All right, unless there are questions.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Loewe, do you wish to say some thing?DR. LOEWE: Among other things, I have tried Marihuana's action on a monkey, and I went to it with great hopes because I thought really that the psychic action would come out in this patient.The observations were that the monkey reacts like the dog, and is one more of the few laboratory species which really show the ataxia action.The other observation was that the monkey required higher doses per kilogram body weight than the dog, which was somewhat unexpected, and that all of the lower doses to which I have climbed up through the ratio of higher doses did not show anything which indicated a psychic action.The monkeys do not show this type of abnormality which occurs in Dr. Bromberg's material.MR. WOLLNER: What is the relation in the dosage per kilogram of weight of dog and human being?DR. LOEWE: The dog dosage per kilogram of weight and the human being per kilogram of weight, are fairly97close. The higher doses used in humans are capable of showing the slightest ataxia symptoms, which would point to the fact that the dosage is almost the same.DR. MATCHETT: This ataxia is never apparent in humans at all?DR. LOEWE: I have no experience; I never saw it. DR. BROMBERG: I never saw it either.MR. WOLLNER: Have you any observations about ataxia symptoms comparable to those in dogs as to humans?DR. BROMBERG: No; but I have never seen a large enough quantity, certainly not the tincture or the fluid extract.Dr. Munch can perhaps answer that.DR. MUNCH: I have given doses up to twice that re-cognized, but I have not noticed ataxia in students.DR. LOEWE: There is one factor which, of course, is important, and it is a fact which we notice from tobacco smoking, and that is that the dosage in the form of the cigarette is probably high enough to produce great ataxic symptoms in humans by way of the administration of inhala-tion.DR. HERWICK: I should like to ask Dr. Bromberg, clinically, whether there is a direct physiological addiction to this; that is, are withdrawal symptoms produced or do98you think it is purely a psychic addiction?DR. BROMBERG: My idea of habituation on this matter is different, and there happen to be several, and we should have the thing clarified.Habituation must rest on three cases, two of them being habit forming.The first are the symptoms appearing of withdrawal of the habit forming drug.The second is that the patient develops tolerance. The third is that because he needs more drug he gets the pleasure of addiction, and all medicine agrees that there must be withdrawal.A morphine addict becomes intolerant of withdrawal. He has abdominal pains and various symptoms. When morphine is given he feels better. And that is the basis of a well known treatment.Secondly, there are the people who take increasing doses to feel well. Those two are well acknowledged criteria.In the New York County jail, the physician in charge thinks he sees withdrawal symptoms, but the offenders are not allowed to discuss the offense with anyone except counsel. They say they did smoke it, or they did not. You do not know whether the symptoms are tied up with the99drug.So, I dare say that there are no clear withdrawal symptoms. The thing is not settled. Patients come in after being cut off without the drug.The third is addiction of pleasure-loving, and in that category comes smoking and colorful music and things of that nature. You can say that one has to have pleasure after he becomes addicted to luxury, and that can be looked upon as a valid psychiatric observation.So I would stop there and say that we can say that in the absence of other evidence, that it is essentially hedonistic addiction.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Loewe, you mentioned in your experiment on dogs that you had injected some of these extracts, but, nevertheless, in most of the experiments that had been previously done, I gather, the drug had been taken orally. Of course, we know the stuff is smoked.Your introduction of injection as a method of administration raises the question in my mind as to whether we might, at some future date, anticipate the use of that on humans, in this way? Is there any possibility of this sort? Similar to that which obtains in heroin, for example?DR. LOEWE: Only after the isolation in pure form100I would say, because, at the present time, by use. of the extracts it will not be an element in the whole picture to introduce it by intravenous injection. It has to be injected in alcohol solution, and a slight injection introduces a bad local infection, pain, and so on.MR. WOLLNER: Why were you impelled to use it as an injection as a method of administration, rather than giving it to your dogs orally, Dr. Loewe?DR. LOEWE: It goes faster. In view of the long period of latency, it is much more convenient to use it intravenously injected, because the peak of the curve is reached sooner.MR. WOLLNER: Would you conclude from that that on dogs, for example, as a medium for standardization, that they are not as radically different when the stuff is in-jected as compared to when it is administered orally?DR. LOEWE: Probably that is true, but only to an inconsiderable extent. In a slighter extent the variations have been reported by various examinators [sic] after oral administration.MR. WOLLNER: Will you recommend it as the preferred procedure for bio-assay.DR. LOEWE: I am not sure that I should give the preference to the intravenous way. I have to collect more101experiences.DR. MATCHETT: Are the effects otherwise identical? DR. LOEWE: Identical.MR. WOLLNER: The curve is more rapid; I mean you achieve the peak of the curve more rapidly. DR. LOEWE: Comparatively more rapidly. Beginning after only twenty minutes, and reaching the peak after half an hour or an hour.MR. WOLLNER: Your experiments with mice were continued under the same circumstances?DR. LOEWE: No. As to mice, they were injected orally only.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We can now go on to the sociological phases.In 88 users there were 86 males and only 2 females. I do not know if that holds true generally. We might have got off the rails on the selection, but that is what those figures show.There were 47 white, 20 colored, 15 Latin Americans. The age, of course, is much younger than among opium users. Most of the users were between 17 and 35. The greatest number was between 21 and 25.I believe that was true of a survey made in New York City of the users.102MR. SMITH: We had 100 arrests there between January 1st and October 1st that ran: 99 Negro, 60 white, and 1 yellow; and the nativity, (and this nativity includes New York City and up-state New York:) 5 Mexican, 1 Chinese, 32 Puerto Rican, 2 Greek:, some from South America, Cuba, Panama, and other places with 130 native born.Then, in addition, I have 12 other cases, which to me were more interesting, because those persons who were held for crimes other than possession, and they ran such as unlawful entry, 3 for grand larceny, in addition to their possession; 1 for grand larceny, who admits he is a user.Of course, the other possessor cases probably were users, but they are charged with possession. One with felonious assault with a pistol and possession; One, exposure of person; one felonious assault, both users; and another, felonious assault with possession; and one a wayward minor who admits, in addition to using Marihuana, that he is using heroin; one with assault and robbery, and one who was a policy peddler. They were held on other charges, rather than on mere possession charges.MR. WOLLNER: What is the distribution in sexes, there, Mr. Smith? MR. SMITH: I have not the age nor sex distribution on those.103In at least four cases up-state we can show a definite connection with prostitution. In one we had a good report, not proven, but a good report that the Negro who was in possession was also running a school, teaching youngsters how to smoke Marihuana. Actually, we are not certain about the facts as to that, but that is the report that has been current with that individual. 	COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Do you have anything on occupations of the users? MR. SMITH: We have four as musicians, two as farmers, and those two farmers were actually growing Marihuana on their farms. Many of them state "unemployed". But where most of those that report unemployed are laborers, they usually are associated with prostitution, policy, and some of the allied types of minor grade crimes. Prostitution, to me, seemed the most evident connection.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our 88, the occupation runs anywhere from bartender to unemployed. There are probably 50 different occupations, musicians are second to laborers,-of the 88.The rest were distributed throughout the various104occupations.MR. SMITH: I can give you a breakdown on that section. I have it here in another portion of my data.There were 5 women arrested as sellers, and 8 women arrested for possession, and 147 males arrested for possession, and 7 for selling.MR. WOLLNER: About 10 per cent. MR. SMITH: Yes, sir.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our geographical distribution, we show the larger number of these around New York; a few in the New England areas; a few in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, several in the Middle Atlantic States, about 5 in the South, Kentucky and Tennessee, four; Michigan-Ohio, 13, Michigan-Ohio is second to New York.And then they string out through the rest of the States, with California probably third.MR. SMITH: In States with equal population ratios, as to the metropolitan district, as against up-state New York, our arrests for Marihuana violations in the State, excluding New York City, are about 10 per cent; 15 cases, actually, against 160.They probably will vary, though, as to the development of prosecution and apprehension, as in the various up-state cities they are just beginning to realize in the105last year that Marihuana is a problem, and the figures for 1938 will be higher than 1937. I expect 1939 will again be higher in up-state New York, so that that ratio of about 10 percent should rise.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Bromberg, you were about to start on the sociological phases. Will you give us the benefit of your views on that?DR. BROMBERG: The material that I have collected comes from the Court of General Sessions. This is the criminal court of New York City.Our material is limited to New York County, although it must be remembered that the courts clientele comes from many sections of the country.We must also note that there are many racial types in our material. This is important, because the British investigators have noted in India that Cannabis does not bring out the motor excitement or hysterical symptoms among Anglo-Saxon users that occurs among natives. There are several other difficulties in selecting reliable material, one being the dependence on statements from prisoners without opportunity for objective tests or other corroborative checks, as in the case of other drugs, e.g., heroin or morphine.During the routine interviews of some 17,000 offend-106ers during six and a half years, we have come across several hundred who have had direct experience with Cannabis. Their testimony checks with experimental results and clinical experiences in regard to symptomatology of intoxication, the absence of true addiction, and the negative connection with major crime. Especially is this noteworthy among sexual offenders, and in cases of assault or murder.The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the press, that crime is caused by Marihuana addiction, demand careful scrutiny.The cases analyzed in this study cover a period of more than six years, from 1932 to 1938. Out of over 16,000 prisoners in this six-year period, 200 offenders were convicted of drug charges or found to be users of drugs, although convicted of other charges, in the Court of General Sessions.Cases of possession for sale are handled in the Court of General Sessions which has jurisdiction over felonies. There is no distinction made in the indictment in the Court of General Sessions as to the nature of the drug sold.Of this group of 200 drug offenders, 67 were indicated to be users of Marihuana in any degree and for any duration of time whether convicted of the crime of selling Marihuana or another crime.107The remaining 133 offenders were morphine or heroin users.It is important to note that the only measure of Marihuana usage is the statement of the offender. Since statements of use are conceived by them to be prejudicial to their interests in court, we meet evasion and denial fairly consistently.Our most reliable source of information is from those not arrested for traffic in drugs and questioned in the routine course of psychiatric study.Now, this leaves out thousands of smokers who were never arrested, people who were never arrested, and people that we deal with who were arrested for major crimes, including the one of selling drugs. Those people were all questioned about Marihuana.Those who were arrested for selling drugs, specifically Marihuana, were questioned as to the use of it. Some of those admitted using it, and some did not.All the criminological material that we have has to be taken with a very large dose of salt, and they are either convicted by the time we see them, or about to be, and are still frightened, and want to keep their fair records clean.The only useful record which we have in which we can108throw out and include material as it sounds reasonable to us, and it is checked, so far as the use of the sociological aspects of it, and the effect of it, and so forth, so that in the General Sessions of Criminal Court the 87 cases of Marihuana users consisted of 21 whites (native born and European extraction), 23 Negroes, 20 Puerto Ricans (some of whom are considered to be racial mixtures), 2 Mexicans, and one Negro and Indian mixture.Of the 67 studied, 46 were convicted of possession and sale of drugs, and 21 other charges. Among the 21 cases convicted of crimes other than the possession of and sale of drugs, were eight charges of burglary, five of grand larceny, three of robbery, two of assault, one each of petit larceny, forgery, and first degree murder, and none of sexual offenses. Burglary, grand larceny, and robbery, then, account for 16 of the 21 cases. There were but two sex cases of any description in the history of the Marihuana cases, in both of which sodomy occurred as previous offenses. In three cases, the individuals were what might be called constant users of Marihuana. One of these had commenced to use the Marihuana three years previous to the current conviction; another, with a sixteen year record, indicated Marihuana, had been used for fifteen years; the third referred to his use of Marihuana as109"several years duration. None of the offenders reported any lasting effects from Marihuana. Interrogations as to the habit-forming nature of Marihuana were all answered in the negative by the prisoners.So that in the General Sessions of Criminal Court the 67 people who were offenders were involved in selling Marihuana or gave some history of using it. Most of those people had previous charges, not including drugs, as to being criminals of other types. The largest proportion were not drug users.The next largest number had no previous connection with the 67. Fifty had never been arrested for taking any drugs. This was their first contact with the court. These were all special cases in the Special Sessions Court, which deals with misdemeanors and other cases.Here, there were 202 cases. Thirteen were there on the first charge of any kind, that being a Marihuana charge. Those things do not mean very much to me, as they simply give a certain picture, a picture of people being picked up and brought in for using Marihuana, and there is not a very heavy weighted criminal record behind them. Drug users are not Marihuana users in the main.In the Court of Special Sessions in the same picture, in the same six-year period, of approximately 75,000 in-110dictments for all crimes, there were 6,000 convictions for possession and use of drugs. Since neither the law, the district attorney, nor the police department make any distinction between the several kinds of narcotics, their arraignments or indictments, in Special Sessions as well as General Sessions, there were no figures from which to estimate the number of Marihuana users as distinguished from the number of users of other drugs. We therefore adopted a system of sampling the 6,000 cases in order to arrive at an approximate estimation of the total number of Marihuana users who came into conflict with the law. In this sampling, we examined the records of l,500 cases, or 25 per cent of the total of 6,000. Of these, 135 were Marihuana charges. From this, it was estimated that about 540 cases, or 9 per cent of all drug cases coming to Special Sessions over a period of six years, were users of Marihuana. Analyzing this sample of 135 cases, it was found that 93 had no previous record; 8 had a previous drug charge or charges, only; 5 had previous charges, including drugs; and 29 had records not including drug charges. Among those with longer records, that is, from four to seven previous arrests, none showed progression in crime from drugs to other crimes.111	In considering all the Marihuana cases in both General Sessions and Special Sessions Courts, a total of 202 convictions, it is an impressive fact that only 30 offenders had been arrested before for drug charges. This does not argue very strongly for Marihuana as a  drug that initiates criminal careers. Where there is a series of crimes committed by one individual, our records show that he passes from other forms of crime to the use of drugs. Thus, in only three cases out of our series of 67, in which an arrest associated with Marihuana was recorded, did the criminal career start with the use of Marihuana, and in 7 cases out of 67 criminal activity started with other drugs. Ninety per cent of the group is accounted for by those who (1) have no criminal record except as drug users, and (2) have a previous record from which they turned to drugs This leaves a small minority of offenders whose criminal careers started with drugs and went on to other crimes like larceny, assault, and so on. As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions in the General Sessions cases (our only method of estimation), it can be said that drugs generally do not initiate criminal careers. Similarly, in Special Sessions, only 8 had previous charges of drugs, and 3.7 per cent has previous charges of drugs and other112petty crimes. In the vast majority of cases in this group of 135, then, earlier usage did not apparently predispose these offenders to crime, even that of drug usage. Whether the first offender Marihuana cases go on to major crime can only be ascertained by referring to the findings of the General Sessions Courts. The expectancy of major crimes following the use of Cannabis, then, is small, according to our experiencesThe problem of habituation of Cannabis is one of grave importance According to the statements of confirmed heroin or morphine addicts, Marihuana is not a habit-forming drug. Naturally, where it is used in conjunction with heroin, morphine or cocaine another problem presents itself.Occasionally, an astute drug peddler will adulterate Marihuana cigarettes with morphine or heroin in order to retain his clientele. Care must be exercised in evaluating the question of Marihuana habituation, so that we are not dealing with this type of adulterated Cannabis.The medical diagnosis of habituation depends on the accepted criteria of acquired tolerance and after-effect upon withdrawal of the drug. Regarding the subject of tolerance, users of Marihuana examined in the clinic universally state that an increase in dosage is not neces-113sary to achieve the desired effect as time goes on.The increase in cigarette consumption, sometimes noted, is simply related to how often and how long the smoker wants to experience these effects.As to the question of withdrawal symptoms, cases have never, to the knowledge of the writer, been observed systematically in an environment where control of the drug can be exercised. Although of secondary value in deciding the problem of habituation, it should be noticed that experience with experimental subjects indicates that after usage of the drug and its cessation no withdrawal symptoms are reported.It has not been possible to observe satisfactorily Marihuana users upon their entrance into custody to establish their behavior after cessation of usage. For one thing, the law does not allow questioning of a defendant prior to trial regarding his charge. The history of the offense cannot be discussed except with counsel, but an offender can be questioned in the course of medical treatment. The fact that Marihuana cases do not request medical treatment upon their incarceration argues for the absence of withdrawal symptoms.As is well known, morphine, opium, etc., users become violently ill upon being taken in custody, away from the114source of their drug, and are vociferous in their demands for treatment.Nevertheless, the wide discrepancies between the reports of other jurisdictions and ours in the question of addiction to Cannabis demands a serious attempt to establish the facts in the case.Up to March 26, 1938, Cannabis was classed as a habit-forming drug in Section 1751 of the Penal Code, based on Public Health Law, Article 22, Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. Due to difficulty in this Court in proving it to be a habit-forming drug (case of People vs. Williams), the Law Revision Commission, appointed by the New York State Legislature, was requested to amend the Penal Code to read "narcotic" rather than "habit-forming" drug.From a legal point of view, therefore, the problem of whether it is habit-forming or not is not vital in this and many other States, since its use as a narcotic by un-authorized persons is an offense.The writer believes it highly desirable and important that a Commission be appointed to examine the matter scientifically as was done in the case of narcosan and other reputed drug cures in 1921 at the Bellevue Psychopathic Hospital under Commissioner Patterson of the Department of Correction.115The most that one can say on the basis of ascertainable facts is that prolonged Marihuana usage constitutes a "sensual" addiction, in that the user wishes to experience again and again the ecstatic sensations and feelings which the drug produces. Unlike morphine addiction, which is biochemically as well as psychologically determined, prolonged Marihuana usage is essentially in the services of the hedonistic elements of the personality. Those are the main conclusions I have developed from that.Then we took the cases of the Marihuana users and tried to break those down. It indicates that no murderers were found among this group of 67, not one murder committed in these six or seven years by a Marihuana user.There were no sex cases among these 67. We have, however, seven hundred odd sex cases, from first degree rape down to exhibitionism, and in the course of the six or seven years not one of them was a Marihuana user, according to history or physical examination.At the time of our examination, two of them had sex cases in their history some years before. One was sodomy, and the other some other type of offense.Of all of these people, only three called themselves116constant users.  One for three years and twelve months, and the others nine months.There is one other point which I would like to mention and that is the case of a man named Joseph Ogden who is reported among others in Mr. Merrill's paper as having been an addict.I saw him and spent some time with him. He was a psychopathic individual. I think he had been in the State hospital at Lexington, and had had several other arrests. But nothing in his history indicated Marihuana.  In other words, the newspaper accounts must be discounted. The fact of the matter was that he had not even been a drug addict, but was a homosexualist. The offender was murdered by him and shoved into a trunk.  I do not know whether he disarticulated his arms or not, but he sent the trunk to the express station, and they saw blood oozing out of it, and picked him up.He told the story rather frankly. It was a horrible crime. I think Marihuana was innocent of that. I am sure of that, because I have been able to check that very carefully.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER:  We have observed two cases of sex crimes where we have been able to prove the connection with Marihuana.117A boy named Perez, in Baltimore raped a ten-year-old girl, and of course he blamed it on Marihuana.It so happened that, just a year before that, Perez had been picked up by the Baltimore police for the sale of 2,500 grains of Cannabis, and got three months in jail. This sex offense happened the following year.And there is another case down in Corpus Christi that we have been able to establish, where an oil worker with a good reputation, obtained and smoked a cigarette, after which he raped his young daughter.Those are two cases that I know of in which we have proof.In the case of Perez, we do not know what else might have been wrong with him, but he was definitely a user and a seller of Marihuana.I believe that Mr. Smith has had a great deal of experience up through New York State.MR. SMITH: We have had one case in the last two or three months, which has been of great interest to the Motor Vehicle Department. A youngster in Mount Kisco, close to New York City, was involved in an automobile accident in that village by hitting three parked cars during the evening. When he was apprehended by the police, he literally tore the officer's blouse from his shoulder,118and he had great difficulty in subduing him. During the evening, they first thought it was alcohol, but later the youngster admitted having used a "reefer". From the information we obtained from him, we apprehended an individual who was growing it, and I think we picked up about six pounds. We had another case farther up-state, not as well established, but apparently pretty well shown, of the inability of the automobile driver to perceive distance and speed. So that factor will be of considerable interest to those interested in traffic control. Because of that recent case in White Plains, we have had some inquiry from the State Motor Vehicle Department, and they arc considering, I believe, the advisability of revoking the licenses of operators who can be shown to be users of Marihuana, in the same fashion that we are now able to do after showing evidence of narcotism. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Is that in your State law now?MR. SMITH: No, sir, it is not in our State law now.In fact, I do not know if it was decided that we could get away with it, but through the Motor Vehicle Department we could, as one of the requirements in the matter of119ability on the questionnaire in New York up-state you have to state whether or not you use narcotic drugs.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Marihuana users, when arrested, want to fight.Their motor impulses seem to be working It takes, sometimes, four or five officers to subdue a man, and they sometimes wreck the living quarters in doing so.We do not have anything like that in arresting opium users.The agents proceed very cautiously when arresting a Marihuana user.MR. SMITH: It conflicts with alcohol which seem to be the worst cases yet, and we have had a few cases who used both. Those are perhaps the few that you have run across. Then, of course, we have those who have just been on the reefer alone.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER, I have noticed a tendency towards more gunplay among Marihuana users than among opium users.MR. SMITH: Than among opium users?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes. And there has been some gun play.The first case that we arrested under the Marihuana Act, (I happened to have been present in the Denver court120when they brought this fellow up before the judge.) had been a user for a number of years. He was only 23 years old, but many of his arrests were for assault.I have noticed that many of these violators have a record of assault.In Wilmington, Delaware, there was the case of John Rhodes, who attacked an officer with a knife and was shot and killed resisting arrest.MR. SMITH: I have four out of twelve in one city where the charges, in addition to possession, are assault.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In many cases, particularly around Ohio, the officers are called in cases of disturbance and they find a Marihuana user with some stuff on him.DR. MUNCH: A chap I talked to told me that the use of gin came in very particularly with the use of a reefer. Is that true with opium? Do Marihuana users tend to take gin along with smoking of the reefer?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I do not know about that. We have not run into that.DR. MUNCH: The point I am asking could be that the alcohol there would tend to increase the solubility of any material that has been swallowed, and, therefore, they would get greater effect under such conditions than if they. had not taken the alcohol.121DR. MATCHETT One of the Internal Revenue officials, formerly in Texas, has told us that down there persons use alcohol and Marihuana together, and where they were very wild it took four or five officers to bring a man in. He attributed that to the combined effect rather than the effect of either one.MR. SMITH: Still, there is a good deal of fancy on the part of some officers, whose experience with Marihuana is new.I have had some experience with one or two sheriffs. I know of one who recently employed the services of two other sheriffs and four deputy sheriffs to secure the arrest of a farmer on a farm where the material was growing.Any youngster, 18 or 19 years old, could have gone there and done it alone. This was because of the first experience of those officers with it. I think the men were anxious to capitalize on the possible publicity which might attend the arrest. So that sometimes you run up against that problem, where they report that it is necessary for a number of them to subdue an individual. That may be an effort to make it appear a more serious type of crime.So that I think we have to put our tongues in our122cheeks as to this, also.DR. MATCHETT: This story came from Deputy Commissioner Berkshire, of the Alcohol Tax Unit.MR. SMITH: We did have in White Plains this additional situation: The fact appeared there that with children of high school age with good financial and social background, that two of those individuals, who were in difficulties there, stated that the smoking of reefers had become a part of the initiation in certain clubs or school fraternities.That probably is a little bit unusual, as an incident, but that has been definitely reported in that vicinity. DR. WRIGHT: Where was that?MR. SMITH: That was in White Plains, New York.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Did you not arrest a youngster sixteen years old for selling?Mr.. SMITH: Yes, sir. There were two youngsters of excellent background, and fine social connections. That was probably a larger factor, as compared to anything else, I think, and that was that they probably had too much financial and social backing. That may be more true in that particular county than in other counties in that State.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: You mentioned a case of a123young man using Marihuana and heroin.MR. WITH: Yes, sir. That was in New York City. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: What had he used first, do you know?MR. SMITH: I do not know. That, I extracted from the Police Department records last Tuesday, but I did .not have time to go back and get the individual cards, and I doubt very much whether the information which appears in the police cards will show that.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have not run into many peddlers of heroin who also handle Marihuana, and we have not run into many users of Marihuana who are also heroin users. However, as Dr. Bouquet points out, in Tunis there is a tendency to switch from Marihuana to heroin.Have you run into any cases like that, Doctor? DR. BROMBERG: I have seen many drug addicts, who have, once or twice, they say, tried Marihuana, and have dropped it, because it was not strong enough. Most true addicts start with heroin or opium.MR. SMITH: Do you not think that that might be more the association with individuals than the association with the drug?DR. BROMBERG: Perhaps. And there is one other fact, and that is that alcohol and Marihuana have a more potent124effect than alcohol alone.I had a case where a man started smoking Marihuana. The seller introduced heroin, he noticed the effect, and he became a user, but, of course, that was not through any choice.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: As to this question of using alcohol with Marihuana, I recall a case in Indiana where a man was arrested who had an infusion of the drug in alcohol. How do they do that? Drink it and smoke a cigarette?DR. BROMBERG: No. I think it is a sociological matter. He uses the gin with it, or otherwise, and it depends on the amount of money and the locality, and they smoke, and it represents having some fun, the effect which they look for.MR. WOLLNER: I wonder how much can be deduced from the present figures in the matter of crime, in view of the fact that these figures represent a static picture whereas the entire Marihuana picture, so far as I know, is on an up-curve.Have you noticed any tendencies that are not static over a period of years Dr. Bromberg?DR. BROMBERG: That is a very good question, because the alcohol thing depends on the relationship between the two.125But I have been in contact with the court for about five years, and the number of Marihuana peddlers has not increased, but the number of Marihuana users we do not know about.MR. WOLLNER: In what order, would you say?DR. BROMBERG: It is impossible to say. These are only approximations, I admit. It all depends on the police activities.They make a drive, and the figures go up. They forget about it, and there are no figures.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Are there any questions as to this phase of the problem?I must say that we are still sort of groping as to a lot of those questions.DR. MUNCH: May I intrude there, just as a matter of difference in mind, as to any sort of figure representing the total number of users of Marihuana? I mean, has anybody said anything as to the number of heroine users being the same as the opium addicts, or less or more, or as to the Marihuana?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: It is impossible to say. The eradication of 16,000 acres of Marihuana during the past year means nothing as to numbers of users. We are sure it was never meant for the illicit traffic. Probably12615,000 of the 16,000 acres was wild growth.DR. BROMBERG: You mean additional acreage than that which had humans on it?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have arrested over 1,000. The Bureau of Prisons is a little concerned about that, because it is causing a definite increase in their jails.Puerto Rico is starting to send a lot of these sellers and users to jail, which they did not do before. There has been a tremendous up-grade in apprehensions.I do not recall just what the arrests have been by states throughout the country. These are Federal arrests. State arrests are probably over that figure.I should say that the 16,000 acres represent only a drop in the bucket, because I know in one State there are 300,000 acres of the wild growth. We have a job here on eradication that is just stupendous.Fortunately, a lot of this acreage that is discovered we hear about through people who do not tell anybody else about it.The illicit trafficker is looking for growth. I cannot understand why the New York trafficker had to go out to Minnesota and strip some of those hemp fields.MR. SMITH: We had two instances where the material was either reported to be, or actually was, of western127growth, and they were getting a higher price than was paid apparently for New York grown. Whether that was bona fide, as to the material from New York State, or as to the material from Minnesota, I do not know, or whether it was a question of price boosting as to the New York sales prices, we still do not know.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think within a couple of blocks from where Dr. Munch lives you can walk into as much [as] fifty acres that has not been destroyed.DR. MUNCH: They went over about 300 acres of that this year and ran out of C.C.C. men and then stopped.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: That is a tremendous problem with us. We have used many of the agencies of the Government, the W.P.A. has helped, and other agencies. We have discouraged all of these well-meaning people throughout the country who want to use Boy Scouts in the removal of' Marihuana.DR. MUNCH: We have had considerable cooperation through Admiral Foote, and the Automobile Vehicle Department of our State.DR. WRIGHT: May I ask Dr. Bromberg whether or not his contacts with these patients show whether or not there is any indication of whether these cigarettes used were tobacco which had been adulterated with Marihuana?128DR. BROMBERG: My source of information is the Police Department, and the cigarettes that they have gathered up are filled definitely with Marihuana, and no other compound.MR. SMITH: I would like to ask Dr. Bromberg, or anybody else who has had experience as to the likelihood of development of perversion.Has anybody had any experience on that?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Kolb, have you run into anything on that? DR. KOLB: No, sir. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: How many of these users have you in Lexington?DR. KOLB: There are about one hundred patients who have used it occasionally, but they are mostly opium and heroin users. About twenty-five have used nothing but Marihuana alone. But, just as Dr. Bromberg has stated they use it occasionally, just to see if it is another drug that they need.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Are these Marihuana users, as such, a younger group than your opium smokers?DR. KOLB: Most of the time.129For instance, we had a man from Puerto Rico, about fifty years old, who had been a judge, and who said it was a political plot that he should get four years. I do not know how politics came into it.He said, "Well, they are trying to get rid of me."He never had any criminal record. That seemed to be a rather strong sentence for users.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have noticed the tendency in Puerto Rico, even with heroin users, to give them five years for use only.DR. KOLB: Yes, they give them a very severe sentence.The district attorney wrote me and wanted to take it up with judge Cooper. I told him that, from the stand-point of rehabilitation, it was a rather harmful matter to put a man in prison for four years. He is liable to learn a lot of things in prison and then go out and hate society and use them against society.It is my idea that users should get one year, and especially the fellow who does not have a criminal record.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I do not think the courts here are being too severe.DR. KOLB' No, they are not.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: They are giving the seller130a great deal more than the user, on the average. DR. KOLB: Of course.MR. WOLLNER: What does your investigation represent as to these twenty-five users of Marihuana alone, as compared to those who use other drugs other than Marihuana?DR. KOLB: Of course, we get them after they have stopped using the drug, and after they have escaped the acute effects of the drugs, There is only one psychiatric case, which we are not quite sure of, that has been due to using the Marihuana drug.MR. WOLLNER: I am going to ask an awfully unfair question.What percentage of these people would have been in jail if they had not smoked Marihuana? DR. KOLB: Well, very few of them.MR. WOLLNER: They would hot have been in jail?DR. KOLB: That applies to a great many users of drugs.A great many of them have done other things, particularly thievery, or other slippery types of work. MR. WOLLNER: Are they slightly impaired?DR. KOLB: They are slightly impaired, partly due to the psychiatric condition, and to the distress of needing the drug.131There are very few violent types of crime with the opium addict.Our experience with the Marihuana addicts is not enough to give an answer. I rather think that with the alcoholic-Marihuana user, that he would become a type of drug addict that would cause many crimes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER:  There was a case in Canada, Mr. Lancaster, there a Marihuana user had withdrawal symptoms similar to those of an opium user.MR. LANCASTER: Yes, sir. That was the boy who was picked up and had used Marihuana for a long time. He was out of work, had no continual employment.He tried to smoke Marihuana, rather liked it, and after several months of usage, he was jailed, and kept there for about a week.His case was remanded, and he reported feeling tingling pains and needles in the hands and feet, and he was greatly upset and pleaded for a narcotic again. He was suffering with an imparity of that order. I do not think it was tried to see whether giving him Marihuana should relieve that case or not.The general impression is that there is no great suffering, and if they are relieved from it after the first five days, naturally they want it again, but they do132not break down if they do not get it.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Bromberg, have you come across any occasion of drinking Marihuana in the form of tea extract, or something of that sort? DR. BROMBERG: No.MR. SMITH: Is there any evidence of it being used in Canada? On any convictions, have you had any evidence of it ?MR. LANCASTER: Not there, no. No, sir, so far there have been no samples submitted to us as yet.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: None that I know of.But I understand they do mix them, mix it with sweets, in northern Africa.MR. SMITH: There have been one or two reports that they do mix it in California.MR. WOLLNER: For your ears, I can tell you, Mr. Smith, that all of the chemists are sitting on the edge of their seats, worrying about that happeningMR. SMITH: And there is a question as to the toxic effects which could be present.MR. WOLLNER: And there may not be any way in which we can examine it. We are hoping that they do not guess that gasoline will extract it.DR. MATCHETT: Is it true that that is a common form133in the Far East?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: No, not in The Far East, but in the Near East. DR. MATCHETT: In the Near East, yes. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We seem to have covered the  sociological phases, so far as we are able to and I am going to turn the choir over, at this point, to Dr. Wollner, who will proceed with the chemical phases. This is where most of the spade work has got to be done, anyway.STATEMENT OF MR.. H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENTMR. WOLLNER: The problem is not yet resolved. We are not yet in a position to know exactly what it is we are looking for, and, within four walls, I am perfectly frank to admit that al]. the chemists I have met, who are interested in this field, are at a complete loss when asked to prophesy the character of the narcotic principle, which we are going to eventually disclose.The situation is as bad in the chemical literature as it is in all of the other phrases.I should certainly be within the reasonable bounds of correctness when I say that ninety percent of the stuff that has been written on the chemical end of Can-134nabis is absolutely wrong, and, of the other ten percent, at least two-thirds of it is of no consequence.That ninety per cent has had, however, to be dealt with, and chemists all over the world have been interested in Cannabis, and in the past few years have spent a goodly portion of their time upsetting a lot of this shibboleth and tradition which has been set up, probably a thousand years, so as to clear the ground and to be able to proceed in a more orderly fashion.In this work the evidence, by force of circumstance, compels us to turn to the pharmacologist for guidance.As Dr. Loewe ably expressed before, since we have no test in the chemical laboratories for indicating the presence or absence of the narcotic principle, every bit of the exploratory work of consequence that has been engaged upon had to be paralleled with work in the field of bio-assay.The chemical problem is so obvious that it does not require much delineation.Chemists, enforcement administrative chemists, are interested in two things. First, and immediately, they want to know how to find and detect the presence of Cannabis sativa, or any of its products that are narcotic in character.In other words, most enforcement officers will make135a seizure in some form, solid or liquid, and the question asked is, "Is this Marihuana?" And no satisfactory technique for answering such a question obtains today.That does not say that in most of the cases that come before the chemists they are not in a definite position to make a definite statement, that before them the substance is definitely Cannabis sativa, but they can not do it as definitely as in the case of morphine, opium, and heroin.The second question they would like answered is,"What is the narcotic principle, or what are the narcotic principles present?"That question is not one of enforcement so much as of general administration.The Commissioner of Narcotics has the problem of deciding, at times, what regulations shall be invoked in respect to an industry or an agricultural phase of this problem.The question arises, how long shall we have to wait before the resin is decomposed, during the rotting process, for example, and the only way I would know how to answer that question is to know how long that principle will exist during that rotting exhibition. Of course, we do not know. We can not answer that question.The question arises, can recommendations be made to136exempt the use of certain portions of the plant and certain industrial directions, as far as governmental regulation is concerned, be given by virtue of the fact that they are harmless. No statement can he made on that score.So, it becomes important, from an administrative point of view, for administrative chemists, associated with the carrying out of the Marihuana Act, to have a more competent picture of the drug, as competent as obtains at the present time in respect to the poppy and its secretion, opium, and its products, morphine, heroin, codeine, and so on.This drug, peculiarly enough, has withstood competent attack for an extensive period of time.Before the laws were passed controlling the opium picture, chemists were able to supply a fairly excellent background, against which such legislation and regulations might have been and were in fact predicated.But, in the case of Marihuana, there is no such background. It is just a fog; without question the psychiatrists and bioassayists and agricultural people know far more about Cannabis than do the chemists.So far as knowing anything about the plant, today, is concerned, all they can tell you is that such and such137a product is not a narcotic, such and such a product is non-narcotic, and they are trying to shrink the residue further and further, but they have not touched it.Of great assistance in clarifying the issue has been the work undertaken by Dr. Blatt, in reviewing the literature.Dr. Blatt has prepared a paper consisting of a critical review of the literature on narcotics, published in the journal of the Washington Academy of Sciences on the 15th of November. I have a number of copies of the paper here, and also a chart setting forth the general character of the critique, so that a person who is a technical man can get a picture of the thing.I am going to ask that only these people who have a working knowledge of chemical symbology receive them, and we will try to get enough copies to mail them out to you later.I am going to ask Dr. Blatt if he will be so kind as to offer a picture of his survey as to the chemical constituents of Cannabis Sativa.STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. BLATT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.DR. BLATT: That will not take very long, because as Mr. Wollner has said, we are only dealing with two-138thirds of ten percent of the material. Very briefly, the story is, you can take Cannabis and extract it with one of several solvents, or combinations of solvents and obtain a physiologically active extract. The only successful technique that has been applied to that so far has been a distillation process, and through the distillation you can get out of it three substances, which I will simply name and pass on. One of them is a paraffin hydrocarbon known as nonacosane, that is, physiologically, inactive. If you do a distillation, you get a definite distillate, and all chemists who have worked with Cannabis know it as red oil. Unfortunately, it also was known as Cannabinol, and that has been the cause of much trouble. 	This red oil looks a good bit like a lubricating oil of a rather poor quality, a semi-solid material at room temperature. That material we will simply call narcotic-active by a physiological test. The real nasty principle about the situation is that that material behaves as if it were a chemical substance, and there have been three different formulas proposed for it. One of the formulas has Cot so far as two individuals having agreed upon it. Then the hitch comes. In about139forty years, three English workers succeeded in preparing and isolating one pure chemical substance from this red oil.They called that Cannabinol, and the one individual substance derived from it is also called Cannabinol. For thirty years, nobody following them was ever able to get this pure Cannabinol.So, we went ahead and worked with Cannabinol, and assumed that we were working with the pure substanceThen, roughly about eight years ago, the pure chemical individual, pure Cannabinol, again was secured for the second time, and apparently it can be repeated.Pure Cannabinol is the fourth chemical substance to be gotten out of Cannabis, and it is the fourth one to be lacking in narcotic activity. It is toxic, however, and it is quite possible that some of the .activity of Canna-binol, some of this complex activity that has been referred to during the morning, is due to pure Cannabinol as a chemical individual.The chemical structure of pure Cannabinol has been fairly well worked out. It is not definitely settled. We do not need to go into that There is one more thing that should be pointed out, and that is the fact that for thirty years perfectly com-140petent chemists have taken this red oil, distilled, and worked with it as if a pure chemical. It not only gives analytical values of resin, but they are even more complex. You can carry out the chemical reactions with this.So, let us refer to red oil as the crude Cannabinol; and the chemical individual as pure Cannabinol. You can run chemical reactions. You can reduce an acetylate and the products you get out are still analyzable for the proper derivatives of crude Cannabinol. That is, where everybody has gone haywire.There is one ray of hope, and a pretty definite one, as to the confusion of a mixture which was taken to be a definite chemical substance, and that is why progress has been so slow, and that is the fact that we have no way quantitatively of following the definite reaction of the chemical principle..The one ray of hope I mention is the fact that you can take red oil, crude Cannabinol, remove one-fourth, which is inactive as pure Cannabinol, and the residual three-fourths still retains chemical activity. There is where the work begins. That is as far as has been gotten chemically.There is just one more point here. As far as I have been able to find, and I received corroboration at noon, there not only is no correlation, or no correlation has141been made, so far as I can find. out, between the various color reactions for Cannabis and the narcotic activity, and I was told at noon that, not only had there been none made, but it was because there definitely is none. So we can not fail to follow the activity as to this color test.I may be getting off in deep water, but that is the apparent final analysis. There is one more thing, and that will finish it up.I hope not many people will be misled by the principle that the active principle of Cannabis is Cannabinol. You will find it even there. The active fraction which you will find, which is more or less of a mixture, is called Cannabinol.You can find a chemical substance which is not active. I think that covers it.MR. WOLLNER: I think that adds oils to the fire. DR. MUNCH: Is there an active substance there? MR. WOLLNER: I will take your word for it, and Bromberg's on the basis of his research in New YorkIt leads us pretty much to where we started.I think if all the research work done so far were dumped together by a group of chemists, or if they started out today on this investigation, that they would be exactly the same as they are now inside of six months;142	that is, all of the information which we have, which is very little, could be accumulated in six months. Recognizing that situation, the Treasury two years ago undertook to lay the basis for a competent attack on the problem. We did not know what that would consist of, but we knew sound, fundamental, reproducible information and data had to be obtained. The first thing we did was to contact the Department of Agriculture, and with their cooperation, there was planted a plot at Arlington Farms over here, last summer, and the summer before, where the plant was observed in its various stages of growth, and which furnished us all of the criteria the literature offered us in the past. As I mentioned earlier, about ninety percent of all of it was thrown out. The report of the first year's investigation was published in the journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association. I have a number of copies here, if there are any technical men who have not soon that report. An equivalent report is being prepared at the present time on the basis of this summers work.We have obtained several tons of Marihuana. We have extracted or are extracting huge quantities of that mater-143ial, in an effort to provide a satisfactory amount on the basis of which a broad attack on the problem may be predicated.Dr. Matchett is in charge of the Treasury's own immediate attack on the problem, and I believe he has some information which he can lay before you this afternoon. Is that correct, Dr. Matchett? STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, TREASURY DEPARTMENT. DR. MATCHETT: The problem is clarified a little bit by recognizing that there are two distinct phases involved, the first of which must be pretty well finished before the second can begin. First of all, there is the separation of the active principle from other material, and second, the characterization of it. Before a competent separation can be undertaken, we must be in possession of suitable assay methods. We, of course, are interested in those manifestations of Marihuana that lead to the effects, which have led in turn, to the passage of the ActWe are not sure, I take it, whether the substance produces ataxia in the dog, or sleep in the mouse, or corneal(?) anesthesia in the rabbit is the same as the one in which we are interested.144Nevertheless, something must be adopted, and by common consent, a dog assay, with all its faults, has been the method of choice.It seems obvious that these various principles, if more than one exists, will be each characterized on its own merits.In considering this phase of it, also, it must not be forgotten that any one of the effects may be combinations, and any of the effects that we are able to measure may possibly be combined effects, of which the bad effect of the drug itself may be only one. With that so disposed of, it is possible to recognize that certain characteristics of the so-called resin are fairly well defined already, although I think we must recognize that the resin itself is variable, and to what extent, we are not yet able to say very definitely.As Dr. Blatt said, there have been certain individuals isolated in pure form, of which the most important are Cannabinol and the hydrocarbon nonacosame.There is also present definitely in the resin a substance that responds to the alkaline Beam test.There are still other substances among all those responsible for the psychological and physiological activity; of such there may be one or more.145And finally, there are those volatile oils, in which there is no tremendous interest other than to dispose of them before being able to isolate the drug.Now, little or nothing is known of the nature of the active substance. All attacks on the problem have, thus far, broadly speaking, produced negative results. The thing, in any event, is not an alkaloid, because we are not able to extract it into acid solutions from solvents, nor does it contain any nitrogen. It is not an acid, since it does not extract into alkaline solution. And it has not been shown to contain any carbonyl groups because it does not form any derivatives with the common reagents for such.There is evidence on the other hand that it forms esters and that it is an aromatic substance, the latter from the refractive index of the most active fraction. From that it would appear to be a phenolic compound. The substance is thermostable under rather rigorous conditions, but it is quickly destroyed in the presence of oxygen.It is also quite likely that it is unsaturated since reduction by hydrogen is possible.But all those, unfortunately, are properties of the active mixtures that Dr. Blatt referred to, rather than of any chemical individual. They are all of some assis-146tance though, in considering methods by which the problem may be attacked.Now, only distillation in a rather high vacuum has been of any assistance thus far in fractionating the mixture, known as Cannabis resin. The volatile oils are so separated with relative ease. The substance responsible for the acid Beam test, whatever it may be, is removed, the acid test no longer appearing in the distillate.The hydrocarbon which does appear in the distillate can be removed by crystallization from alcohol or some other solvent, and pure Cannabinol can be removed as a crystalline acetate or paranitry benzoate.As Dr. Blatt pointed out, this point is where the trail ends at present, with the exception of a brief note indicating that it is definitely possible to find physiological effects in the material remaining after Cannabinol has been removed.It is at that point that we purpose ultimately to actually begin.The former distillation has been carried out at pressures anywhere from atmospheric down to a reported pressure of about five-one thousandths of a millimeter.From the character of the work in which this was reported it would appear that the reported pressures must147be taken with a grain of salt. No essential difference however has appeared in the products of fractionation. The material, as you may be aware, is an exceedingly difficult material to work with, a heavy tar-like oil, and it does not lend itself readily to distillation by any means.We have considered that at this point it might be preferable to resort to molecular distillation in an effort to obtain a more competent separation. If this hope be realized, a number of avenues of attack are opened or re-opened. That is, among other things the action of solvents may be reinvestigated, and of particular interest will be the action of solvents at low temperatures.Then there are possibilities of preferential adsorption, and also it may be possible to prepare crystalline derivatives. They fail to appear from treatment of the present mixtures.Now, the molecular distillation outfit that we have chosen for this work is of the static type, rather than the cyclic still with which you are probably more familiar, because the higher boiling fractions of this material are so viscous that they probably would not cycle with in that still without special precautions to maintain a high temperature.148The original material has been distilled before passing it into the molecular still in a flash apparatus that operates under a good vacuum. This is necessary since the crude oil is particularly prone to spit in the molecular still and ruin the distillation.More specifically, the process that we are following is extraction from the plant material with cold alcohol, alcohol being chosen as a solvent rather than petroleum ether, on account of fire hazard. This process is followed by a liquid extraction from the alcohol by pentane, which does away with a lot of water soluble material, and tarry material of a nondescript character.We have not yet thoroughly satisfied ourselves that all of the active material is extracted by pentane, but we believe we have every reason to think it is.Then the pentane, which incidentally, extracts quite a little alcohol, is removed, and the alcohol is also removed.The material is then passed through the flash process that I referred to a moment ago, and the distillate from here is placed in the molecular still. That is the point which the investigation has reached at this parti-cular moment.Now, it is expected to divide the oil into about ten149fractions in the stills, then to remove Cannabinol as the acetate and the hydrocarbon by precipitation from a suitable solvent, and then to refractions, to the remaining material.The work from that point, of course, all depend upon the results of the fractionations, and can not be very definitely foreseen, other than that those processes, to which I referred a moment ago, will be applied.Now, it would have been possible to have attacked certain phases of the problem along a number of other lines, a few of which I will suggest in conclusion. The first would be a characterization of those volatile oils, which have been referred to, and which would be of interest from a purely chemical point of view.They are separated with relative ease, by steam distillation, for example. No one, of course, has been very much interested in them, and that line of attack has not been followed.Again, someone might become interested in the substance which responds to the acid Beam test. It can be removed from a solution in petroleum either by means of alkali, and presumably would be isolated with relatively little difficulty, but experience shows that resins so prepared are not physiologically active, hence little in-150terest is attached to that substance.A third possible line of attack would have been in connection with the Beam test itself. The development of the color is due to a product resulting from oxidation of some substance which is present In the resin. This substance is soluble in aqueous alkali, and is precipitated by acid. It can be readily extracted from acid solution. It, of course, is not actually the substance which responds to the alkaline Beam test, but it would be of great interest from the purely scientific point of view.MR. WOLLNER: I would like to make a couple of announcements.Those of you who are not particularly interested in the chemical attack here may find this part of the program a little arduous, and I want you to understand that you are at liberty to leave and interrupt if you want to, as I think this part of the program might be a little obtuse at certain points.Dr. Blatt has just indicated that there are some errors in the material which he distributed on the critical review.Do you want to indicate those?DR. BLATT: There is one error in the literature, for example on page 469 in the middle of the page are three151formulas, just one the paragraph beginning in the middle of those formulas. There is a carbon atom, a "C", a single line to an oxygen "0", and that should be a double line to make it conform to the other two.Then, on that flow sheet, on the left-hand half of the page, the second of those errors reads "dihydrogenation with sulphur," and that should be dehydrogenation", and not "dihydrogenation".MR. WOLLNER: As you gathered, Dr. Matchett's attack there is directed at the heart of the problem; that is to say, the isolation and characterization of the extreme number of active principles.I indicated at the beginning that there is another phase of the problem, and that was identification. We at this time do not know whether the chemical attack is destined to determine the active principle in one year or sixty years.The Treasury has issued a little manual of identification, consisting largely of photographs, and it is being distributed. In this country we are mostly dealing with the drug in its plant form, and in this manual they are showing the separate parts of plants, and so on, and it is helpful in that direction.I am going to ask Mr. Levine to give us a picture152of the Beam test.STATEMENT OF MR. LEVINE,CHEMIST, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS.MR. LEVINE: The Beam test seems to be the most widely used chemical test for the identification of Marihuana, and was first introduced by Dr. W. Beam, of the Wellcome Tropical Research Laboratory, of Khartoum.The alkaline test in 1911 and the acid Beam test in 1915 have come to be accepted as specific for Marihuana, although a lot of samples have failed to respond.Workers in Europe and north Africa have used it and tried it on a large number of plant materials.In general it is agreed that no other material responds characteristically to the test.It has been attacked by some chemists, notably Trolle and Rende, who said they obtained the Beam test on a mixture of drugs consisting of ginger, coriander, licorice, nutmeg, and several other things.Other workers, notably Fahamy and Keiy in Egypt, and Papavassiliou and Liberato, in Greece, applied the test to these materials, both individually and in the mixture, and failed to get a positive response to any of them.As I stated before, a large number of authentic samples of Marihuana failed to respond to the Beam test, or153gave a very slightly dirty purple color, which might be mistaken for just a dirty color. So a number of modifications of the Beam test have been introduced to try to improve the results obtained in the test.One of the steps taken to improve the test was the use of adsorbent charcoal to remove chlorophyll from the solution of the resin.This was reported independently by Fahamy and Keiy, Bouquet, and by the Bureau of Narcotics Laboratory.One of the tests developed in the Bureau of Narcotics Laboratory is the ethyl acetate test. Ethyl acetate is used as a solvent, because it is a good solvent for the resin, it has a low boiling point, hence is easily evaporated and it can be treated with activated charcoal, which removes most of the chlorophyll, and other substances, which would interfere with color development, but takes out very little of the material responsible for the Beam test.In carrying out the test, a sample of Marihuana is extracted with a portion of ethyl acetate. The solvent is treated for a few seconds with darco or norite and filtered.The filtrate is divided between two porcelain dishes and evaporated on a steam bath before a fan. To one of154the dishes is added several drops of the alkaline Beam reagent, and to the other, several drops of the acid Beam reagent.In a large number of tests, no samples which were negative to this modification were found to be positive by the original Beam test, or any of a number of other modifications.It seems, therefore, that this is the most satisfactory modification of the Beam test.Dr. Bouquet, in Tunis, has developed two amyl alcohol tests, one of which uses charcoal, and the other does not.His test consists of grinding a sample of Marihuana with potassium Hydroxide, and then adding a portion of alcohol, mixing thoroughly, and filtering, whereupon a purple color appears in the filtrate.Then, to a portion of this filtrate he adds about a ten-fold volume of water, and extracts with one cc. of amyl alcohol. The purple color is extracted into the amyl alcohol.In his test involving the use of charcoal, he adds a small amount of animal charcoal to the mixture of the alcohol, KOH, and Marihuana, presumably to remove chlorophyll, and then lets it stand for two hours before filtering.155The resultant filtrate is free of chlorophyll, and the tests obtained are better.We have found that his test, involving the use of charcoal, works better with activated charcoal, such as norit or Darco than with the animal charcoal prescribed.Also, we find that we get results by filtering immediately after the addition of charcoal, instead of letting the mixture stand for two hours. We have not found any case of failure to respond upon immediate filtration, which would respond after standing.Another modification which we have developed in our laboratory, and which may be considered a modification of the Bouquet test, is probably most convenient of the modifications to run, because it involves the least manipulation. It consists merely of shaking for a few seconds the sample of Marihuana with a two percent alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide. Add to this is an amount of activated charcoal equal in weight to the Marihuana. The mixture is shaken for a few seconds, and filtered immediately. The filtrate is purple and on dilution with water, the purple colored substance may be extracted by amyl alcohol.Other modifications of the technique have been proposed by Dr. Myttanaere, Viehoever, Placencias and others.156As I said before, a large number of plants fail to respond to any of these modifications of the Beam tests. We have followed the appearance of the Beam test in plants with regard to age, parts of plant, and variety.In regard to age, some plants three inches tall have been found to respond to the Beam test. Some plants, at all states of growth, up to their decadence, respond.Many male plants, which are all withered, and consist of nothing but a skeleton with a few dried flowers sticking to the top still respond to the alkaline Beam test.As far as an individual plant goes, the order of response is best in the top, both with the male and female plants, followed by the upper leaves, lower leaves, upper twigs, upper stalk, lower twigs, and lower stalk. In other words, as you go up towards the top of the plant you get the best response.Where the top responds very strongly, you generally get a weak response in the skin of the lower stalk. If the tops respond very weakly, the upper leaves will probably be negative, or just give a trace of response. We have never been able to get any response at all from the pith or roots of the plant.157This last summer we tested six varieties of hemp, as Dr. Robinson indicated this morning. Three of them were Roumanian varieties; one of them was Italian, one, Manchurian; and one of Chinese origin.Of the three Roumanian varieties, about a percent could be positively identified by the alkaline Beam test, as Dr. Natchett pointed out this morning.The other three gave a trace of response to the test.The Italian variety was very close to this, having about 98 percent attainable by the Beam test.Of the Manchurian and Chinese, only about 20 to 50 percent could be positively identified, and of these, practically none of the tests were as strong as the tests obtained from the Roumanian and Italian varieties. The largest number of the plants were absolutely negative, or showed merely faint trances of response, which we would not consider to be suitable for identification if the plants were unknown.We studied the effect of heating the plants towards response to the alkaline Beam test. We found that heating parts of the plant at 100 degrees with air blowing over them for up to five hours did not have any harmful effects on the material response for the alkaline Beam test.In fact, some of the plants showed better response158after heating than before. Although some workers in Europe say in no case should the extract be heated. over 50 degrees Centigrade.However, heating the plant at 150 degrees under the same conditions did prove to have a deleterious effect.Another treatment we tried was permitting the plant to mold. We subjected the tops of some of the plants, both negative and positive, to molding, in a very moist atmosphere, for a period of about five weeks. After this period, the whole plant was covered with slimy mold. Response to the alkaline Beam test was as good as it was originally.Some negative plants which were molded remained negative after the molding period.Oxidization is an essential part of the Beam test. Beam, in his original article, pointed out that if the tests be applied in the absence of air, a dirty brown color will result instead of the purple color. We have taken up some of the resin in alcohol, and added an equal volume of 2 per cent alcoholic KOH solution. The resultant solution was colorless, but on passing oxygen through it, the characteristic purple color developed.Shaking the solution with charcoal had the same effect. Presumably this is because oxidization is effected159by the oxygen adsorbed on the charcoal.Oxidation must be done in alkaline solution. Charcoal plays a dual role in the test. In the case of the ethyl acetate test the effect is merely to remove extraneous matter, since no oxidation is effected in this solution.In certain solvents, such as petroleum ether, the activated charcoal will entirely remove from solution the material responsible for the Beam test, while animal charcoal does this to a much smaller extent. In fact, animal charcoal may be used in petroleum ether, although its effect as a cleaning agent is not very large.The second role of charcoal is that of an oxidizing agent.The oxygen adsorbed on activated charcoal is effective in producing the necessary oxidation of the material responsible for the alkaline Beam test. Animal charcoal is effective to a very much smaller extent, and is therefore unsatisfactory for use in this process.MR. WOLLNER: I think we will have a recess now for about five minutes before we resume.(A short recess was taken, after which the proceedings were resumed as follows:)MR. WOLLNER: Now, after that rather exhaustive160treatise on the Beam test, I would like to have Mr. Benjamin tell us something about this so-called Duquenois test.The reason time is being given on these tests is this: Every so often a new test is obtained, and this is the experience in every phase of chemical activity, and until several months or years have been put in on it, everyone gets highly enthusiastic about it.Efforts are made to introduce it as witness material in court, and the first thing you know you run into a situation where you are yourself out on a peninsula and you can not possibly get back.We have asked the Treasury Department not to employ any tests unless they are absolutely tests on a theory of so-called triangulation, so that when our men go to court to testify on a seizure that their evidence is sound.Mr. Benjamin, will you tell us briefly about the Duquenois test and what our experience has been with that.MR. BENJAMIN: I think this was proposed in the early part of 1938. Reagent number 1 is an alcoholic solution with vanillin and acetaldehyde.The second reagent is concentrated hydrochloric acid;161The technique consists of extracting hemp with petroleum ether and driving off the solvent by heat.One then takes one cc. of the alcoholic reagent, adds it to the residue, and into the solution thus prepared, puts two c.c.s of concentrated hydrochloric acid.There is a change in color from green to slate blue to violet blue.Now, since we have had this, we have tested approximately 165 substances, including some of the alkaloids, the essential oils, C. D.  alcohols, everything I could get my hands on that might show up with this reagent.So far, not one sample of hemp has failed to respond to this test. When I say "hemp" I am referring to solid extracts, fluid extracts, and ether available preparations. They all show positive.Certain essential oils when treated by the test procedure ran through the same changes as the hemp, namely, oil of bay, geranyl acetate, rhodinyl acetate, and one or two others.There was also a compound known as Denol, that gave practically the same reaction as hemp. That is used in C. D. alcohols. I do not know exactly what it is composed of, but I think a mixture of higher alcohols and ketones.162MR. SCHICKTANZ: Yes, higher alcohols.MR. BENJAMIN: I must emphasize the fact that not one sample of Cannabis or fluid extract of Cannabis or solid extract has failed so far.MR. WOLLNER: Would you recommend the test as an eliminative test for hemp; that is to say, hemp would have to give a positive test of the Duquenois agent in order to be considered hemp, and then proceed? MR. BENJAMIN: Yes.MR. WOLLNER: To apply another test to see whether it is another substance?MR. BENJAMIN: I think the fact that ia the Duquenois test for Cannabis fails to respond, then one should hesitate to call the sample Cannabis.MR. WOLLNER: That is predicated---MR. BENJAMIN: (Interposing) On the 165. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Munch, you have had some experience with some other tests, which we do not think very much of.DR. MUNCH: That is fine. MR. WOLLNER: What is your experience with that test?DR. MUNCH: I started about three or four years ago with the method developed by an official in the British pharmacopoeia for ergot, using paradimethyl amino benzal-163dehyde.The results I obtained I then dropped, because I got busy on something else, but I have had occasion this last spring to review and finish up that work, which was reported at Madison and the American Pharmaceutical Association. The manuscript is in the hands of the editor of the American Pharmaceutical Association, and ought to be out next month.In it I tried various modifications and found the 2-1/2 per cent solution of paradimethyl amino benzaldehyde in 65 per cent sulphuric acid, or in 65 per cent phosphoric acid, which is my principal reagent.The material to be tested is shaken with 10 parts, or approximately 10 parts, of low boiling petroleum ether, (below 40 degrees Centigrade) which has been redistilled and a half part of Mercks activated charcoal or norit, or any other U. S. P., activated carbon for five or ten minutes, then filtered. The filtrate is evaporated, and the reagent applied to the residue. The direct application of the reagent causes charring, or does not cause anything, according to how much material has been removed.But on the addition of a drop of water there is an immediate development of a blue color, shifting toward the violet end of the spectrum, and disappearing within164two seconds or two hours, depending on how much material is present.Ergot gives a blue color similar to that of Cannabis, but the color shift is toward the red. The red is much slower than with that of Cannabis, and it persists for several days.I went to two neighborhood drug stores, and got ten or eleven materials out of their prescription department, and sent them through the same tests. Many of them gave no color. Others gave colors of some sort.But, to make a long story short, none of them gave the same type of color as the blue shift that I obtained with Cannabis. I have tried about 50 samples of Cannabis, so far, and every one of those gave the same reaction. While my eye is not too good, still there is a symmetric trend between the potency on dogs and the degree of color developed here. By degree I mean intensity and duration, considering them together. But a product stronger on the dog has given me a stronger color. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Matchett, what is your experience with that Ghamrawy test? DR. MATCHETT: We found too many other substances, which we regard as giving colors too similar to that165given to Cannabis, to have any value in the hands [of] anyone not very definitely expert in the use of it. Even in such hands it is our judgment that colors given tobacco and certain other substances were still too near the color given by Cannabis for use in the case of extracts.Of course, where we have a plant to look at, we realize a different situation exists.DR. MUNCH: Even with tobacco? DR. MATCHETT: Tobacco was very close. DR. MUNCH: Is that right? DR. MATCHETT: This was not used with charcoal. DR. MUNCH: If I do not use charcoal, I get inconclusive results along that line. DR. MATCHETT: I am coming 'to that. It was our experience that the U.S.P. activated charcoal would remove either the hemp or tobacco test substance from petroleum ether. The result being that the test in hemp was about the same as it was in tobacco. I will ask Mr. Benjamin if that is a correct statement.MR. BENJAMIN: That is correct. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Lancaster, have you had any experience with these tests in Canada?MR. LANCASTER: Yes, Dr. [sic] Wollner.166Some years ago our interest was aroused as to whether or not Canadian Cannabis would be at all active. As some of you know, the plant thrives in all climates. We have it in all altitudes. There are no cultivated plants. But some years ago we wanted to satisfy ourselves about the activity of the Canadian produced Cannabis. Some was grown in western Canada for windbreak purposes, that is the only economic function it had with us. 	After applying the alkaline Beam test, as put out from Geneva we obtained positive reactions, and the pharmacologists tried it on dogs and we found it responded, so we concluded that some of the Canadian Cannabis was active.From the standpoint of the administration of the Narcotic Act, our interest is entirely limited to the illicit traffic, and it is confined to the reefer or cigarette, where we have the advantage of a physical. diagnosis, rather than chemical.The chemical work on this we intend to follow up as of extreme importance, because it is difficult to predict to what extent the extracts may come into use.There is a possibility of developing a non-reactive type of plant, but it is not of an immediate concern, although there again conditions of world trade and combined167complications might become such that Canada might be asked to take up that problem again. Who knows?So we can not afford to lose interest in these chemical phases of the testing.Our experience with the Beam test has been that it is somewhat erratic, and does not always give the equivalent results in the hands of different operators, for some reason.Of course, there again, we have run some of our tests on plants where we know we have had them in storage for some years.It is rather puzzling there is no reaction there.MR. WOLLNER: No reaction? MR. LANCASTER: On prolonged storage. MR. WOLLNER: Under what conditions was that hemp stored? MR. LANCASTER: In a large glass stopped bottle. However, we have to check that again, because of the results of this vegetation which remained an open field, which is another puzzle.MR. WOLLNER: That is where we all find ourselves at the moment.What I would like to hear from the group is something in the way of suggestions as to how this problem can be168most competently attacked. What is to be done? The problem is not a simple one, although there is no indication as to its complexity. I say it is not a simple problem, because if material has not been advanced after several thousand years of experience there must be some barrier there. Is there any technique which should be considered which has not been considered?Dr. Hibben, have you any suggestions along this line?DR. HIBBEN: That is rather a difficult question. I think we are proceeding correctly.I think the first thing that has to be done is developing an adequate method for determining the content of the active principle, and until such a method is developed, there is not going to be very much room for improvement.MR. WOLLNER: The only difficulty has been that this problem has been very much the problem of peeling an onion--the more you peel, apparently the more peels you can take off, until you peel away the onion and then there is nothing left.DR. HIBBEN: That is quite true. But I do not think there has been any comprehensive, systematic work done on the problem, by an adequate chemical staff, under ade-169quate direction.MR. WOLLNER: The first thing seems to be to find the active principle. That is a different proposition.DR. MUNCH: Has any work been done on the chlorophyl of the leaf?DR. MATCHETT: All the work we know of is what you have done.DR. MUNCH: The only thought I have is, if the chlorophyll of Marihuana happens to be different from all other chlorophylls in the universe, it can be identified microscopically.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Hibben, you have run some microscopic tests on Cannabis direct for the chlorophyll. DR. HIBBEN: I did not look for chlorophyll. I say that is very desirable, but I say they would be very doubtful on the chlorophyll alone.DR. MATCHETT: Of course, there are some points about that. MR. VALAER: The chemistry of opium was very uncertain for a long, long time. We had a crude mass to work with, and gradually they pulled out one hundred pieces or more. I believe, after all, we have not been interested in this more than about two years. I believe the chemical crude resin Marihuana will work out in the same way. We have two stills upstairs. We have a good many people170working on it in extracts and various ways, even now in this brief time.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Couch, do you have anything to offer?DR. COUCH: I would like to say that this problem is in no more desperate condition than a great many other problems in which a solution has not been reached. They all present this picture before the real work is done in solving it which makes it all seem extremely baffling.It is very curious that by plugging along and keeping infernally at it, that one of these days the problem is solved almost before it is realized, and it seems to me that the lines that have been projected here and the lines that have been followed are exactly those that should be followed, and will, in the course of time, lead to the solution of the problem; I mean the information that you desire to have.There is one thing that occurs to me that has not been mentioned, and that is if any work has been done upon the smoke from Marihuana, as the smoke is physiologically active.It may be different from the resin taken by mouth or injected into the veins. That is another matter. But it seems to me that there is something there that might171be developed as a test for identity.MR. SMITH: I think Dr. Hershfield did something on that chlorophyll work which he did two years ago.DR. COUCH: Of course, along that line is also the possibility of reaction from the protein. It simply rests on the possibility and probability that that is, of course, the leafy tissue, and the extract probably would not serve.The leafy portion would contain some propein. That with a water extract or salt extract of the plant itself, in a very short time would get positive results, one away or the other.The difficulty there is there may be present some protein that is also present in another plant. That difficulty arises, but the precipitation reactions are amazingly specific and amazingly direct.When one goes from one animal tissue to another he has to wash his hands extremely carefully as he changes over from one to another, so as not to spoil the test in the next tissue. There is that sort of delicacy.I simply offer that as a test. I presume there has already been a lot of thought discounted on that subject.MR. WOLLNER: I do not know of that test. Dr. Loewe? DR. LOEWE: If I may bring up the encroachment which172is in doubt, it has been known thousands and thousands of years that sex cells contain an active principle. However, it has taken up to this century to get hold of those active principles, and the reason was not the difficulty with respect to chemistry, but the difficulty was that there was no test for the active principle only as an active principle, and no chemical tests were given.This is the same situation in Cannabis with one exception, and we know the physiological test for the active principle is given. It is much more easily accessible. This biological test is much more easily accessible, so there is a test, and the thing which has not yet been done, at least not yet systematically enough, is to dovetail the identification of the active principle by its active nature by a biological test.I think this specific picture of the dovetail work gives immediately the solution, unless somebody is inclined to drop the whole thing.But I again remember that same situation in the female hormone and the male hormone, which involves just this one property to give a beautiful color reaction. However, it did not take more than five years after finding the right test and using the right test in the right way from the first isolation of the principle. I think173this is the way prescribed.MR. WOLLNER: Do you know of any experiments, Dr. Loewe, that have been performed on the smoke itself? DR. LOEWE: No.DR. BLATT: I know of where they took the Marihuana smoke and passed it through solvents.DR. LOEWE: Through chloroform? DR. BLATT: No, through water. DR. LOEWE Water, rather than chloroform?DR. BLATT: Yes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: There is a great deal of work being done at the present time with respect to the use of opium smoke. A paper has just been prepared by someone in a laboratory in London, which has just been issued. Are you familiar with Dr. Nicholls?MR. LANCASTER: Yes, Dr. Nicholls was mentioned in connection with the research today.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Is that the same Nicholls who is on the Opium Assay Committee?DR. BLATT: I was going to say very much the same thing as Dr. Loewe said; that is, that I can not see any reason for being discouraged as far as chemistry is concerned.Now, you have got a perfectly good point of attack.174The amazing thing about this whole problem is that nothing has been done with the exception of this one matter in 1932, when it was established that crude Cannabinol behaves like a pure substance, and the customary high vacuum distillation technique fails to separate it into its constituents. The work has been apparently dropped from that time on.The surprising thing is that someone has not jumped into that.MR. WOLLNER: Of course, there has been no commercial demand in that respect, .and that is one of the reasons for that.DR. BLATT: It is difficult to get hold of the material. DR. HIBBEN: If you want to get something on spectroscopic methods, when these chemists leave the point where there are spectroscopic methods for determination and for determining the structure, they would aid greatly in facilitating this problem.MR. WOLLNER: It would aid greatly.DR. MATCHETT: We would like to ask Dr. Hlbben if there are not some such methods which may be correlated to the bioassay?175The essential or volatile oils come out of this material very readily. It can be narrowed down to relatively few compounds.If we knew, separately, the spectra of these various materials, would it not help to follow the separations at that stage of operations?DR. HIBBEN: Yes, I think it would. You can start in by that procedure on hormones.DR. MATCHETT: And I believe also carotenoids. DR. HIBBEN: Yes.DR. MATCHETT: As the fractionation goes further and further, the number of bioassays increases almost without limit, and that is one reason we were particularly interested in it.Also, the quantitative phase has to be considered. DR. LOEWE: But, as an economic matter, and the rational method is to proceed in an economical way, which can be done by carefully choosing fractions to test.DR. MATCHETT: I do not believe we could quarrel about that.DR. MUNCH: Doctor, there is the other thought, and that is that we have not been picking on any of the prisoners lately.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Doctor, we are not dealing176with the same problem as opium, where we can take the addict to a hospital at Lexington and go through all of the experiments.There is a little danger that this drug might affect a man permanently. He might do something which we may be sorry for later.I think that must be given serious thought.DR. WRIGHT: Dr. Wollner, I will not be very long now, but I just want to clarify a point, and it would seem from reports and other information that the tests are rather indicative of hemp rather than of the active prin-ciple.I am saying that for this reason: We would like to be in a position to approach the development of strains that were free from the active principle,Now, until we have a test it seems to be that we can not do anything.MR. WOLLNER: Yes, and no.DR. WRIGHT: I will say it is possible that one of these tests may be useful from a breeding standpoint, but it seems to me it is working entirely on a guess,It would seem to me that any approach would be resolving the strains in pure breeding alone. In other words, approach the inbreeding situation in a hybrid manner;177that is the approach we want, but it would seem to me that all we could do at this state would be to develop those lines at random.In other words, set up as many facilities as we could for pure breeding lines. Any individual plant that would be tested would be very indefinite as to what its progeny would be, and it would seem to me that that is more or less a blind approach; shall I say a lick in the dark; and we would have to develop as many as we could. We can do that, develop as many lines as possible, like in Prussic acid in Sudan grass.My point is, and I am mentioning it to you chemists, that we can get nowhere without a test of consequence. We might be lucky. About ten thousand chances to one, we might be lucky until we have a test.MR. WOLLNER: In the last analysis, you are unquestionably correct about that. Really, before significant progress can be made by the agricultural people, we will have to provide you with a formula.Before we adjourn, I would like to invite any of the visiting friends present to come upstairs for a few minutes and see our laboratory set-up for tackling this job, the molecular stills, and extraction equipment, and I am quite sure you will enjoy it.178And I want to really express my appreciation and thanks for your kind cooperation in helping to clarify these issues.(Whereupon, at 5:10 o'clock p.m., the Conference was adjourned sine die.)1Wollners book???