WT01-B22-1IA087-000625-B019-242http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045114 text/html 7579HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:51:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:56 GMTContent-length: 7362 Marihuana Conference of 1938 - Part 1 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Marihuana Conference HELD DECEMBER 5, 1938 in the UNITED STATES Bureau of Internal Revenue Building (Room3003) Washington D. C. CALLED BY THE BUREAU OF NARCOTICS OF THE UNITED STATES TREASURY DEPARTMENT PRESIDED OVER BY MR. H. J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONER OF NARCOTICS, AND MR. H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT MARIHUANA CONFERENCE INDEX OPENING STATEMENT OF H.J. ANSLINGER,COMMISSIONER OF NARCOTICS, containing Review of Proceedings of Sub-Committee on Cannabis of Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium, League of Nations: 4-16 STATEMENT OF DR. A. H .WRIGHT, PROFESSOR OF AGRONOMY, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN, relating to growth of Hemp, where seeds areproduced, and Hemp is grown in United States: 16 - 27 STATEMENT OF MR. FRANKLIN, CHIEF OF DRUG CONTROL, STATE OF NEW YORK, as to growth of Marihuana in that state. 27 - 29 STATEMENT OF DR. B. B. ROBINSON, BUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, relative to experiments as to WorldProduction of Hemp, and quantity of Production in United States and Growthand Production of Cannabis, and Comparative Results obtained from Seed obtainedfrom various Countries: 29 - 49 STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, CHIEF CHEMIST, BUREAU OFNARCOTICS, as to Tests made from Seeds of Hemp in various Countries: 42- 43 STATEMENT OF MR. HENRY FULLER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, as to hisExperience in Growth of Cannabis: 49 - 55 STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, PROFESSOR OF PHARMACOLOGY,TEMPLE UNIVERSITY, relating to Effects of Marihuana on Organs ofBody: 55- 60 STATEMENT OF DR. S. LOEWE, PHARMACOLOGIST, CORNELL UNIVERSITYMEDICAL COLLEGE, as to Bio-Assay of Marihuana 60 - 65 STATEMENT OF DR. WALTER BROMBERG, SENIOR PSYCHIATRIST, DEPARTMENTOF HOSPITALS, NEW YORK CITY, relating to varying Effects of Marihuana in various Classes ofIndividuals: 65 - 88 Discussion on Pharmacological Phases of Marihuana Problem: 89-133 STATEMENT OF H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, TREASURYDEPARTMENT: 133 -137 STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. BLATT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY, Relative toSurvey of Chemical Constituents of Cannabis Sativa: 137-143 STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, TREEASURY DEPARTMENT,containing Report of Department of Attacks on Marihuana Problems:143 -151 STATEMENT OF DR. JOSEPH LEVINE, CHEMIST, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, asto Tests for Identification of Marihuana 152 -160 STATEMENT OF MR. LOUIS BENJAMIN, CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT, asto Tests: 160-164 STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, as to Tests: 162-164 STATEMENT OF DR. H. M. LANCASTER, CHIEF DOMINION ANALYST,CANADIAN GOVERMENT, in relation to Tests: 165 -l70 STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES COUCH, PATHOLOGICAL DIVISION, BUREAU OFANIMAL INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE: 170 -173 General Discussion: 173-178 BY COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I want to express to you theappreciation of the Treasury Department for giving your valuabletime in an effort to assist the Government in this importantwork. I will now introduce the conferees in attendance: DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, Chief Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics DR. JOSEPH LEVINE, Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics LOUIS BENJAMIN, Chemist, Treasury Department DR. B. B. ROBINSON, Bureau of Plant Industry, Department ofAgriculture DR. HERBERT O. CALVERY, Chief, Division of Pharmacology, Food& Drug Administration, Department of Agriculture DR. ROBERT P. HERWICK, Food & Drug Administration, Departmentof Agriculture DR. LAWRENCE KOLB, Division of Mental Hygiene, Public HealthService DR. JAMES COUCH, Pathological Division, Bureau of AnimalIndustry, Department of Agriculture DR. A.H. BLATT, Professor of Chemistry, Howard University DR. S. LOEWE, Pharmacologist, Cornell University Medical College DR. A.H. WRIGHT, Professor of Agronomy, University of Wisconsin DR. WALTER BROMBERG, Senior Psychiatrist, Department ofHospitals, City of New York DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, Professor of Pharmacology, Temple University MR. H. M. LANCASTER, Chief Dominion Analyst, Canadian Government,Ottawa, Canada MR. HENRY FULLER, Consulting Chemist, Washington, D. C. MR. FRANK SMITH, Chief of Drug Control, State of New York. DR. JAMES HIBBEN, Geophysical Laboratory Carnegie Institute ofWashington MR. FRED T. MERRILL, Foreign Policy Association Washington, D. C. MR. PETER VALAER, Chemist, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S.Treasury Department, Washington, D. C. DR. W. V. LINDER, Chief, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S.Treasury Department, Washington, D. C. MR. PAUL W. SIMONDS, Assn. Chief, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U.S. Treasury Department, Washington, D. C. MR. MORRIS KAPLAN, Office of the Chief, Division of Laboratories,U. S. Bureau of Customs DR. S. T. SCHICKTANZ, Chemist, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S.Treasury Department Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-2IA087-000625-B019-266http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045126 text/html 19562HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:51:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:52 GMTContent-length: 19344 Marihuana Conference of 1938 -- Part 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Marihuana Conference HELD DECEMBER 5, 1938 in the UNITED STATES Bureau of Internal Revenue Building (Room3003) Washington D. C. Part 2 Commissioner Anslinger: I assume the press will be after us. The Treasury Departmenthas not as yet publicly announced this meeting. The Departmentwill do this subsequently. I hope therefore, that none of youwill be drawn into discussions with reporters until the meetingis concluded. The Treasury Department will issue a statement onthe meeting. I want all of you to freely express your opinions onevery phase of the subject under discussion; and if you differ onany point, we hope you will not hesitate to present your side ofthe picture. I want to give you a brief review of what took place at Geneva,Switzerland, last spring at a meeting of the Sub-Committee onCannabis, of the Advisory Committee on traffic in opium and otherdangerous drugs of the League of Nations. I think this a fittingway to open the Conference. It will illustrate the internationalsignificance of the Cannabis problem and show the current statusof some of the excellent work that is being done by other nationson the question. This work I think was very important, and I want to give you thereports of the experts of the various countries which will giveyou an idea as to the points on which the authorities stillremain in doubt. The Secretariat of the League referred to various pointssubmitted to the Experts in a questionnaire drawn up for theiruse in January, l936, and used as a basis for the Sub-Committeeswork. He described the research work being undertaken. TheSub-Committee endeavored to indicate on what phases of theMarihuana problem agreement exists, and on what points there is adivergence of views which has formed the subject of exchange ofinformation between the Experts whether on chemical andagricultural questions, or on the medical and pathologicalquestions. Since the Advisory Committee's last session, Mr. J. V.Collins, Government Analyst, Ceylon, on January 12, l938,notified the Committee of his acceptance of the AdvisoryCommittee's invitation to act as an Expert on Cannabis in placeof the late Dr. Symons. The Committee received importantdocuments from two of its Experts, Dr. Bouquet and Dr. deMyttenaere.Dr. Bouquet has for many years done a vast amount ofwork on Cannabis. He is the Inspector of Pharmacies in Tunis. Dr. Bouquet submitted reports on the following points: I Vegetable products wrongly designated as hemp. II Microscopic examination of samples of Cannabis. III Physiologically active resin in the staminate Cannabisplant. IV New variety of Cannabis. V Influence of drought on the growth of Cannabis. VI Medical uses of Cannabis and drugs with a Cannabis base. VII Use of animal charcoal. VIII Dr. James C. Munch's Reaction. IX Is light petroleum the only solvent of the active elementof Cannabis and its preparations? X Addiction by certain solanaceae. Then the report is supplemented by Dr. Bouquet regarding thefollowing points: I Are the light petroleum extracts of Cannabis the only onesthat are physiologically active? II Observations on document O.C.1542 (z) (Report on theresearch conducted by the Treasury Department of the UnitedStates of America, in cooperation with the Department ofAgriculture, in connection with studies on the chemicalidentification of Cannabis Indica (Cannabis Sativa). III Identification test for Cannabis resin, proposed by Dr. deMyttenaere. IV Method of identifying resin, proposed by Dr. H. J. Wollner. V Procedure for experiments. VI Observations on the causes of Cannabis addiction in NorthAfrica. Dr. de Myttenaere submitted to the Secretariat a supplement tothe third note on Indian hemp, and a fourth note on Indian hemp,including a study of the published work which has appeared sinceMay, 1937, giving observations of Mr. Wollner's experiments inthe United States. Apart from these contributions from Experts ofthe Sub-Committee on Cannabis, the Secretariat received a �Studyof the Chemical Identification of Marihuana (CannabisIndica)" by Dr. Rafael Plasencia, Government Chemist ofCuba, and a reply concerning the same subject from the UnitedKingdon Representative. It also received information regardingexperiments on the chemical identification of Cannabis indicacommunicated by the United States Government. This is the reportcovering the investigation conducted by the Treasury Departmentin cooperation with the Department's Agriculture. The United Kingdom also submitted to the Secretariat acommunication concerning the question as to whether Cannabisstalks used commercially for the production of fibre stillcontained resin. That point was also discussed. As to the American documents, we usually summarize all workthat has been done on Cannabis, incorporate it into one documentand submit it to the League of Nations. As to Dr. Plasencia's experiment; he has followed up Beam'sexperiments and elaborated a new method which he states isabsolutely and specifically suitable for Cannabis and constantfor all the varieties tested, even Merck's extract of Cannabisindica with which Beam's reaction gave no result. Our Government has submitted observations on this paper. The United Kingdom Representative also transmitted an opinionby the Government Chemist who suggests certain modifications inthis method. These modifications consist of an attempt toseparate the substances responsible for the characteristic colorin Beam's test on the assumption that it is a phenol. All of these documents are available in the United StatesTreasury Department for anyone who would like to study them. Itwould seem that Dr. de Myttenaere and Mr. Wollner have differentopinions on the point as to whether light petroleum is the bestsolvent for Cannabis. Dr. de Myttenaere considers that so far asis known at present, light petroleum is the best solvent for theextraction of the active principles of Cannabis, and hence theonly one suitable for Beam's test; and he has carried outexperiments as to whether ethyl acetate should be substituted, oris preferable as a solvent for petroleum ether. In the report there is also given the list of vegetableproducts wrongfully designated as hemp, We have a little troublewith that in this country, as it is frequently designated asCannabis, New Zealand hemp, hemp of the Americas, Bombay hemp,African hemp, etc. It has been found that these were all wrong designators usedby various persons interested in the problem. NOTE.--Until very recently. the definition of Cannabis sativa(marihuana) was based upon the traditional conception that theactive principle of the drug, technically known as cannabinol orcannabinone, is present only in the female or pistillate plantand present there only in the flowering tops. Since thedevelopment of more refined chemical tests, it has beendiscovered that the active principle is contained in the leavesof the pistillate plant as well as the leaves of the staminateplant. This brought about the advisability of makihg thedefinition all inclusive in laws for control of the drug found inthe male as well as the female plant. It will therefore benecessary to change the definition in the League of NationsTreaty of 1925. Dr. Bouquet, while investigating this question, found that italways has been acknowledged that intoxicating resin could beobtained from male Cannabis plants but in such small quantitiesthat for practical purposes this source of production is notutilized at present. He realized, however, that it might becomeworthwhile for traffickers to turn their attention to it, andrecommended that the free handling of the vegetative parts ofboth male and female Cannabis plants should be prohibited. Thatwork was started in America by the laboratory of Parke-Davis someyears ago. Then the question of the production of the fibre, thecondition of development, depending on the meterological factorsof the crop area was discussed. In this respect differences havebeen noted between the height of the plant, and the length,consistency and toughness of the textile fibres. The growing conditions of the plant also affect the output ofits resin, which depends directly on the degree of temperature;on the dryness of the soil; and probably on the amount ofsunshine encountered. In the annual report for Turkey for 1937,there is brought to the attention of the Committee dataconcerning a variety of Cannabis sativa having long stalks. It isgrown for industrial purposes in various parts of Anatolia; thefibre is used for manufacturing ropes and sacks; and its resincontent is so slight it could not be used for the extraction of anarcotic drug. That seems to be the answer to our prayers, if true. As to thepsychical and psychopathic effects of Cannabis, the literature onthis phase of the subject tends to confirm the analysis as to thepsychic effects of hashish made as long ago as 1845 by Dr. Moreaude Tours in his book, which incidentally is still the standardwork on the subject. Also, Dr. Brottaux in his book on Hashishpublished in 1934, which I think is considered a veritable"bible" on the subject today, has followed up and inthe main confirmed Dr. Moreau's analysis. Then there was discussed the relation between Cannabis andinsanity. There was reference to the work of Dhunsiboy, theDirector of one of the Hospitals for Insane in India in which hepoints out that the prolonged use of Indian hemp leads toinsanity. The work of Dr. Bouquet was discussed; and also the work ofthe British Indian hemp Commission which carried out an inquiryin 1893 and 1894 into the relationship of Indian hemp and lunacy.Colonel Chopra did some work in India which was discussed. Hefound that in India a special form of mental disease classed astoxic insanity had direct relation to the excessive use of hempdrugs. All of these experts laid stress on "excessiveuse." Then there was a proposal discussed to authorize the sale ofganja to the Indian population in Burma.As you probably know, inIndia. the Government maintains a Monopoly, and various narcoticproducts are sold across the counter tax-paid. The League ofNations wanted to point out to the Committee the various pointsthat were raised in connection with the proposal to sell hemp. To meet the allegation concerning the increase in insanity dueto the use of ganja, a table prepared by the Inspector General ofCivil Hospitals in Burma has been added showing that as far asthe mental hospital at Tagadale was concerned, the percentage ofmental cases attributable to the use of ganja and its derivativesvaried during the years between 1928 and 1937 from 0.87 to 4.35;and that in 1936, out of a total of 296 admissions there were tensuch cases, the corresponding figures for 1937 being 356 and tenrespectively. The Sub-Committee was urged to examine the still-controversialquestion of the relationship between addiction to hemp drugs andthe spread of insanity. The work of Dr. Stringaris on Hashish was discussed. He is anauthority on insanity due to the use of Hashish in Russia. Hemaintains that a further increase can be expected in the ravagescaused by Hashish in Asiatic Russia. Then the question of the relationship between the abuse ofnarcotic drugs and alcoholism arose. It is still a mixedquestion, and considerable recommendations were furnished.InAlgeria, Dr. Bouquet has noted that Heroin addicts were recruitedfrom the Hashish addicts, and Dr. Stringaris in Asiatic Russiahas found that to be the case there also. In conclusion the Secretariat pointed out that, as a result ofconcurrent investigations, progress has been made on chemicalstudies and research, while fresh information has been gatheredin other spheres; at the same time, certain points still requireclarification, especially in connection with the physiological,psychological, and psychopathic effects of Cannabis and with therelationships between Hashish-addiction and insanity, and betweenCannabis-addiction and crime. After considering all of the recommendations furnished by theLeague of Nations, the Sub-Committee then made the followingreport, which is very pertinent in the light of the points wewant to discuss here. "In discussion of the matter before it, the Sub-Committeedivided consideration of the subject as follows: Commercial uses of Cannabis Medical uses of Cannabis Effects of the abuse of Cannabis Methods of detecting the presence of Cannabis Legal definition of the term "Cannabis." The discussions developed the fact that the Committee still lacks complete information concerning the commercial uses of Cannabis. The Sub-Committee would welcome further information concerning the physiological, psychological and psychopathic effects of abusive use of Cannabis and the relation between Cannabis-addiction and crime. Dr. Bouquet pointed out that percentages of resin content in the hemp plant raised in different countries should be ascertained with a view to deciding whether it is necessary to prohibit or merely to control the cultivation of Cannabis for industrial purposes. The value of the Beam test for detecting the presence of Cannabis appears to have been confirmed by a further series of experiments, the results of which are before the Committee, including those attained by the employment of several different modifications of that text. Dr. de Myttenaere said that his experience enabled him to state that the Beam alkaline reaction and its modifications indicated the chief element in the various components of Cannabis resin which was the cause of Hashish addiction, i.e.the alcoholic group. Dr. Bouquet informed the Sub-Committee that a test based upon new principles had recently been devised which will form the subject of a thesis to be presented by Messrs. Duquenois and Hassan Negm Mustapha at the University of Strasbourg in July, 1938, a brief description of which will be circulated to the Opium Advisory Committee. The question of modifying the incomplete definition of Indian hemp in the Geneva Convention of 1925 was discussed, but no definite conclusion was arrived at. It appeared upon examination that such modification would affect not only Article 1 of the Convention, but also Articles 4 and 11 and would necessarily involve complicated adjustments in the Convention itself. It was therefore decided to postpone further consideration of this matter until the next session of this Sub-Committee when it is hoped that more time will be available for the work. Up to the present time, the work of the Sub-Committee has consisted almost entirely of collecting information in regard to the various phases of the Cannabis problem, and, until the Sub-Committee has before it more data than it has at present, it would scarcely be considered advisable to undertake definite recommendations." We would like to take inventory of our research and see what is needed. The Federal Government did not get into this picture until after all 48 states had adopted legislation controlling Marihuana in greater or less degree. The Marihuana Tax Act went into effect a little over a year ago, and since that time we have destroyed some 16,000 acres of the plant throughout the various States; most of it in the Middle West. About l,000 violators have been arrested by the Federal Government. I am not trying to sell this book, but I want to call your attention to the work on "Marihuana'a written by Dr. Robert P. Walton, Professor of Chemistry, University of Mississippi, with a foreword by Dr. Geller who is a distinguished pharmacologist connected with the University of Chicago.I would like to start with the agricultural phases of this problem, which will also include the industrial and economic phases.I am therefore going to call on Dr. Wright of the University of Wisconsin and ask him to discuss some of the questions that seem to be troubling us. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-3IA087-000625-B019-285http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045136 text/html 18954HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:51:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:45 GMTContent-length: 18736 Statement of Dr. A. H. Wright Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. WRIGHT Professor of Agronomy University of Wisconsin DR. WRIGHT: Gentlemen, let me say to you in the first placethat while I am connected with the University of Wisconsin, so far asthe hemp work is concerned, the hemp being Marihuana, I am working as anagent and in cooperation with the Bureau of Plant Industry here inWashington. I had better assume that you are about the agricultural side likeI am about chemistry, that you do not know very much about it.Therefore, suppose I sketch briefly the practical every day procedure bywhich hemp is handled in the United States and Canada, not mentioninganything about the European situation, and as Dr. Robinson is going to reviewsomething about the history of hemp, I will leave that out entirely. In the United States hemp is an annual crop produced from seed planted each year, planted in the Spring the same as small grainsare planted, the same as corn is planted. It has been grown during recent years almost exclusively in veryfew sections; Kentucky, Illinois, Wisconsin and Minnesota. It is planted en masse thickly as small grain, in other words, itis drilled in. It is planted on very good soil in order to be a profitableproduction. It is a crop limited to good soil 18 for profitable production most every where in the world, and itis seeded about a bushel to the acre on soil, prepared as for small grain. After it is planted, there is nothing left to be done except towait for it to be harvested, and it is harvested in the latter part ofAugust, throughout September, and sometimes extending into Octoberdepending on the section of the United States or Canada. The seed is usually produced in Kentucky, and in the NorthAmerican Continent, very rarely any other place. In the sections where itis grown for fibre or industrial uses, seed is not produced. The usual, or arbitrary way of determining when to harvest a cropis when it is well in blossom, we will say rather late blossom whenthe pollen is being fairly cleared, depending from that time on how circumstances work out, but that is when it is begun. It is generally harvested now by special machinery which has been developed during the last few years. It is cut and spread inswaths of even length. It is left in the stuble, spread out for retting. Now, the exact procedure varies in different sections of thecountry. This retting period, that is the period when the so-called fibreportion of the stem is released 19 from the woody portion, varies from two weeks to, in certaincases, two months. After it has reached that stage where the fibre can be removedfrom the straw by being dressed, it is gathered and bound in bundlesand shocked. Then it is put in stacks, usually in hemp mills orprocessing plants. From these stacks it is sent to the dryer, and dried to what is commonly called in the trade bone-dry condition and which wouldmean 8 or 9 or 10% moisture. Then it is crushed by the breaking process, that is the fiber is separated by the usual process called scutching, and it isdivided into two kinds of fibre, one the long stretch, and the other tangled, andthen it is inserted in bales. That, I believe, is the agricultural procedure of the handling ofthe hemp. There is a little variation in Kentucky because of the weather conditions. It is not retted immediately, but shocked until laterin the season when the retting conditioning can be done. In the northern part of the country, it is spread on the groundand the retting is done immediately. Now, I want to avoid going into the acreage and that phase of the work for Dr. Robinson is going to cover that. 20 I would like to inject this thought here for I am sure it will dono harm, and that is that hemp has been an American industry eversince Colonial times It is not a large industry. It has had its ups anddowns, but it has been an American industry since Colonial times, and it isone of the oldest crops that we have in the United States. It is used, as you know, from an industrial stand-point fortextile purposes, and to a minor extent for other purposes and Dr.Robinson will develop that. Now, there might be perhaps some questions right now. One or two other items I want to take up before I am through. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Go right ahead. DR. WRIGHT: You know I might not have another chance to say anything COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: You will be given a chance. Go right ahead, Dr. Wright. DR. WRIGHT: I was just wanted to throw this into the pot, andthat is, of course, that we who work with the commercial producers,and the industry naturally collectively, and I suppose we are justifiablein that, our prejudices are on that side. I do not think we would be humanif we were not, and I do not claim to be other than human. We have asmall industry in the United States that 21 has had its ups and downs over a long period of time. We stillproduce commercial hemp and fibre. Those in the industry are naturallyconcerned. They have a stake in that they have what little they haveinvested in the business. They are not concerned about this last law because I believe they were given a very square deal in the national legislation on thematter. What they are concerned about is the public position, thatindefinite intangible thing, public feeling about growing hemp at all. They have already been subjected to some rather embarrassing situations. Now, just suppose that as a result of the agitation, warranted or not, and there are probably two views on that, and I am open toboth views, the extensive publicity that has been given in the hempstates, particularly Wisconsin where there is much agitation, that somekind of a legislation will come up to put out or eradicate the productionof hemp under the Weed Control Department or the Legislatureappropriating money to do it. I will not bother you long on that, but I just want to mentionthat and show what problem we will be called on to face. Those menhave managed to keep their mouths 22 shut and have expressed no views concerning Marihuana in public,for we feel we are not in a position to do so, and we would like to besure of our ground before doing it. Of course, having worked with eradication procedures and eradication programs, unless you would convince us otherwise wewould oppose the eradication program in Wisconsin as we see it now withthe immense cost and the things of that sort. Now comes the other phase of it. We have been trying, incooperation with the Bureau of Plant Industry, and Dr. Robinson and theDivision of Pharmacy of the University of Wisconsin and Dr. Link who is headof the Bio-Chemistry Department of the University of Wisconsin to begina study of Cannabis in relation to hemp as a crop. Without going into details, I think I have told you my story forthe present. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We thank you very much, Doctor. Before we go on to Dr. Robinson, I think there were various pointsbrought up that our conferees would like to discuss. There is one point about commercial hemp. We did not make asurvey in your State, but we did make a survey in the State ofMinnesota, and some of the hemp that was harvested in 1934 is still on theground. 23 DR. WRIGHT: That is right. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: It is giving us a great deal ofdifficulty. The farmers up in Minnesota in some of the sections have beensubjected to various promotion schemes. Due to the existence of stacks ofthe old 1934 and 1935 crop of harvested hemp in Southern Minnesota, whichis a menace to society in that it has been used by traffickers, wehave arrested a gang who took a truck load of this Marihuana into NewYork. I will say that the farmers up there have been cooperating withus 100%. If they see anybody around that section who looks like atrafficker, they bring out their old shot guns, and he is soon disposed of.We have very little trouble from the farmers up there. It is said that every stack contains a plentiful supply forsmoking purposes. Allegations have been made that if it was on the ground threeyears there would not be any resin left. Mr. Wollner can tell you howmuch resin some of the experts reported after Marihuana had been lying onthe ground three years. It seems that the traffickers can find it. Our ownchemists have found it. We feel that the farmer is entitled to a reasonable return forthese old crops. He planted the crop in goodfaith; he has no desire toviolate the law, and we have 24 been assured that the removal of the harvested crops is verydesirable. It is a very difficult situation. Have you any observations to make, or any discussion on the question? DR. ROBINSON: As to thw commercial procedure, tha plant is spread out on the land, and left there until the stalks are retted, andsome of the leaves are gone. It is shocked and taken into the hemp mill. Thegrower is uncertain as to where he stands, and whether the leaves that are associated with the straw are in the legal sense Marihuana,referring, of course, to that particular clause in the law which refers to drystalks. Now this is done as follows: the straw is left on the land in the stubble for varying times, as I say, from two weeks or longerduring this retting process. It is subject to the action of rains andbleaching and decomposition with the various effects of bacteria and fungi, butwhen it is taken in, it still retains a trace of the leaves. That is whataffects the folks up there in Minnesota. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I notice the term "hurds"referred to. DR. WRIGHT: That is the non-fibrous material crushed and takenaway from the fibrous. It is the residue. It 25 would be the same as shives in flax. MR. WOLLNER: I am afraid to say that the experiment withMinnesota hemp is rather inconclusive. As I understand it the hemp wasbundled before it had been permitted to ret for an extended period oftime. It may be we will find that if the hemp is permitted to retbefore it is stacked, a further decomposition of the drug will ensue.However, we do know that the Minnesota hemp of 1934 is active. DR. WRIGHT: It would be active. MR. WOLLNER. It is active but whether the activity was retainedby improper handling of the hemp, I don't know. As I understand itthey were advised to bunch their hemp before it was retted. DR. WRIGHT: It was never rotted or retted. The plan of handlingin Minnesota was unauthorized. In other words, it was contrary tothe usual procedure. They put the green hemp or the semi-green hemp in abundle, and at a later stage it would be known in the trade as greenhemp. That was never used for textile purposes. It was not suitable fortextile purposes. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Then, Dr. Wright, your opinion is that if harvested properly most of the leaves avould remain on the groundand not adhere to the stalks? 26 DR. WRIGHT: I will be perfectly frank in telling you that willvary in seasonal conditions, and so we are much concerned about that.There are leaves left. As to the condition of those leaves, we don't know.They are left, and there is no use in denying that. There are considerableleft on the straw. There are not a great deal, but there are leaves left. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Then prompt harvesting would reduce this danger we are now confronted with? DR. WRIGHT: It would. DR. MATCHETT: What about the hemp stacked green in Kentucky; doesn't that mold more than that left on the ground? DR. WRIGHT: Hemp is left in the shock in Kentucky. You willcorrect me Dr. Robinson, if I'm wrong, because it has been fifteen yearssince I was down there, but it is my impression that it is shocked. It isfirst spread and allowed to wilt on the ground. DR. MATCHETT: Then there is no molding? DR. WRIGHT: If properly handled there will be no molding. MR. WOLLNER: From our point of view that would be improper handling; there would be no decomposition of the resin. 27 DR. WRIGHT: The general weathering we would get would be during the curing stage. MR. WOLLNER: How long, about, does that take? DR. WRIGHT: Now, after it is shocked, cured and stacked, later itis spread on the land again and retted. DR. MATCHETT: But, during this period, of course, it would be in excellent condition for smoking, - that is, relatively dry in thestack. DR. WRIGHT: From the time it is cut until it is rotted, whatever leaves there are should be suitable for Marihuana. MR. SMITH: While we have not found in New York State a large agricultural growth, we do find that the largest part of ourgrowth, instead of being on good soil, is on poor soil. For the past two years when I have been looking for wild growth,I have found it in dumps or soil that has a high content of ashesor cinders, and I have found it trying to grow it in my own garden but thegrowth does not begin to compare with that of the cinder growth, and as amatter of fact we have found that most recently the wild growth seeks thatkind of soil. That does not prove anything, of course, except we have probably most of our wild growth coming from ashes 28 and cinders and public dumps. This did strike me very forcibly,and what struck me more forcibly was that we had some of the biggestgrowths in Brooklyn where it was almost a clear cinder dump. Our experience in New York State so far has not produced anyonewho desired to be licensed as a cultivator. I think some of that might be offset if the public was assuredthat the cultivator would have to be licensed, after properinvestigation, and that definite qualifications exist to establish control. DR. WRIGHT: As to your first statement about hemp growing on cinder beds, wild hemp, - it is not a fibrous hemp. As all of youwho are familMWith the middle west know, you will find blocks that were formerly even cinder beds, but fibrous hemp will not grow there. MR. SMITH: The point I was chiefly interested in was the public interest, where it was grown, whether being produced by chance ordesign. DR. WRIGHT: We are hopeful we can clarify this situation. Since legislation may be introduced to eradicate or to bring pressureupon the legitimate producer, I appreciate your suggestion. I think it isa good one. MR. SMITH: We have also in New York State given someconsideration to definite measures for removal, but so far we have operatedunder difficulties acting under nuisance laws. Under the Public Healthlaws in New York, we can fix a penalty for maintaining a public nuisance.We have in a few instances removed Marihuana from private property wherethe owner wouldn't undertake it himself, and then assessed a lienagainst the property within the Public Health law on the ground that we haveremoved a public nuisance. DR. WRIGHT: It might be construed to apply to Marihuana under our Public Health regulations in Wisconsin. I do not know whether ithas been discussed or not. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Robinson, we would like to hear from you. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-4IA087-000625-B019-312http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045151 text/html 37129HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:51:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:39 GMTContent-length: 36911 Statement of Dr. B. B. Robinson Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF DR. B. B. ROBINSON BUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. DR. ROBINSON: If fibres produced from plants were ranked in accordance with their world production in tonnage, hemp wouldoccupy a position of probably third or fourth. It would be surpassed bycotton and jute produced in India, and in some years by flax. That gives yousome idea of where it stands in relative importance. Dr. Wright mentioned a matter that many of you are familiar with,the fact of the importance that hemp played in our earlier Colonialdays before the introduction of the cotton gin. The culture of hemp in the United States, I might say hasdecreased because of the cheap competitive fibres which are produced bycheap labor in foreign countries, and it is because of this cheapness thatthey are substituted for hemp in many cases, and not because of the factthat they have characteristics that are better than hemp for cordage ortextile purposes. The average world production between the years 1930 and 1954 for hemp was about 750,000 tons. And now, during that same period inthe United States in this small industry we have produced about 500tons. The world production was produced mainly by Russia where I think 56%of the fibre is produced, followed by Italy, Yugoslavia, Rumania asother producing countries, During the past year or two we imported fordomestic consumption about 700 to 800 tons a year, so our totalconsumption, including domestically produced fibre, and imported fibre runsabout from 1500 to 2000 tons. Now, many of you here may wonder why such a small industry asthat should be favored to continue on, particularly in the light ofthe detrimental character of certain parts of the plant usedillegally. In the first place the United States is dependent upon theforeign production of fibres other than cotton. The United States imports annually about 300,000 tons of fibre used for cordage andtextile purposes. The estimated value last year was about $35,000,000.That does not include some importations of India twine. I do not mean to infer that if hemp were grown in this country,it could substitute for all of this 300,000 tons imported, but it isthe principal fibre which we can get in the United atates, whichcould be substituted in many cases if conditions arose to make itnecessary. The United States, is very thoroughly taken care of at present in reference to supplying our own needs on this cordage fibre. Another argument for the hemp industry is the adaptability of the hemp plant to various regions of the country and because ofsuitability for mechanical handling, and these are some of the reasons why theoffice with which I am connected in the Department of Agriculture isinterested in seeing this small nucleus of hemp industry continued each yearuntil it is capable of supporting itself under economic conditions. I amspeaking more of the industry in Wisconsin rather than the promotionalattempts to grow hemp in Minnesota which one might speak of an unorthodox processing. But this industry we have is capable at the presenttime of supporting itself if public opinion does not force it tobe shut doan, or additional restrictions hamper it. So, this industry could be benefited we naturally think, if this Marihuana stigma could be removed. However, the Wisconsinoperators are not opposed to adjust themselves to the conditions and are verymuch interested in trying to overcome this drug problem. A couple of years ago when this problem was brought to the front more vividly than in the past, the Department of Agriculture wasnaturally interested in it, and the main way we could see to combat it wasas to how to get around it [sic]. Naturally there might be lessrestriction on the production of hemp in this country if we could prove that incertain sections of the country, because of climatic conditions, the drugwas not active, or if we could possibly get plants of varieties that lackthe drug, which is probably an Utopian view, or that had it in lowconcentration. As a result we cooperated with the Bureau of Narcotics, insetting up some experiments. The Bureau of Narcotics has conducted all ofthe chemical work, and Dr. Marchett later on will speak of thesetests. I do not want to go too much into his field. But, we have attempted underthis cooperative work to remove or reduce the resinous substancefrom commercial hemp. You gentlemen who are chemists and pharmacologists can assist the Agricultural program by furnishing the Agriculture Departmentsome working tools or some tests by which we can tell the presence orabsence of this drug, or its activity. It may be said that I am throwingit all on the chemists. I am not trying to do that, but we do need something towork with. So far we naturally have resorted to the Beam tests, the significance of which we do not know with certainty, but in thework we undertook last year, it was the only simple tool which we couldwork with. Now last summer out at Arlington farm close by, we planted afield in which there were 98 small plots of hemp that were set up in conformity with the statistical method of analysis of variancesby a man named Fisher. We obtained statistically significant differences between the varieties using the alkaline but did not obtain it using the acidtest. The question may arise, then, as to which is the most accurate of thetests in measuring the presence or absence of the drug. In reference to that, the question of the region of the hemp mayplay some importance. The native home of hemp is supposedly in centralAsia, �and the hemp of Chinese origin which has been distributed throughout the world has practically alwaysbeen used for fibre purposes. The hemp that has come from India has been of the narcotic typeand has not been cultivated generally for fibre. It has beencultivated for the drug. I wish I knew the history of this a little better, but fromwhat I have been able to learn from others, hemp does not appear toconstitute a narcotic problem in China. That is of a fibrous variety, andthere is a great difference between that hemp and the hemp that came from India. With reference to our test at Arlington, the narcotic chemists selected samples at three different periods for the acid andalkaline test. We got a difference, mathematically significant between thosetests. That is, the first sampling which I think was in the early part ofJune, was different from the later two samplings in that it was lower inthat characteristic of activity, the numbers they gave on the Beamtest. Actually, the last test was a little lower than the middle test,but it was not significantly lower. We arranged 8 different fertilizer treatments for the variousplots and found that the fertilizer used had no effect on the strengthor incidence either the acid or alkaline test. Because of the fertilizer result it would appear that soil vs.variations that occurred probably did not produce any differences or thatthe soil does not play a part. With reference to climate, so far we have not made a test for wehave only had the work at Arlington. But we plan next summer, ifthings go well at Arlington, to conduct a test in Wisconsin. We have somecooperative agents in Mississippi and we thought we could get a test farm there. It hasbeen suggested that we try to get one other region, Arizona or NewMexico, or out in that section. So far, we have not made arrangements, but, ifwe could get these various locations in the United States, then we could havea set-up whereby we could evolute [sic] climatic conditions in referenceto certain tests, the Beam test or some other one if you can furnish it.These are the results which we have obtained so far in the agricultural programto get away from this drug. There have been several reasons I have not brought out as to whywe thought we could get somewhere. We know by handling the plantsthat some of them are very resinous, and some are not. So, we are receptive to the work you men will do to give us somemeans of testing our plants so as to allow us to produce agriculturallysome results which we hope will help the industry. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Thank you very muckh Dr. Robinson. You recall what I said about the Turkish annual report for the year1937 in which it is said that Cannabis sativa with long stalks is grownfor industrial purposes in various parts of Anatolia; that the fibreis used for the manufacture of ropes and sacks, and its resin content is soslight that it could not be used for the extraction of a narcotic drug. Itmight be interesting to get some Turkish seed. MR. WOLLNER: We have not had a great deal of success as regards those statements. We obtained some seed submitted by Dr. Bouquetand I believe Dr. Robinson planted some of them, without any success. DR. ROBINSON: We planted them under favorable conditions last spring. Roughly we may have gotten in the field 200 or 300plants, and after our first Beam test it was estimated we had about 100 left.About the first of August, I came back from a trip to the west, and weel- iminated about two-thirds of the remainder leaving only about 40.I have harvested about 20 of these one-half were males, and we sent 10from that collection over to Dr. Matchett to run an alkaline Beam teston. I was able to obtain out of that .about one-third negative and the restpositive. MR. WOLLNER: Was the amount of resin in these plants comparableto that in other plants? DR. ROBINSON: In harvesting these plants, we merely stripped the seed in the field to keep the birds from getting it and I wouldsay that the African plant was more resinous than the Manchurian plant. It maybe that the African plant was later in maturing, but still, by comparisonwith the Manchurian plant, it had more resin. My hand was simply cakedwith resin in stripping the plant for the seed. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: The Indian Government report for 1934 shows that where they did not have this type of hemp all of theresin was imported from Central Asia. It is stated that the hemp cultivated in Europe does not carrythe intoxicating properties of Indian hemp. While it is believed thatthe European hemp does not contain as much resin as is to be found inhemp usually produced in Asia, the production of the active resin isparticularly variable, and there are some times great differences in quantitydepending on the altitude of the place of cultivation. Are there any questions that you care to ask, Dr. Robinson? DR. HIBBEN: I would like to ask if you made any experiments artificially in the new varieties by radiation? DR. ROBINSON: We had a program for a number of years on hemp, and my predecessor, Mr. Dewey, who unfortunately could not be herethis morning, reached retirement age three years ago, and our hempprogram was interrupted. So far we have not gone into that, but to some extent we have considered it. These other methods we have approached seemed tohave possibilities of results if the tests mean anything. I think this next spring, we should be able to plant thesenegative seeds we have, and those which have tested negative threedifferent times and have been pollinated by plants in three different tests, andwe should be able to give the chemists something definite to test. DR. MUNCH: It is my recollection, when Mr. Dewey made a test ofthe original plants growing in Arlington back in 1922, we founddifferent physiological portents in the male and the female but, at thattime, Mr. Dewey had seed he had obtained from various parts of the world,and it is my impression that after about three years of cultivation atArlington, the growth characteristics of all of these plants tended to the sametype. In other words, they all tended to hemp of a certain height, �as Isay that occurred after three years of cultivation. DR. ROBINSON: I think that more or less that result is obtained. Professor Wright who may have had a little closer touch with theproblem could answer you better. Wouldn't that be your opinion, ProfessorWright? DR. WRIGHT: Yes, under the method used of applying openpollinating, that was the tendency as far as our observation went,�that theywere more or less alike. DR. ROBINSON: In reference to that, these stalks of hemp weobtained last year from these various sources, have all been isolated, sothey have not been cross pollinated. DR. MUNCH I do not know where Mr. Young of Florence, SouthCarolina, got his idea for the raising of Cannabis for a medicinal purpose- DR. ROBINSON: He got it from Mr. Dewey. DR. MUNCH: There was a material decrease in the material beforehe finally abandoned that project. DR. ROBINSON: I do not know how he obtained it all, or that he obtained it all from Mr. Dewey, but as I recall, he did. DR. MUNCH: There is one other question, and that is as to themethod by which the seeds themselves were obtained,-is that of anyinterest to you? COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes, Dr. Wright, can you give ussomething on the that? DR. WRIGHT: Commercial seed used for commercial planting? COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes. DR. WRIGHT: I do not have any notes on that. The seed are grownfrom plants cultivated principally for seed; I mean the ordinary hempwhich has been planted for seed similar to corn. It is planted in rows, allharvested by hand, and put in large shocks like those in Kentucky. It isharvested in the latter part of September or the first of October in thesection in which it is grown. Then the shocks are dumped over on largecanvasses, smoothed out on the ground, and the stubble removed and beat outwith sticks in the old fashioned method. This is the only place in theUnited States producing this commercially. DR. MATCHETT: Isn't most of the seed planted here produced in foreign countries? DR. WRIGHT: I do not get the question. DR. MATCHETT: Aren't most of the seeds produced in foreign countries? DR. WRIGHT: Most of the seed produced for Commercial purposesoriginated in China, central China or towards the south part ofChina and was carried here for cultivation. MR. WOLLNER: I believe what Dr. Matchett means is the commercial crop that is grown for instance in Wisconsin, does that originatefrom seed grown in Kentucky, or the Far East? DR. WRIGHT: All of the hemp planted in the United States for commercial purposes comes from Kentucky. That is, all of thelegitimate hemp comes from seed grown in Kentucky. Does that answer thequestion? DR. MATCHETT: Yes. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Matchett, you have been collaborating with Dr. Robinson in these experiments at Arlington. Can you tellus what results you obtained? Dr. Robinson has told us quite a lot aboutthe results, but I think you can probably elaborate upon them. DR. MATCHETT: First of all I might state we made these tests inthe manner that was published by us last year, and in the treatmentwe divided the tests into six categories, according to the depth ofcolor that we obtained, beginning with zero for negative plants. Theseplants which, gave us only traces of color, which we felt should not beoverlooked, but which we also felt would not constitute wholly satisfactory identification of the plant, were designated number one. Those plants characterized as 2, gave strong responses,definitely positive, and those as 3, 4, and 5 responded with increasingintensity in that order. Briefly we found on variety No. 1, a Rumanian variety 97.5% ofthe plants tested would have been satisfactorily identified by theBeam test. That is assuming for the moment the single test would besufficient, which I believe is generally understood not to be so. Variety No. 2, another Rumanian variety, gave us 100%. Variety No. 3, the third Rumanian variety, 87% of satisfactory response. Variety No. 5, Manchuria, 22.9% satisfactory response. Variety No. 6, Chinese, 13.8% satisfactory. Variety No. 9, Italian, 98.1% There is a very decided difference between the Chinese, and Manchurian varieties on the one hand and the Rumanian and Italian varieties on the other. Now there were some very interesting things in reference to the differences between the three test periods. It is true that there was one rather decided change, particularlyin the second test, but there was not as significant differencebetween the number of negative plants, nor was the difference worked withreference to category No. l. The interesting thing was where we had many in category 2 in the first testing, in the next testing a considerable increaseappeared in category 4, with a corresponding decrease in category 2. The actual number of negative plants was not significantly different. I believe the first test gave us 36, the second test32, and the third test 40. During the course of our activities we found that molding had no apparent effect on one alkaline test response of either negativeor positive plants. We permitted them to mold in a. very moist placefor a period of five weeks. There was no change in the Beam test. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I want to ask Dr. Wright a question. In harvesting the plant, Doctor, we understand that the farmerusually harvests it before the resin reaches its highest stage. Is thattrue? DR. WRIGHT: I will say yes, not knowing when the highest stage of the resin is reached myself, but from what I could gather fromtalking to Mr. Wollner and Dr. Link and those most familiar with thesubject. It is cut in the mid-blossom stage, and from what I understand the plantsare usually expected to have a high content of resin at that time. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our eradication program, 16,000 acres have been gone over, and as I understand it we will also have togo over that same acreage during the coming year, and probably the thirdyear. Do you know how long that seed will remain dormant in the soil? DR. WRIGHT: I can only give you some guess on that. It is quite variable, and how long the seed will remain in the soil is simplymy guess. If it is harvested the first year, before pollination occurs Iwould expect that to handle the situation under most circumstances. I ambasing that on practical observation and experience, but if there is arepetition and the plant does become a volunteer plant, if the same process asfollowed for two years we could expect almost complete eradication. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: What seed could replace the hemp seed as bird food? There is a lot of growth throughout the country due tothe casting about of bird seed. Now, however we require sterilizationof hemp seed. We have not reached the 100% point in sterilization but theseed people tell us they should sell the seed in 5% mixtures; but even5%, mixtures if the seed is not properly sterilized, might producesome wild growth. Have you any suggestions on that? DR. WRIGHT: I believe that these gentlemen here from the animal biology department might be better able to judge of that than Iam. DR., COUCH: As a matter of fact, I do not know anything on thatpoint, and we have not gone into it at all. I am extremely interestedhowever. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think there should be some discussion as to the relative activities between the male and the femaleplants. DR. BLATT: May I ask a question of Dr. Robinson? As I understandit, the average production is about 500 tons a year. Is that 500 tonsof fibre? DR. ROBINSON: Yes. This past summer, we had 1300 acres of hemp produced commercially in this country, and it has been runningabout that acreage with the exception that in 1934 and 1935 this acreageappeared in Minnesota, and in 1936 and 1937 we had a big acreages inIllinois, but those were acreages planted, you might say, for other purposesthan the ordinary use, for there was an idea of producing fibre as asubstitute for a wool and various things of that nature. Those industries thatattempted to do that, for one reason or another, have dropped by the wayside,and 1000 to 1500 acres is the normal hemp production each year in theUnited States. MR. WOLLNER: Professor Wright, you heard Commissioner Anslinger's question for information on the relationship between male andfemale plants. You are undoubtedly aware of most of the discussions inthe past years on the subject of Marihuana, and that it has centeredaround the female plant. As a matter of fact, I believe the United States Pharmacopoeia refers to the flowering type of the female plant,and it is stated that Marihuana comes mostly from the female plant. Iwonder whether historically that might not have arisen from the factthat possibly the male plant flowered at an earlier period than thefemale plant in the growth of the plant itself, and at the time ofharvesting by force of circumstance they were limited to harvesting femaletops. DR. WRIGHT: Not actually knowing it, I could not say, of course,but I am sure that is the answer. In the male plant the leaves drop offlong before, the female plant, and when the traffickers have reachedthe plant the leaves have practically all gone from the male, but thefemales are luxuriant. MR. LEVINE: Is there any distinction between the fiber of malesand females? DR. WRIGHT: You see, in fibre, they are cut at an early stagewhen the female plants are just forming the bud, and the male plants justshedding the pollen. MR. WOLLNER: Then the male plant would grow as tall as the female plant. DR. WRIGHT: Yes, they do usually reach the same height. MR. WOLLNER. When produced for fibre, the plant does not reachthe height we experienced in Arlington. DR. WRIGHT: It has reached its full height when cut for fibre.You planted it in rows, too, which would add to the height. MR. HERWICK: I should like to ask Professor Wright a question asto whether or not there was any quantity of Cannabis raised in thiscountry for commercial drug purposes. DR. WRIGHT: I cannot answer that question. DR. ROBINSON: Undoubtedly there are others here who could furnish that information. I do not know of a single case where any of ithas been furnished companies for that purpose, but I think there arecompanies that get it for that purpose. MR. SMITH: There was a concern that grew it in Indianapolisseveral years ago for their own purposes. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Most of the pharmaceutical houses before enactment of Federal Marihuana Legislation obtained theirCannabis supply from the Middle West. There was relatively littleimportation of Cannabis for medical purposes. DR. COUCH: In the Food and Drug Administration, we occasionallysee a questionnaire sent to the importers more or less of the patentmedicine type, and also some well known pharmaceutical houses wherecannabis is still found in the formula for certain products. Under the PureFood and Drug Act, we have some requirements on that, and we are informedwhat the source of it is, whether gotten in this country or throughimportation. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think the stocks of some of the larger houses who are still putting this out are sufficient to carrythem over for a considerable period of time. Some of the firms transferred orsold their product to other houses, but I know of a number of occasionswhere raw material was obtained in this country for the local trade. DR. WRIGHT: I have been informed by Doctors that they did get a considerable amount of their prepared processed material fromMexico. I was wondering if there was any processing plant in Mexico. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I did not know they imported it for medical uses from Mexico. DR. MUNCH: Many of the commercial manufacturers have grown it,but because of the extreme variability of the potency of the materialthey were growing themselves, they attempted to import it from Madrasor Bombay. But the material imported was often weaker than thatgrown in this country. So the next step was to purchase from Mr. Young at Charleston, South Carolina, or the general neighborhood ofLexington, Kentucky, or Nantou, Illinois. But, those sources folded upwithin the last ten years and there has not been any substantial production ofmaterial in the United States since then. I tested most of the material grownin this country that has been offered. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I suppose that seed came from Kentucky, which in turn came from China. DR. MUNCH: That is true, but I have tested material grown in the United States commercially that was more potent in itsphysiological aspects than that imported from India. MR. FULLER: I think that came about as a result of the interestthat developed in the production of it during the war, or just beforewe got into the war, because at that time I was in the field myself and grewit com- mercially for four or five years in Virginia from that same stockof seed that Young used in South Carolina, and which was obtained fromthe Bureau of Plant Industry. I do not know whether he got itfrom Dewey or not. The plan we adopted was to cull out as much as possible the tall plants for purely commercial reasons. We could not get so muchmaterial from the tall plants. In other words, bushy plants grew up sixand seven feet high, giving much more drug than those that grew up tallerbut not so bushy, When we considered it the proper time, you would grab holdof it. It felt like a sponge. We collected enough material then to producea drug very much more potent than any imported material that came intothe country. It was our experience that it really did not make much difference where the hemp came from, after it had been grown here and become acclimated to our conditions you could select bushy plants fromit, and it was just as potent. It did not make any difference where it camefrom. We used to cull our plants, particularly the male plants. I used tothink it did not have much effect, but be that as it may, that was what wedid. I do not think we could have ever used the male plants anyway for, instripping, the amount of material obtained was so small. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: How did you strip the plant? MR. FULLER: It was a very easy process. It was done by women, and they used gloves. In all of the years we were producing thatmaterial as far as we knew, there never was a case of whereanybody used it for illegitimate purposes. In fact at that time,I do not think there was any Marihuana used. But, it did not pay us togo on. I think a great deal of the Cannabis sold in the drug trade camefrom the wild materials that grew in the Middle West and one of thelargest dealers in drugs handled that crop. I knew him very well, and hetold me at the time. DR. BROMBERG: What further preparation was there after stripping for medicinal purposes? MR. FULLER: We just baled it and sold it. DR. BROMBERG: Any other processing necessary? MR. FULLER: In the manufacturing of medicinals, it has to be extracted usually with alcohol end concentrated down to a solidextract. There was no attempt, and I do not think there has been anyattempt made, to separate for commercial purposes the active principle, foreven with all of the work done, we do not know what it is. MR. WOLLNER: Did you find, Mr. Fuller, in your growth of theplant commercially, that arid seasons or drier seasons would increase,or produce an increased quantity of resin? MR. FULLER: I do not think we noticed any difference. Now, I wasin that portion of Virginia very near to Washington on the firstplateau, six or eight miles out, and some of those summers were very dry. Wewould get sometimes six weeks without rain, and it did not seem toaffect the yield at all. One season, I recall particularly, there was agreat deal of rain, and the crop was just about the same. MR. WOLLNER: I would like to offer this thought to the Departmentof Agriculture. The statement is invariably made by people in Europeand the Far East and Near East that the amount of resin produced by aplant is in a measure proportionate to the rainfall, and the less rainfall themore resin. I wonder whether we are actually dealing with the question of the variation in the amount of resin produced as against the amountof resin exuded. That is to say, isn't it possible as a result of acondition, all that happens is the plant structure, so to speak, shrinks toevaporation and greater amount of resin appears on the surface, but the absolutequantity contained by the flowering tops and the leaves is the same ? DR. ROBINSON: I think your point is well taken, and it was my intention to go into some of those points in those teststhroughout the United States. We collected material over atArlington Farm last summer at various stages for the purpose of making a microtome test of these little pockets. So far we havenot had time to do very much on that, and there are gentlemen here whohave done more. We actually found those pockets present in pants two weeksold and on varying specimens which we have in our office. We want back toplants that were less [than] three weeks old and we found there hashishmaterial. Now in older plants in some of the specimens we have of Indianhemp, it seemed to be exuded from the cells all over the surface, and Iimagine in such plants as that, if it exuded if you touched it, much morewould come off than if it had not exuded. Is that what you mean, certainclimatic conditions would cause cells to erupt, and the viscosity of theexudate would be such that it would spread. MR. WOLLNER: I am thinking in terms of opium or the poppy. Youcan get opium from the pod without scarifying, and the thought struckme, in the case of Cannabis, since the leaf is always extracted in thiscountry, and since in the past the process has been of rubbing it from theoutside, in the East, they get more resin than we do, due to the fact thatmore has exuded but not more produced. DR. HIBBEN: There is another factor involved in the questionabout rainfall, and the formation of resin, and that is perhaps theproduction of resin would depend upon the amount of sunshine, and the morerainfall, the less sunshine. In tomato plants for example, the Department of Agriculture has done a great deal of experimentation as tofoliage, and [it] has been shown that the quantity of foliage depends greatly uponthe duration of sunshine the plant has received. MR. WOLLNER: I had not thought of that. DR. HIBBEN: Some plants require a great deal of sunshine. DR. WRIGHT: May I ask you this question, - I was interested inthe fact that you selected the bushy plant believing it moreprofitable to do that. MR. FULLER: Yes. DR. WRIGHT: Did you have any observations at all to indicate they were more potent or more satisfactory to the purchaser than themore slender plants; have you any reason to believe there is adifference between the two? MR. FULLER: No, I do not think there is any difference, for thegreen leaf from the male plant yields resin, and as far as we coulddetermine, the resin was just as potent as the female. You do not get somuch per plant. That was what we were interested in, but, as far as quality is concerned,I do not think there was any difference. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: And now, Gentlemen, if we have no more questions on the agricultural phase of the problem we willproceed to a little more controversial subject. The pharmacological phase. Iwould like to have Dr. Munch give us a little history of the pharmacology of Marihuana. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-5IA087-000625-B019-337http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045247 text/html 8941HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:52:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:30 GMTContent-length: 8724 Statement of Dr. James C. Munch Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCH PROFESSOR OF PHARMACOLOGY , TEMPLE UNIVERSITY DR. MUNCH: So far as the external effects are concerned of thefluid extract of Cannabis, the effects are hyperesthesia,fomication, and cold extremities. These cause increase inintensity. It is not local. So far as the gastro-intestinal tract is concerned, there is noeffect upon the taste. There is a tendency towards an increase inthirst and appetite, and large doses will cause nausea, emesis,vomiting, and the drugs produced diarrhea or constipation. So far as the effect on the brain, I am only going into thatto this extent, to say that in connection with USPVIII which wasthirty years ago we were interested in knowing whether theAmerican grown plant could be used as well as that which had beenimported from India. The study made by the American DrugManufacturers Association and by others at that time led the USPofficial Committee to the stand that either the Indian or theAmerican grown material would be comparable for medicinalpurposes so long as it was tested and found to have a certainphysiological effect, and from a number of bio-tests that weremade in which the material was administered to dogs, there werethree different effects produced, one effect being to cause the dog to sway from side to side, and backand forth, and finally not to be able to stand erect at all. Itwas then that satisfactory material was produced which wouldproduce such a response. When it became necessary to prepare revised standards forworld use of the Cannabis, we standardized the standards. First,we obtained material from various manufacturers in this countryrepresenting the ordinary strength or potency of the product andthen many of these manufacturers told me of the material of ten or twenty or thirtyyears before, and they gave me the products or materials whichwere of the same commercial strength as they have always beenmarketing. Then through various means, we obtained drugs and standardizedthose products, that is thirteen different products of thisseries of drugs. Those products were then mixed, and constitutedthe USP fluid extract of Cannabis, which was officiallyrecognized in USP X. Then as to the method of bio-assay. Contrary to much of thepublished literature we find that dogs vary as greatly in theirresponse as do humans. On. some 500 dogs I have used, fullyone-half were very insensitive, and were discarded immediately.The nervous type or short-haired dog is usually a satisfactoryanimal but not necessarily the best. Going back to the pharmacological action, so far as thecauses, and effect on circulation, a small dose causes rapidbeating of the heart which may be followed by less than normal.The blood pressure is usually unchanged, or there is a slightfall. So far as the blood is concerned, there is a definite increase inthe hypoglycemiacal content. At the same time, there is adefinite increase in the blood sugar. Enormous doses haveproduced death by cardiac failure, but the doses were 100 to 200times doses, which produced a tremendous physiological effect. If smoked, there is a tendency to choking or coughing, and alldoses tend to decrease the respiratory needs. So far as themuscles are concerned, the muscles show a definite confusion, andwith very large doses there are shown flexor spasms. But not witha therapeutic dose. So far as the pupils of the eyes themselves, there is a verydefinite contraction of the conjunctiva, and usually but notalways a dilation of the pupil. So far as the effect on the glands, there is probably a doublediuretical effect. There is a question, and the production of thediuretic effect is unsettled. It has been reported there is a sexually stimulating effect. Somesay it does and some say it does not exist. So far as antidotes are concerned the thought is, if it has beenswallowed, the administration of an emetic, caffeine or aciddrinks in general. So far as the habituation is concerned, it has been claimed anddenied, and so far as elimination is concerned, I have not beenable to detect it in the urine. So, I do not believe the activeprinciple is eliminated by urine. In the general pharmacopoeia developed by O'Shaunessy in 1843,which reached its peak ten or fifteen years later, it wasclinically recommended for all sorts of diseases and later foundworthless. There is a definite decrease in the central Indian drug whichstimulated further work done by Casparis and others, after whichit appears to have gone into innocuous desuetude until it beganto be criminally exploited, which led to the present burst ofstudy. Pharmacology is right I think, when it is said it does not havethe same effect, or one effect on the brain, and I may besticking my head out when I make a suggested answer that thecause of the awful intoxication is largely due to the differencein the rate of absorption, whether the material is smoked orgiven by solution or in capsules and taken into the stomach, orgiven rectally, and also the susceptibility on the brain, becausein many instances we have given the same material to humans ordogs. Some of the animals it has shown no effect upon, others ithas shown an enormous effect with the same dose. So far asanimals are concerned, we have made a comparative study and findthat dogs and rabbits have proven most suitable for quantitativeassays but none can be relied on for qualitative accuracy, thatis 10 to 12%. That is a complete change from what I said in my book,1 but it is possible, byrunning from 14 to 20 bio-assay, to obtain results accuratewithin plus or minus 11 to 20%. But, it never has been donecommercially and can only be done in connection with research. Through what channels does the active principle find its way intothe nerve centers? I should say through the blood. So far as theeffect on the blood pressure, I have attempted to cover thosereflex changes. It has been stated and denied that there aresignificant lesions in the brain of humans. Dogs I have used forsome years, in some instances showed certain types of brainchanges. Whether those are connected with Cannabis, I do notknow. I am trying to complete that now and perhaps within the next five years I can answer thequestion. Regarding the other questions, I would rather refer those to Dr.Bromberg. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Before we enter into a generaldiscussion, I would like to call on Dr. Loewe of CornellUniversity to give us a statement on the bio-assay method. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-6IA087-000625-B020-5http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045302 text/html 8041HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:52:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:26 GMTContent-length: 7824 Statement of Dr. S. Loewe Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF DR. S. LOEWE PHARMACOLOGIST CORNELL UNIVERSITY MEDICAL COLLEGE DR. LOEWE: The bio-assay, in my opinion, is the point wherethe pharmacologist has to enter this manifold picture at which wearrive in this conference for a very significant reason. The reason is that all the manifold aspects of Marihuana arefocused around and makes the existence of an active principle inthis drug, active principles which are chemically not known, andas long as an active principle is not chemically known, it canonly be determined from its action, that is, biologically, which can only be by bio-assay. Dr. Munch has thoroughly depicted the many aspects of thepharmacological action of Marihuana. That is what we can call thepharmacological spectrum of this drug, But it must be emphasized,that the spectrum of the drug as such and not on one certainactive principle necessarily, for nobody knows the active principle, and nobodyever knows whether there is only one active principle or morethan one active principle. It can be assumed from the beginning that there is more than oneactive principle but this must not necessarily concern theMarihuana interests, because the problem is narrowed to thatactive principle among possibly many active principles whichproduces the narcotic or "dope" action in humans. Even with respect to this point, of course, we are not onehundred percent sure that this is the action of one principle ormore than one. Quantitative bio-assay of the active principle of Marihuana, ofcourse, tends or aims to determine that one active principle or acomplex of active principles, which is interesting from the humanpoint of view, the narcotic principle. May I mention right herethat as long as we do not know how many active principles thereare, we have to assume primarily that every action is carried bya separate active principle, and with this assumption, may Ispeak for the definite ataxia principle, which is the principlewhich can be bio-assayed in the drug which produces the mainaction stored in the dog. There is another action in the drug,which I may call the depressant action, the cataleptic action,and then there is the anesthetic principle which can be studiedin the rabbit, using the depression of the corneal reflex. Thedepressant action in the mouse, manifested by prolonging thehypnotic action, is an action which I have observed and used tobio-assay this one active principle. Now, bio-assay has to start, therefore, with this, which oneof these actions is preferable for the Marihuana problem forstudying the narcotic principle, important for humans? We have much evidence that the ataxia action is fairly wellrelated to the narcotic action. In detail, there is not much to say. Walton has elaborated theprevious effects and experiences of the bio-assay of the drug ina fairly good manner. There are details, and certainly it isnecessary to bio-assay a large number of animals due to theindividual natures and non- susceptibility which complicates the actions, and action can onlybe compared in one and the same animal, and only for comparisonin a single animal, and the consequence is that a large group ofanimals has to be used. The mode of administration has been emphasized by Dr. Munch. Iwould prefer and do prefer, for bio-assay, intravenousadministration because the Marihuana action has a very longperiod of latency without the means of elimination from thesystem, so that the results seem to be fairly well comparable. Now, I am of the opinion, just like Dr. Munch has emphasized,that the bio-assay method of the drug is not definitelyeliminated. I have the impression that the method will result infairly good accuracy, but it is an accuracy of plus or minus 15or 20%, and which will suffice, I suppose, for the period inwhich bio-assay is necessary. It is the unfortunate situation of the pharmacologist that incertain periods of development of active principles he isavailable for the purpose, and in a certain sense he is the mancharged with the entire problem. But, his unfortunate situationis that just when he has developed this method and applied it, itis always finally inherent that he is out of the picture for, assoon as the chemist comes into the picture, and the bio-assay isnot any more necessary, the pharmacologist can be dropped. If Imay mention this at random, all of these points of view are truealso as to the chemical test. Before the chemist has developedthe active principle, the chemical method of identification of much or great importance to the country, andthey may be of much or less importance for identifying the activeprinciples than are the bio-assay methods, but only after thediscovery of the active principle and its chemical properties,the problem of the chemical test, the importance of the Beam testcan become clear. I know of another example where a greater activity of a certaindrug was found, and the drug was not white but yellow, and this,of course, introduced many beliefs that yellow colors andopticals would be an easy expedient for getting a quantitativeactivity. So, there was developed a number of tests for thisdrug, going into this problem, but finally it turned out whatgeneral color of the narcotic or commodity was and the reason forthe high activity of the drug. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Well, Doctor, we are going to have thechemists confer among themselves, and they will then give us someof their views. I think we can reserve the general discussion forthe afternoon. We will now hear from Dr. Walter Bromberg, Senior Psychiatrist ofthe Department of Hospitals, City of New York. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-7IA087-000625-B020-39http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045316 text/html 33452HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:53:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:21 GMTContent-length: 33234 Statement of Dr. Walter Bromberg Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF DR. WALTER BROMBERG SENIOR PSYCHIATRIST DEPARTMENT OF HOSPITALS, CITY OF NEW YORK. DR. BROMBERG: To start with, my interest in this Marihuanaproblem began in 1933 when I reported at Bellevue Hospital agroup of 11 cases of mental reactions induced by smokingMarihuana and I reviewed the literature and medical knowledge atthat time. Also, the experience which I obtained was at thePsychiatric Clinic of the Court of General Sessions over a period of six years. Persons showing overt mental symptomswere brought to the hospital by interested relatives andoccasionally on a magistrate's order. For that reason, the vastmajority of Marihuana smokers did not reach the hospital. Caseswhich came before the Clinic had passed through the Court ofGeneral Sessions and had been arraigned, indicted and convictedof a felony. There has been considerable literature on the intoxication andinsanity-producing effect of Cannabis, in papers from Asia,Europe, and the United States. To sum up this material concisely,it can be said that the several types of syndromes recognizedfall into three groups: (a) intoxication, (b) toxic psychosis with or without admixture ofother types of mental reactions (schizophrenia, manic-depressive)and (c) according to Eastern European and Asiatic observers,chronic dementia and deterioration following prolonged use of thedrug. Apparently this latter type of deteriorating process hasnot been observed in American clinics. Our experience with mental conditions following Marihuanaindicate to us that there are two categories of mental reaction.The following classification is suggested: Acute intoxication (Marihuana Psychosis) Containing sensory,motor and subjective elements, lasting hours to several days,often with anxiety or hysterical reactions, and panic states anddepressions of transient nature. Toxic Psychoses (a) in which there are many admixtures ofdisturbed sensorlum, delusional and emotional reactions amountingto psychosis, but with the common characteristic toxic signs and(b) functional psychoses of a typical variety, initiated byMarihuana or colored by Marihuana in their symptomatology, butwhich continue in the form of the underlying psychosis. In thesecases Marihuana represents an incipient stage in the psychosis,apparently. There were 14 cases of Acute Intoxication and 17 of Toxicpsychosis. The point at which the line is drawn between acute intoxicatingdue to Marihuana and psychosis due to Marihuana depends on thedegree and severity of the symptoms. Acute intoxications, inducedby smoking one to four cigarettes, bring about after an intervalvarying from one-half to five hours in the individual one or allof the following symptoms: an increase in motor activity, afeeling of excitement, mental confusion, disorientation, crowdingof perception, elementary visual illusions and hallucinations,euphoria and talkativeness. In addition to these symptoms,numerous subjective experiences occur, such as increased speed ofthought processes, a feeling of intellectual brilliance, changein time perception, various somatic feelings, dizziness, hunger,a feeling of swelling of the head, lightness of the extremities,a sensation of walking on air, lengthening of the limbs andsexual illusions. More often sex excitement consists in the factthat the possible sexual objects in his environment becomeextraordinarily desirable. There is abundant evidence in ourclinical and experimental material to show that the stimulus forsexual interest and activity derives from the aesthetic enhancement ofobjects in the environment. It is not so much a matter ofincreased potency on the part of the user as increased reactionto sexual fantasies and illusions. One of our patients said:"I saw black and white women lying in bed with legsseparated, as if expecting men . . . some women in the park withnothing on, doing nasty dances, moving their hips. I chased afterthem." Others state women appear amazingly beautiful.Another patient said: "In the subway I felt very sexy. Iwanted to touch every woman that passed." The speeded-up physical motility has its counterpart in rapidspeech. There is a feeling on the part of the individual that heis witty, even brilliant; his ideas flow quickly and words comereadily to the tongue. Conclusions and answers seem to come tomind ready-formed and surprisingly clear, without the effort ofthinking. This feelings of clarity is, of course, spurious.Actually the productions of the intoxicant are hard to follow,for when he wishes to explain what he has thought there is onlyconfusion. The rapid flow of ideas gives a subjective impressionof brilliance of thought and observation. The sense of increasedspeed of thinking apparently has an effect on memory - hence theconfusion that appears on trying to recall what was thoughtduring the intoxication. The smoker finds it pleasant to be with others and to impart hisexperiences to them. This is reflected in the fact that Marihuanais ordinarily smoked at parties or in groups. It is felt thatthis need for a social setting is a reaction to an inner anxietyarising from the threat of bodily destruction implied in somaticillusions induced by Marihuana In the ordinary case of smokingMarihuana, especially with one who is used to the drug, thisthreat becomes converted to euphoria which develops touncontrollable fits of laughter. Nevertheless inquiry shows thatalmost every smoker is aware of definite uneasiness at the outsetof the intoxication. The description from smokers in Harlem andfrom experimental subjects agrees on this point. In the words ofa user of two years' standing, initiates "shrink together,feel tight inside and get frightened." After they smoke it more than once, the realityof these frightening somatic illusions becomes less. Inoccasional instances, and these are the cases which are apt tocome to medical attention, the fear of death, of insanity, ofbodily deformity and of bodily dissolution are startling. Thesepatients are tense, nervous, frightened, they may develop a stateof panic. Often suicide or assaultive acts are the result of these emotionalstates. The anxiety state is so common in patients admitted tothe hospital for uncomplicated Marihuana psychosis, that it canbe considered part of the intoxication syndrome. Notes taken on experimental subjects who were psychologicallytrained illustrate these points: Subject l. Two cigarettes were smoked within 40 minutes.Immediately after the second a feeling of lightness in vertex ofhead was felt. Head was expanding; there was a feeling of mildexcitement. Now the head felt heavy and there was a definitefeeling of lengthening in the legs and a tension in the back muscles of the thigh. Head feltalternately light and heavy. There was a sensation as though thetop of the head were lifted with about four inch increase inheight, accompanied by optic images of skulls and skeletons.Feeling of the arms rising up in the air. Subject was aware of a feeling of confusion. Suddenly he sawimages of legs and arms in a dissecting room which wereterrifying. Subject 2. "I felt a little euphoric at first, but withthe first draw my heart feels faster, my eyes a little heavier. Ifeel myself perspiring all over, and shaking. I can feel a slightdizziness. I feel weak; the dizziness has left and I amperspiring (Asked to walk around the room. Refuses to do so and becomes negativistic). On looking back I remembered that Ihad sexual thoughts during the time of the experiment. Time seemsto pass in a peculiar way, there being a combination of fastnessand slowness. I took my first inhalation a few minutes after 9and when I looked at the clock and saw it was 10 after 9. I wasvery much surprised because it seemed like hours. The wholeexperiment seems now as if it lasted much longer than it did.Walking home I walked slowly in front of oncoming cars and felt asense of recklessness connected with not being able to walkfaster and not caring." It is remarkable how much anxiety is developed when one looks forexperimental subjects among laymen. The drug is popularlysupposed to release aggressive and sexual impulses beyond thepoint of control; it is also regarded as being habit-forming. Thelegendary history and social connotation of hashish smoking mayhelp to develop in those who have had no experience with thedrug, a series of anxieties masking sexual fantasies andaggressive impulses. This has come almost to the point of masshysteria. Some public officials are unwilling to allow the use ofMarihuana cigarettes for experimentation purposes, on the groundthat it may be "immoral," tending to foster thedevelopment of drug addiction among the public. This frequentanxiety concerning Cannabis may have as its source the feeling ofdissolution and other somatic changes induced in smokers which iscommunicated somehow to the non-smoking public. In clinical material as indicated, Marihuana effects may rangefrom mild intoxications to transitory psychoses which requirepsychiatric aid. The effects vary and not all the symptoms occurin every case. Illustrative of the Marihuana psychosis withanxiety reactions, and somatic sensory distortions: A 31 year old white man, admitted March 27, 1934, with a historyof having smoked just one cigarette. On admission the patient wasdepressed, retarded, apprehensive. He admitted smoking Marihuana.Was oriented and memory showed no defects. Physical examinationwas negative. The patient states, "My hand began to feelblue all of a sudden. I felt like laughing and I felt funny in myhead. it was the queerest feeling I ever had. I felt like I waskind of fainting away like. I sweat and then I'd get kind ofchilly. I got the scare of my life. I thought I was going to dieand everything else. I knew what was happening all the time. Ithought my hands were beginning to get blue. My throat began toget kind of dry. It was a little better than getting drunk. I didnot want to step down from the curb�it seemed to be so high. Iwas sitting down and was afraid to get up." Patient improvedand on the second day was less apprehensive, was pleasant andcheerful. He was discharged as recovered, after two days. This case demonstrates visual illusions, which recall themegalopsia (perceiving objects larger than they are), and morecommon micropsia, which has been reported experimentally andclinically. It is this type of illusion, induced by hashish, thatmay have been the basis for the story of Aladdin who saw thetremendous genie emerge from his lamp spout in the ArabianNights' tale. A 32 year old Irish-American, admitted September 17, 1937, with ahistory of smoking Marihuana cigarettes two hours prior toadmission. He felt dizzy, wanted to commit suicide by jumping outof windows, bumping head on the wall, floor, etc. On admissionwas uneasy, apprehensive, impulsive. Said, "I feel sick. I'mgoing through hell. I saw trucks coming at me getting larger andI wanted to open the door of the cab and jump out." He wasdischarged as improved in his own custody about 12 hours afteradmission. A common type of intoxication is indicated in the following case: A 38 year old Negro, admitted April 13, 1934, with history thathe had run out of the house poorly clad and that he had smoked"artificial" cigarettes. He was confused on admission,was dazed in appearance and disoriented. He described a lightnessof the head, dizziness and seeing star-shaped figures before his eyes after smoking a"doped" cigarette. He was apprehensive on examination.On the second or third day after admission, apprehension haddisappeared and he was discharged as recovered, being clear,composed, but unable to account for his earlier excitement. It is not uncommon to find the history of admixture of otherdrugs or alcohol in Cannabis intoxication. Frequently alcoholintensifies the Cannabis symptomatology. A 27 year old man of old American stock, admitted on June 18,1933, at his own request. He had been a chronic alcoholic anddisplayed definite evidences of psychopathic makeup; had markedinferiority because of his eyes and body structure. On admissionhe appeared to be apprehensive, a little excited, spokecoherently and relevantly. His experiences were rather clearlyset forth--"I was down on the water-front. A fellow gave mean Egyptian cigarette to smoke . . . it was hashish. About anhour afterwards I began to see things. I'd see things flying inthe air. This made me laugh and I'd laugh at things not worthlaughing at. Then I began to see green and other colors flowingbefore my eyes. Then things got black. I imagined people were following me and I screamed in my hotel and got kicked out. Istill see red lines in front of my eyes and other differentcolors all stuck together. Then I began to hear bells that would get fainter and fainterand then start again. Imagined someone was after me all evening.I thought I heard footsteps and saw people ducking in and out ofdoorways behind. me. At the time I said to myself maybe it allaffect my eyes. I seen a big splotch in front of me � it wasscarlet� very bright, exceptionally bright. It contracted, thenfaded away. I knew all the time it was due to hashish." The second group comprises cases of toxic psychosis due to orinitiated by Cannabis. There may be other toxic agents present,as alcohol, other drugs, infective or other endogenous elements.Disordered sensorium, excitement and agitation, retardation,blocking with emotional rigidity, hallucinations, sensations ofsomatic change, delusional experiences may appear in the toxicpsychosis. The psychosis lasts from weeks to months. Often themental picture crystallizes out into a schizophrenic or manicdepressive psychosis after several weeks or months (seeparadigm). At the onset of the illness what can be consideredcharacteristic Cannabis symptom- atology is discernible. As the underlying functional psychosisdevelops, the toxic elements recede. A boy of 16, admitted February 27, 1934, with statement from thefamily that for two months he had been depressed, apprehensive,worried, scratching his hands in a nervous manner, prayedconstantly. He complained that somebody read his thoughts. Onadmission was well developed and showed no physical signs. Patient was agitated,depressed, talked constantly in a bizarre manner about the devilinfluencing him, etc. Said: "I felt lightly when I waswalking - as if I weighed only 10 pounds. I felt like running mywhole body was light. I felt like jumping. As if I was walking onair. I felt happy. Then I saw yellow lights all around me. I sawblue and green too. The colors were more bright than usual. Thereare just masses of colors - sometimes I see a black cross witheverything red behind it. That means there is a God. He ishelping me. The devil knows the evil thoughts in me." Thisagitated condition improved and patient was discharged about 3weeks after admission as a psychosis due to drugs; acutehallucinatory episode. Patient was readmitted August 1st of that year with a picture ofa depression with schizoid features. On this admission there wereno evidences whatever of the sensory illusions and somaticfeelings that he had previously when he smoked Marihuana. He wastransferred to the state hospital, where he remained four years,being diagnosed as Paranoid Schizophrenia with CatatonicFeatures. There he was restless and overactive. He had a markedpush of speech, expressed ideas of reference and religiousdelusions and was manneristic. Said: "I figured the devilwas trying to pull me away from God so I cut a cross on my arm.Physically I am the same, but mentally I am another person. ...Ifeel that people influence me by touching me - like injectingdope." Later he was manneristic, grimaced, was untidy,repeated practically all questions asked, answered briefly andusually vaguely and would say, "I don' know exactly,"or "I don't know." He remained dull, apathetic,indifferent and mute until the present time. The personality factor is of undoubted importance in this groupof individuals. After the toxic state passed off in thesepatients in whom the intoxication reaches deeply enough into thepersonality, a basic psychotic state developed. At times, thetoxic features are in the background, the personality reactionsbeing pre-dominant. What the inner relationship is between Cannabis and the onset of a functional psychotic state isnot always clear. From our observation, the inner reaction tosomatic sensation seems to be vital. Such reactions consisted ofpanic states which disappeared as soon as the stimulus (effectsof the drug) faded. It is generally known in psychopathology that when the perception ofour own bodily sensations is disturbed we are liable to beprofoundly affected psychologically. Disturbances in perceptionof the body-model (Korperschema), which is built up ofkinesthetic, tactile, visual and other stimuli, and integrated into the core of the personality, elicitsome type of reaction. Such disturbances act as a blow to theego, invoking defensive reactions of anxiety, apprehension,projection, etc., which approach or are schizophrenic in theirclinical manifestations. The following case illustrates thesepoints: A 20 year-old colored man admitted February 22, 1936. He is saidby his mother to have been "nervous" for some time,said he wanted to die, wanted to kill himself. Prior to admissionhis mother caught him with a bottle of lysol. He had beendepressed and despondent. He was a boy of superior intelligenceas measured by the Army Alpha test. On admission he stated thathe used Marihuana for several months and during this time he hadheard people talking about him They said' "Oh, what an uglyboy. How mean-looking he is." For four months, August toOctober, 1935, he smoked three to four cigarettes a day until hebegan to feel ill. At first Marihuana made him happy. Then hefelt that he made a peculiar noise in his throat; ate once a day;was unable to sleep; and experienced auditory hallucinations. Thehallucinations started four months ago and increased gradually.He thought his face was changing. He looked thin, mean, and ugly;he became self-conscious. He felt that every-one in theneighborhood knew it. He stated at times he seemed speeded up,but his mind was keenly alert with the development of the ideasof reference, he became self-reproachful, apprehensive andfearful. He was then transferred to a state hospital on March 13, 1936,where he stated his hallucinations had disappeared and hisemotional reaction improved. After three months he was dischargedto his home; within five months he was readmitted to BellevueHospital, where he had gone in a state of panic, and from wherehe was re-committed to a state hospital. He was tense, uneasy,still retained ideas of reference, acted oddly at home apparentlyin response to his delusions. Diagnosis on second admission toState Hospital was Dementia Praecox Paranoid Type, which was madeabout two years after the onset of the original illness. Some cases showed the manic-depressive reactions, but these werein the minority. It is perhaps to be expected thatschizophrenic-like psychoses are more common because individualswho take to drugs have some deep inadequacy to start with. Thecyclothymic personality is less prone to require the drug. A man of 28 who was brought to the hospital by his mother onFebruary 13, 1938, with the history that he had been smokingreefers for some time. A year ago he had an episode, was nothospitalized and improved from it. On admission patient wasconfused, restless, apprehen- sive. He engaged in violent daydreamings. At times he appeared tobe reacting to hallucinations. He said he "had a bighead." He became talkative, euphoric, elated and overactiveafter a day or so. He said: "The best thing for me to do is.. . you look fine. I've got to look like you . I know what it is. . . when a Buick and a Packard get together." His speechwas distinctly flighty, his behavior panicky; was constantlyrestless. Would cry, sing, talk. He was transferred to a state hospital on February 24, 1938.There his condition persisted and he became somewhat depressed,but showed promise of recovery a few months after admission.Diagnosis at State Hospital was Manic Depressive Psychosis, ManicType. Mixed reactions merge with the toxic psychoses. These reactionsvary clinically, some occurring in chronic alcoholics, some inschizophrenics and some in psychopathic personalities, and in allof them Marihuana usage was a factor. It can be clearly seen thataside from the direct toxic effect of the drug, the personalityof the patient plays a tremendous role in psychotic statesfollowing Marihuana usage. A Cuban, age 34, who was admitted on March 6, 1938, to BellevueHospital. He had been taking Marihuana for one and a half years.He had jumped in front of a south-bound subway train withoutinjury. He was very depressed, dull, lackadaisical, despondent inattitude. He was definitely under productive but still stronglysuicidal. He described taking one cigarette every day ofMarihuana for a year and a half because it took his worries away.For some time he had been conscious that people were looking athim He feels that his body is heavy all the time. Sometimes he hears deceased persons talking to him. He seeslights at times. At times he sees a photograph of a strangeperson. His friend corroborated the history, stating that he had been inthis depressed condition for 3-4 years. He had a work-housesentence for 2-3 months for Marihuana. He was transferred to astate hospital March 18, 1938. At that time he was dull,preoccupied, but lost his hallucinatory and delusional trends.The State Hospital diagnosed him as Schizophrenia, HebephrenicType (?) and he was released after two months. In some cases the drug makes relatively little difference inthe content of the psychosis. It is for the clinician todetermine how much Marihuana influences the clinical picture. InSouth Africa, where dagga (equivalent of Marihuana) smoking isvery widespread, a diagnosis of Marihuana psychosis is made inany "toxic psychosis where there are very good grounds forassuming addiction to dagga smoking." It is felt that thereshould be more exact criteria, as we outlined above, for adiagnosis of Marihuana psychosis, by which we mean the presenceof disordered sensorium, characteristic colored visual hallucinations, timechanges, subjective and somatic feelings. One is apt toover-estimate the place of Marihuana in the causation of apsychotic picture. A white man of 28, admitted January 23, 1938, to BellevueHospital with a history that he was in a state hospital inArizona for 3 months about two years ago and one in Indiana for 9months four years ago. "I was smoking this Marihuana weed(at time of admission to State Hospital in Arizona). I ran around the desert for a time, ran out nights andone day knocked on a door and told a woman I was Dillinger. Itried to see how much water I could walk in. I was just likehypnotized and walking in my sleep. Sometimes I feel likesomething's controlling me. Sometimes I feel just like I'mtalking to somebody with my mouth closed. I just ask them a question with my brain and they answer. Sometimes it's a man,sometimes it's a woman's voice; it just works in my temple. Ithink it's imagination. It's just like a dream. People stare atme. Sometimes I see different colors. I had that years ago - justlike a light coming towards me; it's not a light, it's an arc.His effect was flat and he was dejected and slow-speaking. Showed blocking and evasiveness on. sex experiences. Had ideas ofreference and persecutory ideas. He was transferred to a state hospital, where he was noted asbeing preoccupied, under productive and somewhat dissociated. Hestated that he had some sort of seizures that were not reallyfits, but that when he had them if he had a sword he would notmind cutting everybody's head off. He also believed if anybodygot killed near the place where he worked he would be blamed forit. Said that when he looks in bright lights he sees visions likeall sorts of different colors, blues, whites, and these seem toblind him. A diagnosis was made of Dementia Praecox, ParanoidType, and he was still in State Hospital after five months. In psychopathic personalities, those with deep inferiorities, useof drugs is a method of supporting the ego. In these casesMarihuana does not always produce the desirable effect.Apparently it is not strong enough to affect the problems whichhave involved deeper layers of the personality. Such individualsadopt heroin or morphine very soon after a short experience withMarihuana. The experience of drug addicts seen at the Court ofGeneral Sessions confirms this. Persons addicted to heroin,morphine, cocaine or opium never return to Cannabis. Such individuals are admittedly psychopathic in that they need anincrement of drug to make their lives tolerable, In the nextcase, the use of Cannabis represented the attempt of the patientto overcome his sexual inadequacy. In this respect the socialpsychology of the drug is a factor, since Marihuana is popularlysupposed to free sexual inhibitions. A white man, age 23, admitted to Bellevue Hospital on March 31,1938, with a history that he felt unworthy and thought he had avenereal disease. He held ideas of infidelity against his wifeand was assaultive. Threw a four month old baby across a room. Heturned gas jets on. On admission he was rambling, talkative, evasive, depressed,self-absorbed and had somatic complaints. He said: 'I wassentenced to the Workhouse for 4 months for smoking Marihuana. Iknew then I was not satisfying my wife and I thought it mighthelp. A year ago some friends gave me the weed, I smoked several.I felt calm and liked to listen to music - very happy -exhilarating feeling - that's all." In the hospital he was talkative, discussed his problem in detailand showed some depression, which improved. The infidelity ideasand his sexual inadequacies concerned him most. He wastransferred to a state hospital with a diagnosis of Psychosiswith Psychopathic Personality; Cannabis usage a factor. Often Cannabis intoxication represents a stage in the incipiencyof a psychosis. The patient who is developing a functionalpsychosis strives in the incipient stage to overcome theunconsciously perceived difficulties. In this sense Marihuanausage represents a healthy reaction tendency, even though themechanism may be unknown to the patient. The next caseillustrated this problem. A boy who had made a successfuladjustment on a moderate level of social attainment began to showschizoid behavior shortly after the usage of Marihuana. Theprocess continued to a psychotic state. What role did the drugplay? Could the psychosis have begun without the drug? Was theuse of Cannabis the patient's attempt to cure his developingpsychosis? These are problems needing careful judgment and studyand wide clinical experience. A young Negro, 20, admitted October 2, 1936 to Bellevue Hospitalwith a history of having been dull, indifferent for some time.Insisted upon keeping the windows closed, would not leave thehouse, but denied he heard voices. Would masturbate openly andmade sign with fingers, and actions were decidedly peculiar.Mother states she caught him. smoking a sweet-smelling cigarettewith a white man and soon after got a history from his playmatesthat he had been smoking Marihuana cigarettes for a long time. Observation in the hospital confirmed his withdrawn, retardedattitude. Psychometric gave an IQ. of 75 with rating ofBorderline to Dull Normal Intelligence. Was pre-occupied on ward;difficult to obtain his attention; evasive; offered many excusesfor closing window and putting out lights. About 10 days after admission he appeared a littlemore alert and cheerful. He was discharged in custody of motheras Incipient Schizophrenia (?) or Psychoneurosis, Reactive State,on October 13, 1936. He was readmitted a year later, October 15, 1937. At that timemother gave a statement that for past year, since he lefthospital, he had been dull, staying in the house in a "deepstudy." He seems to listen; does not say anything'. At onetime he beat up an old man in the house who, he said, called him names. Prior to admission he had attacked awoman for no apparent reason. Sleeps day and night. Often looksas if he is in a dream, Changed personality reactions for morethan a year. For two weeks distinctly worse. On admission he was sluggish, dull and lethargic, spoke in aquiet, low voice, showed empty affect, but was intact inintellectual functions, memory, comprehension, orientation. Hewas transferred to the State Hospital on October 20, 1937, wherehe was evasive and dull. He showed no interest in thesurroundings and did not mingle with the other patients. Heexpressed mild ideas of persecution and of electricity, wasevasive and suspicious. He said some people called him bad namesacross the street. Believes that an attempt was made to harm him."I sometimes have a funny feeling in my legs(electricity)." Their diagnostic impression included thepossibility of Dementias-Praecox, Paranoid Type. Gradually he acquired an interest and socialized with otherpatients. At all times he was neat and tidy in personalappearance and habits. He improved after five months and wasready for parole. Now, so much for the psychopathic. We now come to thecriminology. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I thought we would cover that in anothersubject. We will now adjourn for lunch and come back at 1:30. (Thereupon at 12:20 o'clock p.m., a recess was declared, theconference to resume discussions at 1:30 p.m.) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-8IA087-000625-B020-72http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045335 text/html 65212HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:53:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:51:54 GMTContent-length: 64994 Discussion of the Pharmacology of Marijuana Discussion of the Pharmacology ofMarijuana AFTERNOON SESSION. The conference was resumed at 1:30 o'clock p.m., pursuant to the taking of a recess at noon. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Gentlemen, the Conference will be in order. We may very well start with the general discussion on the pharmacological phases of the problem, and you can direct yourquestions to Dr. Munch, Dr. Loewe, or Dr. Bromberg. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Munch, I would like to ask you, in respect tothe statement made by Dr. Walton that Cannabis has been used as arelief during labor in the Far East, are you familiar with that generalpicture? DR. MUNCH: Yes. I think that the product that is actually usedthere is not Cannabis itself, but one of these peculiar mixtures of daturaand opium and hashish and other things. Some of the reports refer to the women smoking the cigarettes fora period in labor, but they are not in agreement with theinformation I have gotten from the Mexicans or out in Nevada, for example, wherethey have tried it and found it of no value. On the isolated tissues the solutions of the drug have no effect,or have a very mild, quieting action. If I remove the alcohol, they have little effect, 90 which means that the active principle is not sufficiently solublein water to produce an action. So that I do not believe the action is verydefinitely therapeutic. It is more psychological, I believe, than it isphysiological. MR. WOLLNER: Who is Willis? One of them refers to the fact that Willis recommends its use in tedious labor where the patient isrestless. DR. MUNCH: Let me look at my copy of this book. MR. WOLLNER: It is on page 156. DR. MUNCH: Did you say "Willis", Mr. Wollner? MR. WOLLNER: Yes. On page 156, "EFFECTS DURING LABOR".It starts out, "Willis recommended". DR. MUNCH: Willis has written a book on obstetrics andgynecology, but I cannot give you the reference to it right now. MR. WOLLNER: All right. DR. MUNCH: But he is one of the authors in that field. However,the work I was referring to more particularly was done by Watt (?)and Breyer-Brandwijh, which [sic] I believe is the co-author of thepublication on poisonous plants in South Africa. I have had correspondence with Watt along that line. 91 He refers to it in the last paragraph there after South Africa. MR. WOLLNER: The reason I ask you that question is because of Dr. Bromberg's remarks, which I interpreted as being indicative ofthe production of a hypersensitivity. Am I wrong in that, Dr.Bromberg? DR. BROMBERG: A hypersensitivity? MR. WOLLNER: On the part of an individual who uses Marihuana;that is, an increased agility. DR. BROMBERG: The effects I refer to are on a motor activity. You refer to those, I presume? MR. WOLLNER: Yes. DR. BROMBERG: By which we mean the promptness to move either aimlessly or purposefully; that is, in acute intoxication thesmoker is apt to dance around and move or wave his arms, or go throughmovements that are more rapid than he would move ordinarily; move his chair,knock it across the room, talk to people, show a general output ofactivity. Many of those prisoners whom I have contacted state that they rather slow up or would rather be quiet during this period. Thereare two effects, in other words. The hyperactivity is not universal. The great, ex- 92 treme activity results in assault, throwing people around. Thisis similar to what you see in certain types of alcohol intoxication,so-called pathological intoxication, where a few drinks set a man off intoa rampage, breaking things, throwing things around, and fighting. I think maybe men come in on that more than women because of the basic physiological pattern. They are more active anyhow. Thisrefers to women, does it not? MR. WOLLNER: Yes, sir. DR. BROMBERG: Certainly the effects are not uniform and cannot be counterbalanced. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Doctor, regarding these 31 admissions out of 100,000, I think it would be interesting to know just whatperiod they cover. Are they of recent origin, or are they scatteredpretty well throughout the years? The reason that I bring that up is that the mental hospital atBurma showed, with the increased illicit traffic in Marihuana, thetotal admissions of insanity cases rose from .87 to 4.35%. I amwondering whether we can expect an increase in such cases, and also whetherthese 31 cases are more or less of recent origin. 93 DR. BROMBERG: I can answer that by saying that the admissions already in the past four years of this type of Marihuana insanityis almost twice that which it was during the first four years of ourobservation, that is, three years of our observation period. Of course, you can realize that many other cases go to private hospitals which pass off without regulatory medical treatment,and there are other factors so great that I would not put much reliance onthese figures. I merely give them to you as true data so far as we haveavailable. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have been getting some reports from various sections of the country showing cases of alleged insanitydue to Marihuana which have been brought to light. For instance, there were interesting developments in a case in Findlay, Ohio, concerning a fifteen-year-old boy who showed signsof being insane. When asked about his condition he made statements that he hadbeen smoking cigarettes, and an investigation developed theinformation that there were two defendants, who were brothers, who were in chargeof a playground, and they had been selling drugs that is, Marihuanacigarettes, to boys around there; and we found about sixteen pounds concealedabove a garage owned by them. These fellows had 94 stopped selling the drug, because they noticed signs of the boysacting queer, and they became frightened. They were particularly alarmed because of what they thought was an unusual appetite for thedrug. We have a questionnaire whereby we ask Marihuana users involvedin our cases, all sorts of questions. As a matter of fact, I wouldlike now to revise that questionnaire, after what I have heard here. One-fourth of those users when asked what effect the drug has on them, say, "It gives me a good appetite." "Thefirst cigarette makes me feel hungry." They become hungry after they smoke, have aheavy and exceptionally good appetite. That is their answer withoutprompting. Yet that question does not appear in the questionnaire. We ask them --- of course, we have to take their word for whatthey say --- whether they notice any permanent physical or mentaleffects, and they make statements which confirm the opinions of Dr. Munch andDr. Bromberg. The answers are: "I believe it has affected my nerves." "I can not keep my mind on one thing long enough to thinkclearly." "Loss of memory"; "Very bad on nerves";"Produces twisted thoughts"; "Affects my brain"; "Dulls my head." 95 "Causes me to become deaf". "I think I�m more intelligent." "Makes me tired". "Hard to think""Headache and weakness". "Seemingly dulls senses"; and so on. Then the question is asked: "What effects do you obtain from smoking Marihuana?" I think most of the answers confirm whathas been said about the distortion of space, time, vision and hearing. The auditory sensibilities are affected. We are running into a great deal of cases which have to do with illicit traffic among musicians. The next question is, "Have you acquired tolerance?"Quite a number of the users have developed a craving for Marihuana. Some of themstop after smoking few cigarettes, and there is no sign here that theyincrease the number that they smoke in a day. Some of them vary between one cigarette and twenty cigarettes a day. Others have smoked it once; some have smoked it for tenyears. MR. WOLLNER: I was wondering whether it would not be better, unless there are other specific questions, to postpone thisportion of the Conference, which relates to bio-assay, which pertains to achemist, because all of those questions are related, and go on with therest of 96 the program. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: All right, unless there are questions. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Loewe, do you wish to say some thing? DR. LOEWE: Among other things, I have tried Marihuana's action ona monkey, and I went to it with great hopes because I thoughtreally that the psychic action would come out in this patient. The observations were that the monkey reacts like the dog, and is one more of the few laboratory species which really show theataxia action. The other observation was that the monkey required higher dosesper kilogram body weight than the dog, which was somewhat unexpected,and that all of the lower doses to which I have climbed up throughthe ratio of higher doses did not show anything which indicated a psychicaction. The monkeys do not show this type of abnormality which occurs in Dr. Bromberg's material. MR. WOLLNER: What is the relation in the dosage per kilogram of weight of dog and human being? DR. LOEWE: The dog dosage per kilogram of weight and the human being per kilogram of weight, are fairly 97 close. The higher doses used in humans are capable of showing the slightest ataxia symptoms, which would point to the fact that thedosage is almost the same. DR. MATCHETT: This ataxia is never apparent in humans at all? DR. LOEWE: I have no experience; I never saw it. DR. BROMBERG: I never saw it either. MR. WOLLNER: Have you any observations about ataxia symptoms comparable to those in dogs as to humans? DR. BROMBERG: No; but I have never seen a large enough quantity, certainly not the tincture or the fluid extract. Dr. Munch can perhaps answer that. DR. MUNCH: I have given doses up to twice that re-cognized, but Ihave not noticed ataxia in students. DR. LOEWE: There is one factor which, of course, is important,and it is a fact which we notice from tobacco smoking, and that is thatthe dosage in the form of the cigarette is probably high enough toproduce great ataxic symptoms in humans by way of the administration ofinhala- tion. DR. HERWICK: I should like to ask Dr. Bromberg, clinically,whether there is a direct physiological addiction to this; that is, arewithdrawal symptoms produced or do 98 you think it is purely a psychic addiction? DR. BROMBERG: My idea of habituation on this matter is different,and there happen to be several, and we should have the thingclarified. Habituation must rest on three cases, two of them being habit forming. The first are the symptoms appearing of withdrawal of the habit forming drug. The second is that the patient develops tolerance. The third is that because he needs more drug he gets the pleasureof addiction, and all medicine agrees that there must be withdrawal. A morphine addict becomes intolerant of withdrawal. He has abdominal pains and various symptoms. When morphine is given hefeels better. And that is the basis of a well known treatment. Secondly, there are the people who take increasing doses to feel well. Those two are well acknowledged criteria. In the New York County jail, the physician in charge thinks hesees withdrawal symptoms, but the offenders are not allowed to discussthe offense with anyone except counsel. They say they did smoke it,or they did not. You do not know whether the symptoms are tied up withthe 99 drug. So, I dare say that there are no clear withdrawal symptoms. The thing is not settled. Patients come in after being cut offwithout the drug. The third is addiction of pleasure-loving, and in that categorycomes smoking and colorful music and things of that nature. You can saythat one has to have pleasure after he becomes addicted to luxury, andthat can be looked upon as a valid psychiatric observation. So I would stop there and say that we can say that in the absenceof other evidence, that it is essentially hedonistic addiction. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Loewe, you mentioned in your experiment on dogs that you had injected some of these extracts, but, nevertheless,in most of the experiments that had been previously done, I gather, the drughad been taken orally. Of course, we know the stuff is smoked. Your introduction of injection as a method of administrationraises the question in my mind as to whether we might, at some futuredate, anticipate the use of that on humans, in this way? Is there anypossibility of this sort? Similar to that which obtains in heroin, forexample? DR. LOEWE: Only after the isolation in pure form 100 I would say, because, at the present time, by use. of theextracts it will not be an element in the whole picture to introduce it byintravenous injection. It has to be injected in alcohol solution, and aslight injection introduces a bad local infection, pain, and so on. MR. WOLLNER: Why were you impelled to use it as an injection as a method of administration, rather than giving it to your dogsorally, Dr. Loewe? DR. LOEWE: It goes faster. In view of the long period of latency,it is much more convenient to use it intravenously injected, becausethe peak of the curve is reached sooner. MR. WOLLNER: Would you conclude from that that on dogs, for example, as a medium for standardization, that they are not asradically different when the stuff is in-jected as compared to when it is administered orally? DR. LOEWE: Probably that is true, but only to an inconsiderable extent. In a slighter extent the variations have been reported byvarious examinators [sic] after oral administration. MR. WOLLNER: Will you recommend it as the preferred procedure for bio-assay. DR. LOEWE: I am not sure that I should give the preference to the intravenous way. I have to collect more 101 experiences. DR. MATCHETT: Are the effects otherwise identical? DR. LOEWE: Identical. MR. WOLLNER: The curve is more rapid; I mean you achieve the peakof the curve more rapidly. DR. LOEWE: Comparatively more rapidly. Beginning after onlytwenty minutes, and reaching the peak after half an hour or an hour. MR. WOLLNER: Your experiments with mice were continued under the same circumstances? DR. LOEWE: No. As to mice, they were injected orally only. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We can now go on to the sociological phases. In 88 users there were 86 males and only 2 females. I do not knowif that holds true generally. We might have got off the rails on theselection, but that is what those figures show. There were 47 white, 20 colored, 15 Latin Americans. The age, of course, is much younger than among opium users. Most of the userswere between 17 and 35. The greatest number was between 21 and 25. I believe that was true of a survey made in New York City of the users. 102 MR. SMITH: We had 100 arrests there between January 1st and October 1st that ran: 99 Negro, 60 white, and 1 yellow; and thenativity, (and this nativity includes New York City and up-state New York:)5 Mexican, 1 Chinese, 32 Puerto Rican, 2 Greek:, some from SouthAmerica, Cuba, Panama, and other places with 130 native born. Then, in addition, I have 12 other cases, which to me were more interesting, because those persons who were held for crimes otherthan possession, and they ran such as unlawful entry, 3 for grandlarceny, in addition to their possession; 1 for grand larceny, who admits heis a user. Of course, the other possessor cases probably were users, butthey are charged with possession. One with felonious assault with apistol and possession; One, exposure of person; one felonious assault, bothusers; and another, felonious assault with possession; and one a waywardminor who admits, in addition to using Marihuana, that he is using heroin;one with assault and robbery, and one who was a policy peddler. They wereheld on other charges, rather than on mere possession charges. MR. WOLLNER: What is the distribution in sexes, there, Mr. Smith? MR. SMITH: I have not the age nor sex distribution on those. 103 In at least four cases up-state we can show a definite connection with prostitution. In one we had a good report, not proven, but agood report that the Negro who was in possession was also running aschool, teaching youngsters how to smoke Marihuana. Actually, we are notcertain about the facts as to that, but that is the report that has beencurrent with that individual. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Do you have anything on occupations of the users? MR. SMITH: We have four as musicians, two as farmers, and those two farmers were actually growing Marihuana on their farms. Many of them state "unemployed". But where most ofthose that report unemployed are laborers, they usually are associated with prostitution, policy, and some of the allied types of minor gradecrimes. Prostitution, to me, seemed the most evident connection. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our 88, the occupation runs anywhere from bartender to unemployed. There are probably 50 different occupations, musicians are second to laborers,-of the 88. The rest were distributed throughout the various 104 occupations. MR. SMITH: I can give you a breakdown on that section. I have ithere in another portion of my data. There were 5 women arrested as sellers, and 8 women arrested for possession, and 147 males arrested for possession, and 7 forselling. MR. WOLLNER: About 10 per cent. MR. SMITH: Yes, sir. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our geographical distribution, we show the larger number of these around New York; a few in the NewEngland areas; a few in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, several in theMiddle Atlantic States, about 5 in the South, Kentucky and Tennessee,four; Michigan-Ohio, 13, Michigan-Ohio is second to New York. And then they string out through the rest of the States, with California probably third. MR. SMITH: In States with equal population ratios, as to the metropolitan district, as against up-state New York, our arrestsfor Marihuana violations in the State, excluding New York City, areabout 10 per cent; 15 cases, actually, against 160. They probably will vary, though, as to the development of prosecution and apprehension, as in the various up-state citiesthey are just beginning to realize in the 105 last year that Marihuana is a problem, and the figures for 1938will be higher than 1937. I expect 1939 will again be higher in up-stateNew York, so that that ratio of about 10 percent should rise. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Bromberg, you were about to start on the sociological phases. Will you give us the benefit of yourviews on that? DR. BROMBERG: The material that I have collected comes from the Court of General Sessions. This is the criminal court of New YorkCity. Our material is limited to New York County, although it must be remembered that the courts clientele comes from many sections ofthe country. We must also note that there are many racial types in ourmaterial. This is important, because the British investigators have notedin India that Cannabis does not bring out the motor excitement orhysterical symptoms among Anglo-Saxon users that occurs among natives. Thereare several other difficulties in selecting reliable material, onebeing the dependence on statements from prisoners without opportunity for objective tests or other corroborative checks, as in the case ofother drugs, e.g., heroin or morphine. During the routine interviews of some 17,000 offend- 106 ers during six and a half years, we have come across severalhundred who have had direct experience with Cannabis. Their testimony checkswith experimental results and clinical experiences in regard to symptomatology of intoxication, the absence of true addiction,and the negative connection with major crime. Especially is thisnoteworthy among sexual offenders, and in cases of assault or murder. The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the press, that crime is caused by Marihuana addiction, demand careful scrutiny. The cases analyzed in this study cover a period of more than six years, from 1932 to 1938. Out of over 16,000 prisoners in thissix-year period, 200 offenders were convicted of drug charges or found tobe users of drugs, although convicted of other charges, in the Court ofGeneral Sessions. Cases of possession for sale are handled in the Court of General Sessions which has jurisdiction over felonies. There is nodistinction made in the indictment in the Court of General Sessions as to thenature of the drug sold. Of this group of 200 drug offenders, 67 were indicated to beusers of Marihuana in any degree and for any duration of time whetherconvicted of the crime of selling Marihuana or another crime. 107 The remaining 133 offenders were morphine or heroin users. It is important to note that the only measure of Marihuana usageis the statement of the offender. Since statements of use areconceived by them to be prejudicial to their interests in court, we meetevasion and denial fairly consistently. Our most reliable source of information is from those notarrested for traffic in drugs and questioned in the routine course ofpsychiatric study. Now, this leaves out thousands of smokers who were neverarrested, people who were never arrested, and people that we deal with whowere arrested for major crimes, including the one of selling drugs.Those people were all questioned about Marihuana. Those who were arrested for selling drugs, specificallyMarihuana, were questioned as to the use of it. Some of those admitted usingit, and some did not. All the criminological material that we have has to be taken witha very large dose of salt, and they are either convicted by thetime we see them, or about to be, and are still frightened, and want to keeptheir fair records clean. The only useful record which we have in which we can 108 throw out and include material as it sounds reasonable to us, andit is checked, so far as the use of the sociological aspects of it, andthe effect of it, and so forth, so that in the General Sessions of CriminalCourt the 87 cases of Marihuana users consisted of 21 whites (native bornand European extraction), 23 Negroes, 20 Puerto Ricans (some of whomare considered to be racial mixtures), 2 Mexicans, and one Negro andIndian mixture. Of the 67 studied, 46 were convicted of possession and sale of drugs, and 21 other charges. Among the 21 cases convicted ofcrimes other than the possession of and sale of drugs, were eight charges ofburglary, five of grand larceny, three of robbery, two of assault, one eachof petit larceny, forgery, and first degree murder, and none of sexualoffenses. Burglary, grand larceny, and robbery, then, account for 16 of the21 cases. There were but two sex cases of any description in the history ofthe Marihuana cases, in both of which sodomy occurred as previousoffenses. In three cases, the individuals were what might be calledconstant users of Marihuana. One of these had commenced to use the Marihuanathree years previous to the current conviction; another, with a sixteenyear record, indicated Marihuana, had been used for fifteen years; thethird referred to his use of Marihuana as 109 "several years� duration. None of the offenders reportedany lasting effects from Marihuana. Interrogations as to the habit-formingnature of Marihuana were all answered in the negative by the prisoners. So that in the General Sessions of Criminal Court the 67 peoplewho were offenders were involved in selling Marihuana or gave somehistory of using it. Most of those people had previous charges, notincluding drugs, as to being criminals of other types. The largest proportion werenot drug users. The next largest number had no previous connection with the 67. Fifty had never been arrested for taking any drugs. This wastheir first contact with the court. These were all special cases in theSpecial Sessions Court, which deals with misdemeanors and other cases. Here, there were 202 cases. Thirteen were there on the firstcharge of any kind, that being a Marihuana charge. Those things do notmean very much to me, as they simply give a certain picture, a picture ofpeople being picked up and brought in for using Marihuana, and there isnot a very heavy weighted criminal record behind them. Drug users are notMarihuana users in the main. In the Court of Special Sessions in the same picture, in the same six-year period, of approximately 75,000 in- 110 dictments for all crimes, there were 6,000 convictions forpossession and use of drugs. Since neither the law, the district attorney, northe police department make any distinction between the several kinds ofnarcotics, their arraignments or indictments, in Special Sessions as well asGeneral Sessions, there were no figures from which to estimate the numberof Marihuana users as distinguished from the number of users ofother drugs. We therefore adopted a system of sampling the 6,000 cases inorder to arrive at an approximate estimation of the total number ofMarihuana users who came into conflict with the law. In this sampling, weexamined the records of l,500 cases, or 25 per cent of the total of 6,000. Ofthese, 135 were Marihuana charges. From this, it was estimated that about540 cases, or 9 per cent of all drug cases coming to Special Sessions over aperiod of six years, were users of Marihuana. Analyzing this sample of 135 cases, it was found that 93 had no previous record; 8 had a previous drug charge or charges, only; 5had previous charges, including drugs; and 29 had records notincluding drug charges. Among those with longer records, that is, from four toseven previous arrests, none showed progression in crime from drugs toother crimes. 111 In considering all the Marihuana cases in both General Sessions and Special Sessions Courts, a total of 202 convictions, it is animpressive fact that only 30 offenders had been arrested before for drugcharges. This does not argue very strongly for Marihuana as a drug thatinitiates criminal careers. Where there is a series of crimes committed by one individual,our records show that he passes from other forms of crime to the useof drugs. Thus, in only three cases out of our series of 67, in which anarrest associated with Marihuana was recorded, did the criminal careerstart with the use of Marihuana, and in 7 cases out of 67 criminal activitystarted with other drugs. Ninety per cent of the group is accounted forby those who (1) have no criminal record except as drug users, and (2) have aprevious record from which they turned to drugs This leaves a smallminority of offenders whose criminal careers started with drugs and went onto other crimes like larceny, assault, and so on. As measured by thesuccession of arrests and convictions in the General Sessions cases (our onlymethod of estimation), it can be said that drugs generally do not initiatecriminal careers. Similarly, in Special Sessions, only 8 had previouscharges of drugs, and 3.7 per cent has previous charges of drugs and other 112 petty crimes. In the vast majority of cases in this group of 135,then, earlier usage did not apparently predispose these offenders tocrime, even that of drug usage. Whether the first offender Marihuana cases goon to major crime can only be ascertained by referring to the findingsof the General Sessions Courts. The expectancy of major crimes followingthe use of Cannabis, then, is small, according to our experiences The problem of habituation of Cannabis is one of grave importance According to the statements of confirmed heroin or morphineaddicts, Marihuana is not a habit-forming drug. Naturally, where it isused in conjunction with heroin, morphine or cocaine another problempresents itself. Occasionally, an astute drug peddler will adulterate Marihuana cigarettes with morphine or heroin in order to retain hisclientele. Care must be exercised in evaluating the question of Marihuanahabituation, so that we are not dealing with this type of adulterated Cannabis. The medical diagnosis of habituation depends on the acceptedcriteria of acquired tolerance and after-effect upon withdrawal of thedrug. Regarding the subject of tolerance, users of Marihuana examinedin the clinic universally state that an increase in dosage is not neces- 113 sary to achieve the desired effect as time goes on. The increase in cigarette consumption, sometimes noted, is simply related to how often and how long the smoker wants to experiencethese effects. As to the question of withdrawal symptoms, cases have never, tothe knowledge of the writer, been observed systematically in anenvironment where control of the drug can be exercised. Although of secondaryvalue in deciding the problem of habituation, it should be noticed thatexperience with experimental subjects indicates that after usage of the drugand its cessation no withdrawal symptoms are reported. It has not been possible to observe satisfactorily Marihuanausers upon their entrance into custody to establish their behaviorafter cessation of usage. For one thing, the law does not allow questioning of adefendant prior to trial regarding his charge. The history of the offensecannot be discussed except with counsel, but an offender can be questionedin the course of medical treatment. The fact that Marihuana cases do notrequest medical treatment upon their incarceration argues for the absenceof withdrawal symptoms. As is well known, morphine, opium, etc., users become violentlyill upon being taken in custody, away from the 114 source of their drug, and are vociferous in their demands fortreatment. Nevertheless, the wide discrepancies between the reports of other jurisdictions and ours in the question of addiction to Cannabisdemands a serious attempt to establish the facts in the case. Up to March 26, 1938, Cannabis was classed as a habit-formingdrug in Section 1751 of the Penal Code, based on Public Health Law,Article 22, Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. Due to difficulty in this Court inproving it to be a habit-forming drug (case of People vs. Williams), the LawRevision Commission, appointed by the New York State Legislature, wasrequested to amend the Penal Code to read "narcotic" rather than"habit-forming" drug. From a legal point of view, therefore, the problem of whether itis habit-forming or not is not vital in this and many other States,since its use as a narcotic by un-authorized persons is an offense. The writer believes it highly desirable and important that a Commission be appointed to examine the matter scientifically aswas done in the case of narcosan and other reputed drug cures in 1921at the Bellevue Psychopathic Hospital under Commissioner Patterson ofthe Department of Correction. 115 The most that one can say on the basis of ascertainable facts isthat prolonged Marihuana usage constitutes a "sensual"addiction, in that the user wishes to experience again and again the ecstatic sensationsand feelings which the drug produces. Unlike morphine addiction, which is biochemically as well as psychologically determined, prolonged Marihuana usage isessentially in the services of the hedonistic elements of the personality. Those are the main conclusions I have developed from that. Then we took the cases of the Marihuana users and tried to break those down. It indicates that no murderers were found among thisgroup of 67, not one murder committed in these six or seven years by aMarihuana user. There were no sex cases among these 67. We have, however, seven hundred odd sex cases, from first degree rape down toexhibitionism, and in the course of the six or seven years not one of them was aMarihuana user, according to history or physical examination. At the time of our examination, two of them had sex cases intheir history some years before. One was sodomy, and the other someother type of offense. Of all of these people, only three called themselves 116 constant users. One for three years and twelve months, and theothers nine months. There is one other point which I would like to mention and thatis the case of a man named Joseph Ogden who is reported among othersin Mr. Merrill's paper as having been an addict. I saw him and spent some time with him. He was a psychopathic individual. I think he had been in the State hospital atLexington, and had had several other arrests. But nothing in his history indicatedMarihuana. In other words, the newspaper accounts must be discounted. Thefact of the matter was that he had not even been a drug addict, but was a homosexualist. The offender was murdered by him and shoved into atrunk. I do not know whether he disarticulated his arms or not, but hesent the trunk to the express station, and they saw blood oozing out ofit, and picked him up. He told the story rather frankly. It was a horrible crime. Ithink Marihuana was innocent of that. I am sure of that, because I havebeen able to check that very carefully. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have observed two cases of sex crimes where we have been able to prove the connection withMarihuana. 117 A boy named Perez, in Baltimore raped a ten-year-old girl, and of course he blamed it on Marihuana. It so happened that, just a year before that, Perez had beenpicked up by the Baltimore police for the sale of 2,500 grains of Cannabis,and got three months in jail. This sex offense happened the followingyear. And there is another case down in Corpus Christi that we havebeen able to establish, where an oil worker with a good reputation,obtained and smoked a cigarette, after which he raped his young daughter. Those are two cases that I know of in which we have proof. In the case of Perez, we do not know what else might have beenwrong with him, but he was definitely a user and a seller of Marihuana. I believe that Mr. Smith has had a great deal of experience upthrough New York State. MR. SMITH: We have had one case in the last two or three months, which has been of great interest to the Motor Vehicle Department.A youngster in Mount Kisco, close to New York City, was involved inan automobile accident in that village by hitting three parked carsduring the evening. When he was apprehended by the police, he literally torethe officer's blouse from his shoulder, 118 and he had great difficulty in subduing him. During the evening, they first thought it was alcohol, but laterthe youngster admitted having used a "reefer". From theinformation we obtained from him, we apprehended an individual who was growingit, and I think we picked up about six pounds. We had another case farther up-state, not as well established,but apparently pretty well shown, of the inability of the automobiledriver to perceive distance and speed. So that factor will be of considerable interest to thoseinterested in traffic control. Because of that recent case in White Plains, we have had someinquiry from the State Motor Vehicle Department, and they arcconsidering, I believe, the advisability of revoking the licenses of operatorswho can be shown to be users of Marihuana, in the same fashion that we arenow able to do after showing evidence of narcotism. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Is that in your State law now? MR. SMITH: No, sir, it is not in our State law now. In fact, I do not know if it was decided that we could get awaywith it, but through the Motor Vehicle Department we could, as one ofthe requirements in the matter of 119 ability on the questionnaire in New York up-state you have tostate whether or not you use narcotic drugs. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Marihuana users, when arrested, want to fight. Their motor impulses seem to be working It takes, sometimes, fouror five officers to subdue a man, and they sometimes wreck theliving quarters in doing so. We do not have anything like that in arresting opium users. The agents proceed very cautiously when arresting a Marihuanauser. MR. SMITH: It conflicts with alcohol which seem to be the worstcases yet, and we have had a few cases who used both. Those are perhapsthe few that you have run across. Then, of course, we have those who havejust been on the reefer alone. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER, I have noticed a tendency towards more gunplay among Marihuana users than among opium users. MR. SMITH: Than among opium users? COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes. And there has been some gun play. The first case that we arrested under the Marihuana Act, (Ihappened to have been present in the Denver court 120 when they brought this fellow up before the judge.) had been auser for a number of years. He was only 23 years old, but many of hisarrests were for assault. I have noticed that many of these violators have a record ofassault. In Wilmington, Delaware, there was the case of John Rhodes, who attacked an officer with a knife and was shot and killedresisting arrest. MR. SMITH: I have four out of twelve in one city where thecharges, in addition to possession, are assault. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In many cases, particularly around Ohio, the officers are called in cases of disturbance and they find aMarihuana user with some stuff on him. DR. MUNCH: A chap I talked to told me that the use of gin came invery particularly with the use of a reefer. Is that true with opium?Do Marihuana users tend to take gin along with smoking of the reefer? COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I do not know about that. We have not run into that. DR. MUNCH: The point I am asking could be that the alcohol therewould tend to increase the solubility of any material that has beenswallowed, and, therefore, they would get greater effect under suchconditions than if they. had not taken the alcohol. 121 DR. MATCHETT One of the Internal Revenue officials, formerly in Texas, has told us that down there persons use alcohol andMarihuana together, and where they were very wild it took four or fiveofficers to bring a man in. He attributed that to the combined effect ratherthan the effect of either one. MR. SMITH: Still, there is a good deal of fancy on the part ofsome officers, whose experience with Marihuana is new. I have had some experience with one or two sheriffs. I know ofone who recently employed the services of two other sheriffs and fourdeputy sheriffs to secure the arrest of a farmer on a farm where thematerial was growing. Any youngster, 18 or 19 years old, could have gone there and doneit alone. This was because of the first experience of those officerswith it. I think the men were anxious to capitalize on the possiblepublicity which might attend the arrest. So that sometimes you run up againstthat problem, where they report that it is necessary for a number of them tosubdue an individual. That may be an effort to make it appear a moreserious type of crime. So that I think we have to put our tongues in our 122 cheeks as to this, also. DR. MATCHETT: This story came from Deputy Commissioner Berkshire, of the Alcohol Tax Unit. MR. SMITH: We did have in White Plains this additional situation:The fact appeared there that with children of high school age withgood financial and social background, that two of those individuals,who were in difficulties there, stated that the smoking of reefers had becomea part of the initiation in certain clubs or school fraternities. That probably is a little bit unusual, as an incident, but thathas been definitely reported in that vicinity. DR. WRIGHT: Where was that? MR. SMITH: That was in White Plains, New York. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Did you not arrest a youngster sixteen years old for selling? Mr.. SMITH: Yes, sir. There were two youngsters of excellent background, and fine social connections. That was probably alarger factor, as compared to anything else, I think, and that was that theyprobably had too much financial and social backing. That may be more true inthat particular county than in other counties in that State. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: You mentioned a case of a 123 young man using Marihuana and heroin. MR. WITH: Yes, sir. That was in New York City. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: What had he used first, do you know? MR. SMITH: I do not know. That, I extracted from the Police Department records last Tuesday, but I did .not have time to goback and get the individual cards, and I doubt very much whether theinformation which appears in the police cards will show that. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have not run into many peddlers of heroin who also handle Marihuana, and we have not run into manyusers of Marihuana who are also heroin users. However, as Dr. Bouquetpoints out, in Tunis there is a tendency to switch from Marihuana to heroin. Have you run into any cases like that, Doctor? DR. BROMBERG: I have seen many drug addicts, who have, once or twice, they say, tried Marihuana, and have dropped it, because itwas not strong enough. Most true addicts start with heroin or opium. MR. SMITH: Do you not think that that might be more theassociation with individuals than the association with the drug? DR. BROMBERG: Perhaps. And there is one other fact, and that isthat alcohol and Marihuana have a more potent 124 effect than alcohol alone. I had a case where a man started smoking Marihuana. The seller introduced heroin, he noticed the effect, and he became a user,but, of course, that was not through any choice. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: As to this question of using alcohol with Marihuana, I recall a case in Indiana where a man was arrestedwho had an infusion of the drug in alcohol. How do they do that? Drink itand smoke a cigarette? DR. BROMBERG: No. I think it is a sociological matter. He usesthe gin with it, or otherwise, and it depends on the amount of money andthe locality, and they smoke, and it represents having some fun, theeffect which they look for. MR. WOLLNER: I wonder how much can be deduced from the present figures in the matter of crime, in view of the fact that thesefigures represent a static picture whereas the entire Marihuana picture,so far as I know, is on an up-curve. Have you noticed any tendencies that are not static over a periodof years Dr. Bromberg? DR. BROMBERG: That is a very good question, because the alcoholthing depends on the relationship between the two. 125 But I have been in contact with the court for about five years,and the number of Marihuana peddlers has not increased, but the number of Marihuana users we do not know about. MR. WOLLNER: In what order, would you say? DR. BROMBERG: It is impossible to say. These are onlyapproximations, I admit. It all depends on the police activities. They make a drive, and the figures go up. They forget about it,and there are no figures. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Are there any questions as to this phaseof the problem? I must say that we are still sort of groping as to a lot of those questions. DR. MUNCH: May I intrude there, just as a matter of difference inmind, as to any sort of figure representing the total number of usersof Marihuana? I mean, has anybody said anything as to the number ofheroine users being the same as the opium addicts, or less or more, or asto the Marihuana? COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: It is impossible to say. The eradicationof 16,000 acres of Marihuana during the past year means nothing asto numbers of users. We are sure it was never meant for the illicittraffic. Probably 126 15,000 of the 16,000 acres was wild growth. DR. BROMBERG: You mean additional acreage than that which had humans on it? COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have arrested over 1,000. The Bureauof Prisons is a little concerned about that, because it is causing adefinite increase in their jails. Puerto Rico is starting to send a lot of these sellers and usersto jail, which they did not do before. There has been a tremendousup-grade in apprehensions. I do not recall just what the arrests have been by statesthroughout the country. These are Federal arrests. State arrests areprobably over that figure. I should say that the 16,000 acres represent only a drop in thebucket, because I know in one State there are 300,000 acres of the wildgrowth. We have a job here on eradication that is just stupendous. Fortunately, a lot of this acreage that is discovered we hearabout through people who do not tell anybody else about it. The illicit trafficker is looking for growth. I cannot understandwhy the New York trafficker had to go out to Minnesota and strip someof those hemp fields. MR. SMITH: We had two instances where the material was either reported to be, or actually was, of western 127 growth, and they were getting a higher price than was paidapparently for New York grown. Whether that was bona fide, as to the materialfrom New York State, or as to the material from Minnesota, I do not know,or whether it was a question of price boosting as to the New York salesprices, we still do not know. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think within a couple of blocks from where Dr. Munch lives you can walk into as much [as] fifty acresthat has not been destroyed. DR. MUNCH: They went over about 300 acres of that this year andran out of C.C.C. men and then stopped. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: That is a tremendous problem with us. We have used many of the agencies of the Government, the W.P.A. hashelped, and other agencies. We have discouraged all of these well-meaningpeople throughout the country who want to use Boy Scouts in the removalof' Marihuana. DR. MUNCH: We have had considerable cooperation through Admiral Foote, and the Automobile Vehicle Department of our State. DR. WRIGHT: May I ask Dr. Bromberg whether or not his contactswith these patients show whether or not there is any indication ofwhether these cigarettes used were tobacco which had been adulteratedwith Marihuana? 128 DR. BROMBERG: My source of information is the Police Department,and the cigarettes that they have gathered up are filled definitelywith Marihuana, and no other compound. MR. SMITH: I would like to ask Dr. Bromberg, or anybody else whohas had experience as to the likelihood of development of perversion. Has anybody had any experience on that? COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Kolb, have you run into anything on that? DR. KOLB: No, sir. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: How many of these users have you in Lexington? DR. KOLB: There are about one hundred patients who have used it occasionally, but they are mostly opium and heroin users. About twenty-five have used nothing but Marihuana alone. But, just as Dr. Bromberg has stated they use it occasionally,just to see if it is another drug that they need. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Are these Marihuana users, as such, a younger group than your opium smokers? DR. KOLB: Most of the time. 129 For instance, we had a man from Puerto Rico, about fifty yearsold, who had been a judge, and who said it was a political plot thathe should get four years. I do not know how politics came into it. He said, "Well, they are trying to get rid of me." He never had any criminal record. That seemed to be a ratherstrong sentence for users. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have noticed the tendency in Puerto Rico, even with heroin users, to give them five years for useonly. DR. KOLB: Yes, they give them a very severe sentence. The district attorney wrote me and wanted to take it up withjudge Cooper. I told him that, from the stand-point of rehabilitation,it was a rather harmful matter to put a man in prison for four years. Heis liable to learn a lot of things in prison and then go out and hate societyand use them against society. It is my idea that users should get one year, and especially thefellow who does not have a criminal record. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I do not think the courts here are beingtoo severe. DR. KOLB' No, they are not. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: They are giving the seller 130 a great deal more than the user, on the average. DR. KOLB: Of course. MR. WOLLNER: What does your investigation represent as to these twenty-five users of Marihuana alone, as compared to those whouse other drugs other than Marihuana? DR. KOLB: Of course, we get them after they have stopped usingthe drug, and after they have escaped the acute effects of the drugs,There is only one psychiatric case, which we are not quite sure of, thathas been due to using the Marihuana drug. MR. WOLLNER: I am going to ask an awfully unfair question. What percentage of these people would have been in jail if theyhad not smoked Marihuana? DR. KOLB: Well, very few of them. MR. WOLLNER: They would hot have been in jail? DR. KOLB: That applies to a great many users of drugs. A great many of them have done other things, particularlythievery, or other slippery types of work. MR. WOLLNER: Are they slightly impaired? DR. KOLB: They are slightly impaired, partly due to thepsychiatric condition, and to the distress of needing the drug. 131 There are very few violent types of crime with the opium addict. Our experience with the Marihuana addicts is not enough to givean answer. I rather think that with the alcoholic-Marihuana user,that he would become a type of drug addict that would cause many crimes. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: There was a case in Canada, Mr.Lancaster, there a Marihuana user had withdrawal symptoms similar to thoseof an opium user. MR. LANCASTER: Yes, sir. That was the boy who was picked up andhad used Marihuana for a long time. He was out of work, had nocontinual employment. He tried to smoke Marihuana, rather liked it, and after severalmonths of usage, he was jailed, and kept there for about a week. His case was remanded, and he reported feeling tingling pains and needles in the hands and feet, and he was greatly upset andpleaded for a narcotic again. He was suffering with an imparity of that order.I do not think it was tried to see whether giving him Marihuana shouldrelieve that case or not. The general impression is that there is no great suffering, andif they are relieved from it after the first five days, naturally theywant it again, but they do 132 not break down if they do not get it. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Bromberg, have you come across any occasion of drinking Marihuana in the form of tea extract, or something ofthat sort? DR. BROMBERG: No. MR. SMITH: Is there any evidence of it being used in Canada? Onany convictions, have you had any evidence of it ? MR. LANCASTER: Not there, no. No, sir, so far there have been no samples submitted to us as yet. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: None that I know of. But I understand they do mix them, mix it with sweets, innorthern Africa. MR. SMITH: There have been one or two reports that they do mix itin California. MR. WOLLNER: For your ears, I can tell you, Mr. Smith, that allof the chemists are sitting on the edge of their seats, worrying aboutthat happening MR. SMITH: And there is a question as to the toxic effects whichcould be present. MR. WOLLNER: And there may not be any way in which we can examine it. We are hoping that they do not guess that gasoline willextract it. DR. MATCHETT: Is it true that that is a common form 133 in the Far East? COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: No, not in The Far East, but in the Near East. DR. MATCHETT: In the Near East, yes. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We seem to have covered the sociological phases, so far as we are able to and I am going to turn the choirover, at this point, to Dr. Wollner, who will proceed with the chemicalphases. This is where most of the spade work has got to be done, anyway. STATEMENT OF MR.. H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT MR. WOLLNER: The problem is not yet resolved. We are not yet in a position to know exactly what it is we are looking for, and,within four walls, I am perfectly frank to admit that al]. the chemists Ihave met, who are interested in this field, are at a complete loss when askedto prophesy the character of the narcotic principle, which we are going toeventually disclose. The situation is as bad in the chemical literature as it is inall of the other phrases. I should certainly be within the reasonable bounds of correctness when I say that ninety percent of the stuff that has been writtenon the chemical end of Can- 134 nabis is absolutely wrong, and, of the other ten percent, atleast two-thirds of it is of no consequence. That ninety per cent has had, however, to be dealt with, andchemists all over the world have been interested in Cannabis, and in thepast few years have spent a goodly portion of their time upsetting a lotof this shibboleth and tradition which has been set up, probably athousand years, so as to clear the ground and to be able to proceed in a moreorderly fashion. In this work the evidence, by force of circumstance, compels usto turn to the pharmacologist for guidance. As Dr. Loewe ably expressed before, since we have no test in the chemical laboratories for indicating the presence or absence ofthe narcotic principle, every bit of the exploratory work ofconsequence that has been engaged upon had to be paralleled with work in the fieldof bio- assay. The chemical problem is so obvious that it does not require much delineation. Chemists, enforcement administrative chemists, are interested in two things. First, and immediately, they want to know how to findand detect the presence of Cannabis sativa, or any of its productsthat are narcotic in character. In other words, most enforcement officers will make 135 a seizure in some form, solid or liquid, and the question askedis, "Is this Marihuana?" And no satisfactory technique for answering sucha question obtains today. That does not say that in most of the cases that come before the chemists they are not in a definite position to make a definitestatement, that before them the substance is definitely Cannabis sativa, butthey can not do it as definitely as in the case of morphine, opium, andheroin. The second question they would like answered is, "What is the narcotic principle, or what are the narcoticprinciples present?" That question is not one of enforcement so much as of general administration. The Commissioner of Narcotics has the problem of deciding, attimes, what regulations shall be invoked in respect to an industry or an agricultural phase of this problem. The question arises, how long shall we have to wait before theresin is decomposed, during the rotting process, for example, and theonly way I would know how to answer that question is to know how long thatprinciple will exist during that rotting exhibition. Of course, we do notknow. We can not answer that question. The question arises, can recommendations be made to 136 exempt the use of certain portions of the plant and certainindustrial directions, as far as governmental regulation is concerned, begiven by virtue of the fact that they are harmless. No statement can hemade on that score. So, it becomes important, from an administrative point of view,for administrative chemists, associated with the carrying out of theMarihuana Act, to have a more competent picture of the drug, as competentas obtains at the present time in respect to the poppy and its secretion,opium, and its products, morphine, heroin, codeine, and so on. This drug, peculiarly enough, has withstood competent attack foran extensive period of time. Before the laws were passed controlling the opium picture,chemists were able to supply a fairly excellent background, against whichsuch legislation and regulations might have been and were in factpredicated. But, in the case of Marihuana, there is no such background. It isjust a fog; without question the psychiatrists and bioassayists andagricultural people know far more about Cannabis than do the chemists. So far as knowing anything about the plant, today, is concerned,all they can tell you is that such and such 137 a product is not a narcotic, such and such a product isnon-narcotic, and they are trying to shrink the residue further and further, butthey have not touched it. Of great assistance in clarifying the issue has been the work undertaken by Dr. Blatt, in reviewing the literature. Dr. Blatt has prepared a paper consisting of a critical review ofthe literature on narcotics, published in the journal of theWashington Academy of Sciences on the 15th of November. I have a number of copies ofthe paper here, and also a chart setting forth the general character of thecritique, so that a person who is a technical man can get a picture of thething. I am going to ask that only these people who have a working knowledge of chemical symbology receive them, and we will try toget enough copies to mail them out to you later. I am going to ask Dr. Blatt if he will be so kind as to offer apicture of his survey as to the chemical constituents of Cannabis Sativa. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-9IA087-000625-B020-94http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045348 text/html 8875HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:53:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:12 GMTContent-length: 8658 Statement of Dr. A. H. Blatt Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. BLATT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY. DR. BLATT: That will not take very long, because as Mr.Wollner has said, we are only dealing with two thirds of tenpercent of the material. Very briefly, the story is, you can takeCannabis and extract it with one of several solvents, orcombinations of solvents and obtain a physiologically activeextract. The only successful technique that has been applied tothat so far has been a distillation process, and through thedistillation you can get out of it three substances, which I willsimply name and pass on. One of them is a paraffin hydrocarbon known as nonacosane, thatis, physiologically, inactive. If you do a distillation, you get a definite distillate, and allchemists who have worked with Cannabis know it as red oil.Unfortunately, it also was known as Cannabinol, and that has beenthe cause of much trouble. This red oil looks a good bit like a lubricating oil of a ratherpoor quality, a semi-solid material at room temperature. Thatmaterial we will simply call narcotic-active by a physiologicaltest. The real nasty principle about the situation is that thatmaterial behaves as if it were a chemical substance, and therehave been three different formulas proposed for it. One of the formulas has Cot so far as two individuals havingagreed upon it. Then the hitch comes. In about forty years, threeEnglish workers succeeded in preparing and isolating one pure chemical substance from this red oil. They called that Cannabinol, and the one individual substancederived from it is also called Cannabinol. For thirty years,nobody following them was ever able to get this pure Cannabinol. So, we went ahead and worked with Cannabinol, and assumed that wewere working with the pure substance. Then, roughly about eightyears ago, the pure chemical individual, pure Cannabinol, again was secured for the second time, and apparentlyit can be repeated. Pure Cannabinol is the fourth chemical substance to be gotten outof Cannabis, and it is the fourth one to be lacking in narcoticactivity. It is toxic, however, and it is quite possible thatsome of the activity of Cannabinol, some of this complex activitythat has been referred to during the morning, is due to pureCannabinol as a chemical individual. The chemical structure of pure Cannabinol has been fairly wellworked out. It is not definitely settled. We do not need to gointo that There is one more thing that should be pointed out, andthat is the fact that for thirty years perfectly competentchemists have taken this red oil, distilled, and worked with itas if a pure chemical. It not only gives analytical values ofresin, but they are even more complex. You can carry out the chemical reactions withthis. So, let us refer to red oil as the crude Cannabinol; andthe chemical individual as pure Cannabinol. You can run chemicalreactions. You can reduce an acetylate and the products you getout are still analyzable for the proper derivatives of crudeCannabinol. That is, where everybody has gone haywire. There is one ray of hope, and a pretty definite one, as to theconfusion of a mixture which was taken to be a definite chemicalsubstance, and that is why progress has been so slow, and that isthe fact that we have no way quantitatively of following thedefinite reaction of the chemical principle. The one ray of hope I mention is the fact that you can take redoil, crude Cannabinol, remove one-fourth, which is inactive aspure Cannabinol, and the residual three-fourths still retainschemical activity. There is where the work begins. That is as faras has been gotten chemically. There is just one more point here. As far as I have been able tofind, and I received corroboration at noon, there not only is nocorrelation, or no correlation has been made, so far as I canfind. out, between the various color reactions for Cannabis andthe narcotic activity, and I was told at noon that, not only hadthere been none made, but it was because there definitely isnone. So we can not fail to follow the activity as to this colortest. I may be getting off in deep water, but that is the apparentfinal analysis. There is one more thing, and that will finish itup. I hope not many people will be misled by the principle that theactive principle of Cannabis is Cannabinol. You will find it eventhere. The active fraction which you will find, which is more orless of a mixture, is called Cannabinol. You can find a chemical substance which is not active. I thinkthat covers it. MR. WOLLNER: I think that adds oils to the fire. DR. MUNCH: Is there an active substance there? MR. WOLLNER: I will take your word for it, and Bromberg's on thebasis of his research in New York It leads us pretty much towhere we started. I think if all the research work done so farwere dumped together by a group of chemists, or if they startedout today on this investigation, that they would be exactly thesame as they are now inside of six months; that is, all of theinformation which we have, which is very little, could beaccumulated in six months. Recognizing that situation, the Treasury two years ago undertookto lay the basis for a competent attack on the problem. We didnot know what that would consist of, but we knew sound,fundamental, reproducible information and data had to beobtained. The first thing we did was to contact the Department ofAgriculture, and with their cooperation, there was planted a plotat Arlington Farms over here, last summer, and the summer before,where the plant was observed in its various stages of growth, andwhich furnished us all of the criteria the literature offered us in the past. As I mentionedearlier, about ninety percent of all of it was thrown out. Thereport of the first year's investigation was published in thejournal of the American Pharmaceutical Association. I have anumber of copies here, if there are any technical men who havenot soon that report. An equivalent report is being prepared at the present time on thebasis of this summer's work. We have obtained several tons of Marihuana. We have extracted orare extracting huge quantities of that material, in an effort toprovide a satisfactory amount on the basis of which a broad attack on the problem may be predicated. Dr. Matchett is in charge of the Treasury's own immediate attackon the problem, and I believe he has some information which hecan lay before you this afternoon. Is that correct, Dr. Matchett? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-10IA087-000625-B020-113http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045358 text/html 12983HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:53:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:08 GMTContent-length: 12765 Statement of Dr. John R. Matchett Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, TREASURY DEPARTMENT. DR. MATCHETT: The problem is clarified a little bit byrecognizing that there are two distinct phases involved, thefirst of which must be pretty well finished before the second canbegin. First of all, there is the separation of the active principlefrom other material, and second, the characterization of it.Before a competent separation can be undertaken, we must be inpossession of suitable assay methods. We, of course, are interested in those manifestations ofMarihuana that lead to the effects, which have led in turn, tothe passage of the Act We are not sure, I take it, whether thesubstance produces ataxia in the dog, or sleep in the mouse, orcorneal(?) anesthesia in the rabbit is the same as the one in which we are interested. Nevertheless, something must be adopted, and by common consent, adog assay, with all its faults, has been the method of choice. Itseems obvious that these various principles, if more than oneexists, will be each characterized on its own merits. In considering this phase of it, also, it must not be forgottenthat any one of the effects may be combinations, and any of theeffects that we are able to measure may possibly be combinedeffects, of which the bad effect of the drug itself may be onlyone. With that so disposed of, it is possible to recognize thatcertain characteristics of the so-called resin are fairly welldefined already, although I think we must recognize that theresin itself is variable, and to what extent, we are not yet ableto say very definitely. As Dr. Blatt said, there have beencertain individuals isolated in pure form, of which the mostimportant are Cannabinol and the hydrocarbon nonacosame. There is also present definitely in the resin a substance thatresponds to the alkaline Beam test. There are still other substances among all those responsible forthe psychological and physiological activity; of such there maybe one or more. And finally, there are those volatile oils, in which there is notremendous interest other than to dispose of them before beingable to isolate the drug. Now, little or nothing is known of the nature of the activesubstance. All attacks on the problem have, thus far, broadlyspeaking, produced negative results. The thing, in any event, isnot an alkaloid, because we are not able to extract it into acidsolutions from solvents, nor does it contain any nitrogen. It isnot an acid, since it does not extract into alkaline solution.And it has not been shown to contain any carbonyl groups becauseit does not form any derivatives with the common reagents forsuch. There is evidence on the other hand that it forms esters andthat it is an aromatic substance, the latter from the refractiveindex of the most active fraction. From that it would appear tobe a phenolic compound. The substance is thermostable underrather rigorous conditions, but it is quickly destroyed in the presence of oxygen. It is also quitelikely that it is unsaturated since reduction by hydrogen ispossible. But all those, unfortunately, are properties of the activemixtures that Dr. Blatt referred to, rather than of any chemicalindividual. They are all of some assistance though, inconsidering methods by which the problem may be attacked. Now, only distillation in a rather high vacuum has been of anyassistance thus far in fractionating the mixture, known asCannabis resin. The volatile oils are so separated with relativeease. The substance responsible for the acid Beam test, whateverit may be, is removed, the acid test no longer appearing in thedistillate. The hydrocarbon which does appear in the distillatecan be removed by crystallization from alcohol or some othersolvent, and pure Cannabinol can be removed as a crystalline acetate or paranitry benzoate. As Dr.Blatt pointed out, this point is where the trail ends at present,with the exception of a brief note indicating that it isdefinitely possible to find physiological effects in the materialremaining after Cannabinol has been removed. It is at that point that we purpose ultimately to actually begin.The former distillation has been carried out at pressuresanywhere from atmospheric down to a reported pressure of aboutfive-one thousandths of a millimeter. From the character of the work in which this was reported itwould appear that the reported pressures must be taken with agrain of salt. No essential difference however has appeared in the products of fractionation. The material, as you may beaware, is an exceedingly difficult material to work with, a heavytar-like oil, and it does not lend itself readily to distillationby any means. We have considered that at this point it might bepreferable to resort to molecular distillation in an effort toobtain a more competent separation. If this hope be realized, anumber of avenues of attack are opened or re-opened. That is,among other things the action of solvents may be reinvestigated,and of particular interest will be the action of solvents at lowtemperatures. Then there are possibilities of preferentialadsorption, and also it may be possible to prepare crystallinederivatives. They fail to appear from treatment of the presentmixtures. Now, the molecular distillation outfit that we have chosen forthis work is of the static type, rather than the cyclic stillwith which you are probably more familiar, because the higherboiling fractions of this material are so viscous that theyprobably would not cycle with in that still without special precautions to maintain a high temperature. The original material has been distilled before passing itinto the molecular still in a flash apparatus that operates undera good vacuum. This is necessary since the crude oil isparticularly prone to spit in the molecular still and ruin thedistillation. More specifically, the process that we arefollowing is extraction from the plant material with coldalcohol, alcohol being chosen as a solvent rather than petroleumether, on account of fire hazard. This process is followed by a liquid extraction from the alcohol by pentane,which does away with a lot of water soluble material, and tarrymaterial of a nondescript character. We have not yet thoroughly satisfied ourselves that all of theactive material is extracted by pentane, but we believe we haveevery reason to think it is. Then the pentane, which incidentally, extracts quite a littlealcohol, is removed, and the alcohol is also removed. Thematerial is then passed through the flash process that I referredto a moment ago, and the distillate from here is placed in themolecular still. That is the point which the investigation hasreached at this particular moment. Now, it is expected to divide the oil into about ten fractionsin the stills, then to remove Cannabinol as the acetate and thehydrocarbon by precipitation from a suitable solvent, and then torefractions, to the remaining material. The work from that point,of course, all depend upon the results of the fractionations, andcan not be very definitely foreseen, other than that those processes, to which I referred a moment ago, will beapplied. Now, it would have been possible to have attackedcertain phases of the problem along a number of other lines, afew of which I will suggest in conclusion. The first would be acharacterization of those volatile oils, which have been referred to, and which would be of interest froma purely chemical point of view. They are separated with relativeease, by steam distillation, for example. No one, of course, hasbeen very much interested in them, and that line of attack hasnot been followed. Again, someone might become interested in the substance whichresponds to the acid Beam test. It can be removed from a solutionin petroleum either by means of alkali, and presumably would beisolated with relatively little difficulty, but experience showsthat resins so prepared are not physiologically active, hence little interest is attachedto that substance. A third possible line of attack would have been in connectionwith the Beam test itself. The development of the color is due toa product resulting from oxidation of some substance which ispresent In the resin. This substance is soluble in aqueousalkali, and is precipitated by acid. It can be readily extractedfrom acid solution. It, of course, is not actually the substancewhich responds to the alkaline Beam test, but it would be ofgreat interest from the purely scientific point of view. MR. WOLLNER: I would like to make a couple of announcements.Those of you who are not particularly interested in the chemicalattack here may find this part of the program a little arduous,and I want you to understand that you are at liberty to leave andinterrupt if you want to, as I think this part of the program might be a little obtuseat certain points. Dr. Blatt has just indicated that there are some errors in thematerial which he distributed on the critical review. Do you wantto indicate those? DR. BLATT: There is one error in the literature, for example onpage 469 in the middle of the page are three formulas, just onethe paragraph beginning in the middle of those formulas. There is a carbon atom, a "C", a single line to anoxygen "0", and that should be a double line to make itconform to the other two. Then, on that flow sheet, on theleft-hand half of the page, the second of those errors reads"dihydrogenation with sulphur," and that should be"dehydrogenation", and not "dihydrogenation". MR. WOLLNER: As you gathered, Dr. Matchett's attack there isdirected at the heart of the problem; that is to say, theisolation and characterization of the extreme number of activeprinciples. I indicated at the beginning that there is anotherphase of the problem, and that was identification. We at thistime do not know whether the chemical attack is destined todetermine the active principle in one year or sixty years. The Treasury has issued a little manual of identification,consisting largely of photographs, and it is being distributed.In this country we are mostly dealing with the drug in its plantform, and in this manual they are showing the separate parts ofplants, and so on, and it is helpful in that direction. I am going to ask Mr. Levine to give us a picture ofthe Beam test. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-11IA087-000625-B020-148http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045441 text/html 33448HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:54:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:03 GMTContent-length: 33230 Statement of Mr. Levine Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 STATEMENT OF MR. LEVINE, CHEMIST, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS. MR. LEVINE: The Beam test seems to be the most widely usedchemical test for the identification of Marihuana, and was firstintroduced by Dr. W. Beam, of the Wellcome Tropical ResearchLaboratory, of Khartoum. The alkaline test in 1911 and the acidBeam test in 1915 have come to be accepted as specific forMarihuana, although a lot of samples have failed to respond. Workers in Europe and north Africa have usedit and tried it on a large number of plant materials. In general it is agreed that no othermaterial responds characteristically to the test. It has been attacked by some chemists, notably Trolle and Rende,who said they obtained the Beam test on a mixture of drugsconsisting of ginger, coriander, licorice, nutmeg, and severalother things. Other workers, notably Fahamy and Keiy in Egypt,and Papavassiliou and Liberato, in Greece, applied the test tothese materials, both individually and in the mixture, and failedto get a positive response to any of them. As I stated before, a large number of authentic samples ofMarihuana failed to respond to the Beam test, or gave a veryslightly dirty purple color, which might be mistaken for just a dirty color. So a number of modifications of the Beam test havebeen introduced to try to improve the results obtained in thetest. One of the steps taken to improve the test was the use ofadsorbent charcoal to remove chlorophyll from the solution of theresin. This was reported independently by Fahamy and Keiy,Bouquet, and by the Bureau of Narcotics Laboratory. One of the tests developed in the Bureau of Narcotics Laboratoryis the ethyl acetate test. Ethyl acetate is used as a solvent,because it is a good solvent for the resin, it has a low boilingpoint, hence is easily evaporated and it can be treated withactivated charcoal, which removes most of the chlorophyll, andother substances, which would interfere with color development,but takes out very little of the material responsible for theBeam test. In carrying out the test, a sample of Marihuana is extracted witha portion of ethyl acetate. The solvent is treated for a fewseconds with darco or norite and filtered. The filtrate is divided between two porcelain dishes andevaporated on a steam bath before a fan. To one of the dishes isadded several drops of the alkaline Beam reagent, and to the other, several drops of the acid Beam reagent. In a large numberof tests, no samples which were negative to this modificationwere found to be positive by the original Beam test, or any of a number of other modifications. It seems, therefore, that thisis the most satisfactory modification of the Beam test. Dr. Bouquet, in Tunis, has developed two amyl alcohol tests, oneof which uses charcoal, and the other does not. His test consistsof grinding a sample of Marihuana with potassium Hydroxide, andthen adding a portion of alcohol, mixing thoroughly, andfiltering, whereupon a purple color appears in the filtrate. Then, to a portion of this filtrate he adds about a ten-foldvolume of water, and extracts with one cc. of amyl alcohol. Thepurple color is extracted into the amyl alcohol. In his test involving the use of charcoal, he adds a small amountof animal charcoal to the mixture of the alcohol, KOH, andMarihuana, presumably to remove chlorophyll, and then lets itstand for two hours before filtering. The resultant filtrate is free of chlorophyll, and the testsobtained are better. We have found that his test, involving theuse of charcoal, works better with activated charcoal, such asnorit or Darco than with the animal charcoal prescribed. Also, we find that we get results by filtering immediately afterthe addition of charcoal, instead of letting the mixture standfor two hours. We have not found any case of failure to respondupon immediate filtration, which would respond after standing. Another modification which we have developed in our laboratory,and which may be considered a modification of the Bouquet test,is probably most convenient of the modifications to run, becauseit involves the least manipulation. It consists merely of shakingfor a few seconds the sample of Marihuana with a two percentalcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide. Add to this is an amount of activated charcoal equal in weight tothe Marihuana. The mixture is shaken for a few seconds, andfiltered immediately. The filtrate is purple and on dilution withwater, the purple colored substance may be extracted by amylalcohol. Other modifications of the technique have been proposed by Dr.Myttanaere, Viehoever, Placencias and others. As I said before, a large number of plants fail to respond to anyof these modifications of the Beam tests. We have followed theappearance of the Beam test in plants with regard to age, partsof plant, and variety. In regard to age, some plants three inchestall have been found to respond to the Beam test. Some plants, at all states of growth,up to their decadence, respond. Many male plants, which are all withered, and consist of nothingbut a skeleton with a few dried flowers sticking to the top stillrespond to the alkaline Beam test. As far as an individual plant goes, the order of response is bestin the top, both with the male and female plants, followed by theupper leaves, lower leaves, upper twigs, upper stalk, lowertwigs, and lower stalk. In other words, as you go up towards thetop of the plant you get the best response. Where the top responds very strongly, you generally get a weakresponse in the skin of the lower stalk. If the tops respond veryweakly, the upper leaves will probably be negative, or just givea trace of response. We have never been able to get any responseat all from the pith or roots of the plant. This last summer we tested six varieties of hemp, as Dr. Robinsonindicated this morning. Three of them were Roumanian varieties;one of them was Italian, one, Manchurian; and one of Chineseorigin. Of the three Roumanian varieties, about a percent couldbe positively identified by the alkaline Beam test, as Dr.Natchett pointed out this morning. The other three gave a traceof response to the test. The Italian variety was very close tothis, having about 98 percent attainable by the Beam test. Of the Manchurian and Chinese, onlyabout 20 to 50 percent could be positively identified, and ofthese, practically none of the tests were as strong as the testsobtained from the Roumanian and Italian varieties. The largestnumber of the plants were absolutely negative, or showed merelyfaint trances of response, which we would not consider to besuitable for identification if the plants were unknown. We studied the effect of heating the plants towards response tothe alkaline Beam test. We found that heating parts of the plantat 100 degrees with air blowing over them for up to five hoursdid not have any harmful effects on the material response for thealkaline Beam test. In fact, some of the plants showed better response after heatingthan before. Although some workers in Europe say in no caseshould the extract be heated. over 50 degrees Centigrade. However, heating the plant at 150 degrees under the sameconditions did prove to have a deleterious effect. Anothertreatment we tried was permitting the plant to mold. We subjectedthe tops of some of the plants, both negative and positive, tomolding, in a very moist atmosphere, for a period of about fiveweeks. After this period, the whole plant was covered with slimymold. Response to the alkaline Beam test was as good as it wasoriginally. Some negative plants which were molded remained negative afterthe molding period. Oxidization is an essential part of the Beam test. Beam, in hisoriginal article, pointed out that if the tests be applied in theabsence of air, a dirty brown color will result instead of thepurple color. We have taken up some of the resin in alcohol, andadded an equal volume of 2 per cent alcoholic KOH solution. The resultant solution wascolorless, but on passing oxygen through it, the characteristicpurple color developed. Shaking the solution with charcoal had the same effect.Presumably this is because oxidization is effected by the oxygenadsorbed on the charcoal. Oxidation must be done in alkalinesolution. Charcoal plays a dual role in the test. In the case ofthe ethyl acetate test the effect is merely to remove extraneous matter, since no oxidation is effected in thissolution. In certain solvents, such as petroleum ether, the activatedcharcoal will entirely remove from solution the materialresponsible for the Beam test, while animal charcoal does this toa much smaller extent. In fact, animal charcoal may be used inpetroleum ether, although its effect as a cleaning agent is not very large. The second role of charcoal is that of an oxidizing agent. Theoxygen adsorbed on activated charcoal is effective in producingthe necessary oxidation of the material responsible for thealkaline Beam test. Animal charcoal is effective to a very muchsmaller extent, and is therefore unsatisfactory for use in this process. MR. WOLLNER: I think we will have a recess now for about fiveminutes before we resume. (A short recess was taken, after which the proceedings wereresumed as follows:) MR. WOLLNER: Now, after that rather exhaustive treatise on theBeam test, I would like to have Mr. Benjamin tell us somethingabout this so-called Duquenois test. The reason time is being given on these tests is this: Every sooften a new test is obtained, and this is the experience in everyphase of chemical activity, and until several months or yearshave been put in on it, everyone gets highly enthusiastic aboutit. Efforts are made to introduce it as witness material in court,and the first thing you know you run into a situation where youare yourself out on a peninsula and you can not possibly getback. We have asked the Treasury Department not to employ any testsunless they are absolutely tests on a theory of so-calledtriangulation, so that when our men go to court to testify on aseizure that their evidence is sound. Mr. Benjamin, will you tell us briefly about the Duquenois testand what our experience has been with that. MR. BENJAMIN: I think this was proposed in the early part of1938. Reagent number 1 is an alcoholic solution with vanillin andacetaldehyde. The second reagent is concentrated hydrochloricacid; The technique consists of extracting hemp with petroleumether and driving off the solvent by heat. One then takes one cc. of the alcoholic reagent, adds it to theresidue, and into the solution thus prepared, puts two c.c.�s ofconcentrated hydrochloric acid. There is a change in color from green to slate blue to violetblue. Now, since we have had this, we have tested approximately165 substances, including some of the alkaloids, the essentialoils, C. D. alcohols, everything I could get my hands on thatmight show up with this reagent. So far, not one sample of hemp has failed to respond to thistest. When I say "hemp" I am referring to solidextracts, fluid extracts, and ether available preparations. Theyall show positive. Certain essential oils when treated by the test procedure ranthrough the same changes as the hemp, namely, oil of bay, geranylacetate, rhodinyl acetate, and one or two others. There was also a compound known as Denol, that gave practicallythe same reaction as hemp. That is used in C. D. alcohols. I donot know exactly what it is composed of, but I think a mixture ofhigher alcohols and ketones. MR. SCHICKTANZ: Yes, higher alcohols. MR. BENJAMIN: I must emphasize the fact that not one sample ofCannabis or fluid extract of Cannabis or solid extract has failedso far. MR. WOLLNER: Would you recommend the test as an eliminative testfor hemp; that is to say, hemp would have to give a positive testof the Duquenois agent in order to be considered hemp, and thenproceed? MR. BENJAMIN: Yes. MR. WOLLNER: To apply another test to see whether it is anothersubstance? MR. BENJAMIN: I think the fact that ia the Duquenois test forCannabis fails to respond, then one should hesitate to call thesample Cannabis. MR. WOLLNER: That is predicated--- MR. BENJAMIN: (Interposing) On the 165. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Munch, you have had some experience with someother tests, which we do not think very much of. DR. MUNCH: That is fine. MR. WOLLNER: What is your experience with that test? DR. MUNCH: I started about three or four years ago with themethod developed by an official in the British pharmacopoeia forergot, using paradimethyl amino benzaldehyde. The results Iobtained I then dropped, because I got busy on something else,but I have had occasion this last spring to review and finish upthat work, which was reported at Madison and the AmericanPharmaceutical Association. The manuscript is in the hands of theeditor of the American Pharmaceutical Association, and ought to be out next month. In it I tried various modifications and found the 2-1/2 per centsolution of paradimethyl amino benzaldehyde in 65 per centsulphuric acid, or in 65 per cent phosphoric acid, which is myprincipal reagent. The material to be tested is shaken with 10parts, or approximately 10 parts, of low boiling petroleum ether,(below 40 degrees Centigrade) which has been redistilled and ahalf part of Merck�s activated charcoal or norit, or any otherU. S. P., activated carbon for five or ten minutes, thenfiltered. The filtrate is evaporated, and the reagent applied tothe residue. The direct application of the reagent causescharring, or does not cause anything, according to how muchmaterial has been removed. But on the addition of a drop of waterthere is an immediate development of a blue color, shiftingtoward the violet end of the spectrum, and disappearing within two seconds or two hours, depending onhow much material is present. Ergot gives a blue color similar to that of Cannabis, but thecolor shift is toward the red. The red is much slower than withthat of Cannabis, and it persists for several days. I went to two neighborhood drug stores, and got ten or elevenmaterials out of their prescription department, and sent themthrough the same tests. Many of them gave no color. Others gavecolors of some sort. But, to make a long story short, none ofthem gave the same type of color as the blue shift that I obtained with Cannabis. I havetried about 50 samples of Cannabis, so far, and every one ofthose gave the same reaction. While my eye is not too good, still there is a symmetric trendbetween the potency on dogs and the degree of color developedhere. By degree I mean intensity and duration, considering themtogether. But a product stronger on the dog has given me astronger color. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Matchett, what is your experience with thatGhamrawy test? DR. MATCHETT: We found too many other substances, which we regardas giving colors too similar to that given to Cannabis, to haveany value in the hands [of] anyone not very definitely expert inthe use of it. Even in such hands it is our judgment that colorsgiven tobacco and certain other substances were still too nearthe color given by Cannabis for use in the case of extracts. Ofcourse, where we have a plant to look at, we realize a differentsituation exists. DR. MUNCH: Even with tobacco? DR. MATCHETT: Tobacco was very close. DR. MUNCH: Is that right? DR. MATCHETT: This was not used with charcoal. DR. MUNCH: If I do not use charcoal, I get inconclusive resultsalong that line. DR. MATCHETT: I am coming 'to that. It was our experience thatthe U.S.P. activated charcoal would remove either the hemp ortobacco test substance from petroleum ether. The result beingthat the test in hemp was about the same as it was in tobacco. Iwill ask Mr. Benjamin if that is a correct statement. MR. BENJAMIN: That is correct. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Lancaster, have you had any experience withthese tests in Canada? MR. LANCASTER: Yes, Dr. [sic] Wollner. Some years ago ourinterest was aroused as to whether or not Canadian Cannabis wouldbe at all active. As some of you know, the plant thrives in all climates. We have it in all altitudes. There areno cultivated plants. But some years ago we wanted to satisfyourselves about the activity of the Canadian produced Cannabis.Some was grown in western Canada for windbreak purposes, that isthe only economic function it had with us. After applying thealkaline Beam test, as put out from Geneva we obtained positivereactions, and the pharmacologists tried it on dogs and we foundit responded, so we concluded that some of the Canadian Cannabiswas active. From the standpoint of the administration of the Narcotic Act,our interest is entirely limited to the illicit traffic, and itis confined to the reefer or cigarette, where we have theadvantage of a physical. diagnosis, rather than chemical. The chemical work on this we intend to follow up as of extremeimportance, because it is difficult to predict to what extent theextracts may come into use. There is a possibility of developinga non-reactive type of plant, but it is not of an immediateconcern, although there again conditions of world trade andcombined complications might become such that Canada might beasked to take up that problem again. Who knows? So we can not afford to lose interest in these chemical phases ofthe testing. Our experience with the Beam test has been that it is somewhaterratic, and does not always give the equivalent results in thehands of different operators, for some reason. Of course, thereagain, we have run some of our tests on plants where we know wehave had them in storage for some years. It is rather puzzlingthere is no reaction there. MR. WOLLNER: No reaction? MR. LANCASTER: On prolonged storage. MR. WOLLNER: Under what conditions was that hemp stored? MR. LANCASTER: In a large glass stopped bottle. However, we haveto check that again, because of the results of this vegetationwhich remained an open field, which is another puzzle. MR. WOLLNER: That is where we all find ourselves at the moment.What I would like to hear from the group is something in the wayof suggestions as to how this problem can be most competentlyattacked. What is to be done? The problem is not a simple one,although there is no indication as to its complexity. I say it isnot a simple problem, because if material has not been advancedafter several thousand years of experience there must be somebarrier there. Is there any technique which should be considered which has notbeen considered? Dr. Hibben, have you any suggestions along this line? DR. HIBBEN: That is rather a difficult question. I think weare proceeding correctly. I think the first thing that has to be done is developing anadequate method for determining the content of the activeprinciple, and until such a method is developed, there is notgoing to be very much room for improvement. MR. WOLLNER: The only difficulty has been that this problem hasbeen very much the problem of peeling an onion--the more youpeel, apparently the more peels you can take off, until you peelaway the onion and then there is nothing left. DR. HIBBEN: That is quite true. But I do not think there has beenany comprehensive, systematic work done on the problem, by anadequate chemical staff, under adequate direction. MR. WOLLNER: The first thing seems to be to find the activeprinciple. That is a different proposition. DR. MUNCH: Has any work been done on the chlorophyl of the leaf? DR. MATCHETT: All the work we know of is what you have done. DR. MUNCH: The only thought I have is, if the chlorophyll ofMarihuana happens to be different from all other chlorophylls inthe universe, it can be identified microscopically. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Hibben, you have run some microscopic tests onCannabis direct for the chlorophyll. DR. HIBBEN: I did not look for chlorophyll. I say that is verydesirable, but I say they would be very doubtful on thechlorophyll alone. DR. MATCHETT: Of course, there are some points about that. MR. VALAER: The chemistry of opium was very uncertain for a long,long time. We had a crude mass to work with, and gradually theypulled out one hundred pieces or more. I believe, after all, wehave not been interested in this more than about two years. Ibelieve the chemical crude resin Marihuana will work out in thesame way. We have two stills upstairs. We have a good many peopleworking on it in extracts and various ways, even now in thisbrief time. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Couch, do you have anything to offer? DR. COUCH: I would like to say that this problem is in no moredesperate condition than a great many other problems in which asolution has not been reached. They all present this picturebefore the real work is done in solving it which makes it allseem extremely baffling. It is very curious that by plugging along and keeping infernallyat it, that one of these days the problem is solved almost beforeit is realized, and it seems to me that the lines that have beenprojected here and the lines that have been followed are exactlythose that should be followed, and will, in the course of time,lead to the solution of the problem; I mean the information thatyou desire to have. There is one thing that occurs to me that hasnot been mentioned, and that is if any work has been done upon the smoke from Marihuana,as the smoke is physiologically active. It may be different from the resin taken by mouth or injectedinto the veins. That is another matter. But it seems to me thatthere is something there that might be developed as a test foridentity. MR. SMITH: I think Dr. Hershfield did something on thatchlorophyll work which he did two years ago. DR. COUCH: Of course, along that line is also the possibility ofreaction from the protein. It simply rests on the possibility andprobability that that is, of course, the leafy tissue, and theextract probably would not serve. The leafy portion would contain some protein. That with a waterextract or salt extract of the plant itself, in a very short timewould get positive results, one away or the other. The difficultythere is there may be present some protein that is also presentin another plant. That difficulty arises, but the precipitationreactions are amazingly specific and amazingly direct. When onegoes from one animal tissue to another he has to wash his handsextremely carefully as he changes over from one to another, so asnot to spoil the test in the next tissue. There is that sort ofdelicacy. I simply offer that as a test. I presume there hasalready been a lot of thought discounted on that subject. MR. WOLLNER: I do not know of that test. Dr. Loewe? DR. LOEWE: If I may bring up the encroachment which is in doubt,it has been known thousands and thousands of years that sex cellscontain an active principle. However, it has taken up to thiscentury to get hold of those active principles, and the reasonwas not the difficulty with respect to chemistry, but thedifficulty was that there was no test for the active principleonly as an active principle, and no chemical tests were given. This is the same situation in Cannabis with one exception, and weknow the physiological test for the active principle is given. Itis much more easily accessible. This biological test is much moreeasily accessible, so there is a test, and the thing which hasnot yet been done, at least not yet systematically enough, is to dovetail the identification ofthe active principle by its active nature by a biological test. Ithink this specific picture of the dovetail work givesimmediately the solution, unless somebody is inclined to drop the wholething. But I again remember that same situation in the femalehormone and the male hormone, which involves just this oneproperty to give a beautiful color reaction. However, it did nottake more than five years after finding the right test and usingthe right test in the right way from the first isolation of theprinciple. I think this is the way prescribed. MR. WOLLNER: Do you know of any experiments, Dr. Loewe, that havebeen performed on the smoke itself? DR. LOEWE: No. DR. BLATT: I know of where they took the Marihuana smoke andpassed it through solvents. DR. LOEWE: Through chloroform? DR. BLATT: No, through water. DR. LOEWE Water, rather than chloroform? DR. BLATT: Yes. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: There is a great deal of work being doneat the present time with respect to the use of opium smoke. Apaper has just been prepared by someone in a laboratory inLondon, which has just been issued. Are you familiar with Dr.Nicholls? MR. LANCASTER: Yes, Dr. Nicholls was mentioned in connection withthe research today. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Is that the same Nicholls who is on theOpium Assay Committee? DR. BLATT: I was going to say very much the same thing as Dr.Loewe said; that is, that I can not see any reason for beingdiscouraged as far as chemistry is concerned. Now, you have got aperfectly good point of attack. The amazing thing about thiswhole problem is that nothing has been done with the exception ofthis one matter in 1932, when it was established that crudeCannabinol behaves like a pure substance, and the customary highvacuum distillation technique fails to separate it into itsconstituents. The work has been apparently dropped from that timeon. The surprising thing is that someone has not jumped intothat. MR. WOLLNER: Of course, there has been no commercial demand inthat respect, .and that is one of the reasons for that. DR. BLATT: It is difficult to get hold of the material. DR. HIBBEN: If you want to get something on spectroscopicmethods, when these chemists leave the point where there arespectroscopic methods for determination and for determining thestructure, they would aid greatly in facilitating this problem. MR. WOLLNER: It would aid greatly. DR. MATCHETT: We would like to ask Dr. Hibben if there are notsome such methods which may be correlated to the bioassay? Theessential or volatile oils come out of this material veryreadily. It can be narrowed down to relatively few compounds. Ifwe knew, separately, the spectra of these various materials,would it not help to follow the separations at that stage ofoperations? DR. HIBBEN: Yes, I think it would. You can start in by thatprocedure on hormones. DR. MATCHETT: And I believe also carotenoids. DR. HIBBEN: Yes. DR. MATCHETT: As the fractionation goes further and further, thenumber of bioassays increases almost without limit, and that isone reason we were particularly interested in it. Also, thequantitative phase has to be considered. DR. LOEWE: But, as an economic matter, and the rational method isto proceed in an economical way, which can be done by carefullychoosing fractions to test. DR. MATCHETT: I do not believe we could quarrel about that. DR. MUNCH: Doctor, there is the other thought, and that is thatwe have not been picking on any of the prisoners lately. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Doctor, we are not dealing with the sameproblem as opium, where we can take the addict to a hospital atLexington and go through all of the experiments. There is alittle danger that this drug might affect a man permanently. Hemight do something which we may be sorry for later. I think thatmust be given serious thought. DR. WRIGHT: Dr. Wollner, I will not be very long now, but I justwant to clarify a point, and it would seem from reports and otherinformation that the tests are rather indicative of hemp ratherthan of the active principle. I am saying that for this reason: We would like to be in aposition to approach the development of strains that were freefrom the active principle, Now, until we have a test it seems tobe that we can not do anything. MR. WOLLNER: Yes, and no. DR. WRIGHT: I will say it is possible that one of these tests maybe useful from a breeding standpoint, but it seems to me it isworking entirely on a guess, It would seem to me that anyapproach would be resolving the strains in pure breeding alone.In other words, approach the inbreeding situation in a hybridmanner; that is the approach we want, but it would seem to methat all we could do at this state would be to develop thoselines at random. In other words, set up as many facilities as we could for purebreeding lines. Any individual plant that would be tested wouldbe very indefinite as to what its progeny would be, and it wouldseem to me that that is more or less a blind approach; shall Isay a lick in the dark; and we would have to develop as many aswe could. We can do that, develop as many lines as possible, likein Prussic acid in Sudan grass. My point is, and I am mentioning it to you chemists, that wecan get nowhere without a test of consequence. We might be lucky.About ten thousand chances to one, we might be lucky until wehave a test. MR. WOLLNER: In the last analysis, you are unquestionably correctabout that. Really, before significant progress can be made bythe agricultural people, we will have to provide you with aformula. Before we adjourn, I would like to invite any of thevisiting friends present to come upstairs for a few minutes andsee our laboratory set-up for tackling this job, the molecularstills, and extraction equipment, and I am quite sure you willenjoy it. And I want to really express my appreciation and thanks for yourkind cooperation in helping to clarify these issues. (Whereupon, at 5:10 o'clock p.m., the Conference was adjournedsine die.) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 WT01-B22-12IA086-000619-B005-114http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/histdrug.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033308 text/html 35954HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:32:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:39:35 GMTContent-length: 35736 The History of The Drug Laws The Historyof the Drug Laws This page, when completed, will contain a brief history ofthe major events which have brought us to the current state ofaffairs with our drug policy. Readers are invited to submitverifiable historical items which might be included in thelibrary. A Short History of the Drug Laws, by theNational Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information A Summary of Historical Events TheAncient History of Drugs Hemp Natural History 96(12) {Dec. 1987} "How Carthage Lostthe Sea," concerning the wreck of a 3rd century B.C.Carthaginian shipwreck discovered off the town of Marsala inwestern Sicily. Author Honor Frost notes (pp. 61-63): The most surprising discovery, however, was the stems of agrass whose yellow color stood out among the dunnage (the layerof branches that protected the bottom of the hull from ballaststones). There was so much of this plant material that we coulddo no more than bag random samples for analysis at the JodrellLaboratory, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew...after excavating twobasketfuls of them, we made a special request for theiridentification. The answer was, probably Cannabis sativa. Thedoubt was due to the decay of the minute hairs that would havedifferentiated these stems from two other plants: hops andstinging nettles. Given the choice, I accept cannabis: baskets ofstinging nettles seem improbable and there is no record of Punichop cultivation, whereas Herodotus, writing in the fifth centuryB.C., already refers to cannabis smoking. Caroline T. Miller suggested in a follow-up letter("Letters", _Natural History_ 97(7) {July 1988}) thatthe cannabis found was likely the remains of extra sails/riggingmaterial (since hemp was a commonly-used material for thispurpose). This was refuted in an editor's note (ibid.) whereinwas noted: According to Honor Frost...rope was found on the ship, butall of it was made, not from hemp, but from a type of grass. Thetwo small baskets of cannabis on board would not have beensuitable or sufficient for rope making. Bhang (cannabis) and charas (hash) were first used in Indiain rituals honoring the god Siva, who gave cannabis to mankind. Contrary to popular belief, American Indians did not usecannabis or it's derivatives, rather, they smoked a distinctiveblend of tobacco and other selected leaves and bark commonlycalled kinnikinnik. 1 part tobacco 1 part sumac leaves seasoned with the inner bark of either a willow or dogwoodtree. The word 'tobacco' actually means 'pipe'. Europeans mistookit to mean the pipes contents. 'They also have a tree,' the ancient text reads, 'which bearsthe strangest produce. When they are met together in companiesthey throw some of it upon the fire round which they are sitting,and presently, by the mere smell of the fumes which it gives outin burning, they grow drunk, as the Greeks do with wine. More ofthe fruit is then throw on the fire, and, their drunkennessincreasing, they often jump up and begin to dance and sing. Suchis the account which I have heard of these people.' This excerpt, taken from Herodotus' account of a certainScythian tribe, was written in the fifth century B.C. Today, many archeologists and anthropologists believe it wasIndian hemp or cannabis sativa that Herodotus called 'thestrangest produce'. Cocaine The Opiates Alcohol Tobacco The 1700's From Licit & Illicit Drugs, by Consumer Reports, p.403: ...In 1762, "Virginia awarded bounties for hemp cultureand manufacture, and imposed penalties upon those who did notproduce it." George Washington was growing hemp at Mount Vernon threeyears later--presumably for its fiber, though it has been arguedthat Washington was also concerned to increase the medicinal orintoxicating potency of his marijuana plants.* The asterisk footnote: * The argument depends on a curious tradition, which may ormay not be sound, that the quality or quantity of marijuana resin(hashish) is enhanced if the male and female plants are separated*before* the females are pollinated. There can be no doubt thatWashington separated the males and the females. Two entries inhis diary supply the evidence: May 12-13 1765: "Sowed Hemp at Muddy hole bySwamp." August 7, 1765: "--began to seperate (sic) the Male fromthe Female Hemp at Do--rather too late." George Andrews has argued, in The Book of Grass: AnAnthology of Indian Hemp (1967), that Washington's August 7diary entry "clearly indicates that he was cultivating theplant for medicinal purposes as well for its fiber." [7] Hemight have separated the males from the females to get betterfiber, Andrew concedes--but his phrase "rather toolate" suggests that he wanted to complete the separation*before the female plants were fertilized*--and this was apractice related to drug potency rather than to fiber culture. "Coffee houses in England became the centres for acertain intelligentsia and social set. There was so much argumentand discussion in the houses that spies returned to King Charleswith black stories of the seditious nature of those places. Hewas advised, and attempted to have them closed. One year therewas a royal order to that effect, but within 11 days it waswithdrawn because lawyers pointed out that it curbed the basicrights of man. The King then countered with a heavy tax on thedrink sold publicly, which resulted in a situation like someother similar governmental prohibitions, tremendous ingenuitybeing expended to reduce the tax burden and still allow coffeefor the houses." Wellman, F. L. 1961. Coffee: Botany, Cultivation, andUtilization. Interscience Publ., New York. p23. The 1800's Hemp The Opiates Cocaine Invented - 1845 The Effect of the Civil War The rise in the use of morphine The rise in patent medicines Following her husbands assassination, Mary Todd Lincoln istreated with cannabis while institutionalized for her nervouscondition. (Not a quote.) Meeley, M.E. Jr. and R.G. McMyrtry.1983. The Insanity File:The Case of Mary Todd Lincoln. Southern Ill. Univ. Press. The First American Anti-Drug Law The first American anti-drug law was an 1875 San Franciscoordinance which outlawed the smoking of opium in opium dens. Itwas passed because of the fears that Chinese men were luringwhite women to their "ruin" in opium dens. Culturalstudies of the time showed that opium dens occupied a place inChinese culture roughly comparable to the position that saloonsoccupied in white culture. That is, most patrons went to them onthe weekends, partook of the intoxicants and went back to theirwork the following Monday, with no apparent interference in theirwork. There were opium addicts, of course, but, on balance, theaddiction problem didn't seem to be any worse than addictionproblems with alcohol. The usage patterns in general seemed to becomparable to the usage patterns of alcohol. The real source of the prejudice against opium smoking wasthe racial prejudice against the Chinese. Opium smoking was apeculiarly Chinese custom. White people took their own fair shareof opium in concoctions such as laudunum and any number of otherover the counter drugs, in liquid, powder, or pill form. It wasonly the smoking of opium which was outlawed because that wasassociated with the Chinese. History records that, like most ofthe drug laws to follow it, the ordinance was massivelyunsuccessful. The San Francisco ordinance was followed by Federallegislation in 1888 aimed at keeping the Chinese out of the opiumtrade and placing certain restrictions on smoking opium. Again,the laws were directed specifically at racial groups and theperceived habits of those racial groups, not the drug itself.Under these laws, there were no restrictions on whites engaged inthe opium trade. Racial prejudice at the time ran to levels which would bedifficult to imagine today. One of the newspapers of the timerecords the story of a group of white men who got drunk and gotin an argument over whether Chinese and Indians (NativeAmericans) were really the same race. To test their theory, theycaptured a Chinese man and a Native American and took them bothto the river and threw them in. The Chinese man drowned, whilethe Native American swam to shore and escaped. On that basis,they concluded that they were not of the same race. The newspaperdid not mention that anyone was punished as a result of theincident. Sources -- Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs,1972 "A few plants such as the potato, tomato, poppy and hempseem to have the power of growing with equal luxuriance underalmost any climatic condition, changing or modifying someimportant function as if to adapt themselves to the alteredcircumstance. As remarked, hemp is perhaps the most notableexample of this; hence, it produces a valuable fibre in Europe,while showing little or no tendency to produce the narcoticprinciple which in Asia constitutes its chief value. " Watt, George. 1889. Dictionary of the Economic Products ofIndia. Calcutta 2:105. The Racial Roots of our Drug Laws COCAINE: One article in the New York Times even went so far as to saythat cocaine made blacks shoot better, that it would"increase, rather than interfere with good marksmanship...The record of the 'cocaine nigger' near Asheville, who droppedfive men dead in their tracks, using only one cartridge for each,offers evidence that is sufficiently convincing."(1) ALiterary Digest article claimed that "most of the attacksupon white women of the South are the direct result of thecocaine-crazed Negro brain."(2) When Coca-Cola removedcocaine from their drink, it was not out of concern for theircustomers' health. It was to please their Southern market, which"feared blacks getting cocaine in any form."(3) Theracism went beyond blacks. When "every Jew peddler in theSouth carries the stuff,"(4) inciting blacks to rape whitewomen, what choice did we have but prohibition? HEROIN Labor organizations played a big role in anti-Orientalfeeling. The leader of the AFL was particularly fond of bringingup fears of Chinese opium peddlers raping young American boys andgirls: According to Hill, "Gompers [Samuel Gompers, Presidentof the American Federation of Labor 1886-1924, except for oneyear] conjures up a terrible picture of how the Chinese enticelittle white boys and girls into becoming 'opium fiends.'Condemned to spend their days in the back of laundry rooms, thesetiny lost souls would yield up their virgin bodies to theirmaniacal yellow captors. "What other crimes were committedin those dark fetid places," Gompers writes, "whenthese little innocent victims of the Chinamen's wiles were underthe influence of the drug, are almost too horrible to imagine...There are hundreds, aye, thousands, of our American girls andboys who have acquired this deathly habit and are doomed,hopelessly doomed, beyond the shadow of redemption."(5) Some of the original laws are particularly telling. In 1887,Congress forbade *Chinese* to import opium, but not Americans. In1890, they extended this law to allow opium manufacture only toAmericans. In 1909, they banned *smoking* opium.(9) Smoking thedrug (rather than drinking it) was considered"Chinese". In 1901, Congress forbade the sale of opium and alcohol"to aboriginal tribes and uncivilized races", and laterextended this to include "uncivilized elements in Americaitself and in its territories, such as Indians, Alaskans, theinhabitants of Hawaii, railroad workers, and immigrants at portsof entry."(7) In 1902, an American Pharmaceutical Association report said,"If the Chinaman cannot get along without his 'dope,' we canget along without him."(8) In Idaho, they took a separate route towards protectingWhites from Chinese: In their 1887 statute, they explicitly madeit illegal for "any white person" to frequent a housewhere opium was smoked.(10) Oregon's legislators were quite honest: "Smoking opiumis not our vice, and therefore, it may be that this legislationproceeds more from a desire to vex and annoy the 'HeathenChinese' in this respect than to protect the people from the evilhabit."(12) Harry J. Anslinger, head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics,continued this campaign well into the twentieth century, accusingRed China of planning a "long range dope-and-dialecticassault on America and its leaders".(11) MARIJUANA Marijuana prohibition started in the Southwest, where"the dirty greasers grow", as sung by soldiers underGeneral Pershing.(13) A Texas police captain summed up theproblem: under marijuana, Mexicans became "very violent,especially when they become angry and will attack an officer evenif a gun is drawn on him. They seem to have no fear, I have alsonoted that under the influence of this weed they have enormousstrength and that it will take several men to handle one manwhile under ordinary circumstances one man could handle him withease."(14) According to the Butte Montana Standard, in 1927, "Whensome beet field peon takes a few traces of this stuff... hethinks he has just been elected president of Mexico, so he startsout to execute all his political enemies."(15) The American Coalition, an anti-foreigner group, stated"Marihuana, perhaps now the most insidious of our narcotics,is a direct by-product of unrestricted Mexican immigration.Easily grown, it has been asserted that it has recently beenplanted between rows in a California penitentiary garden. Mexicanpeddlers have been caught distributing sample marihuana cigaretsto school children. Bills for our quota against Mexico have beenblocked mysteriously in every Congress since the 1924 Quota Act.Our nation has more than enough laborers."(16) According to the Missionary Educator Movement, "The useof marihuana is not uncommon in the colonies of the lower classof Mexican immigrants. This is a native drug made from what issometimes called the 'crazy weed.' The effects are highexhilaration and intoxication, followed by extreme depression andbroken nerves. [Police] officers and Mexicans both ascribe manyof the moral irregularities of Mexicans to the effects ofmarihuana."(17) The very name marihuana was introduced at this time to makeit sound Mexican--some interests didn't even realize thatmarihuana and hemp were the same plant. Lobbyists for thebirdseed industry, for example, arrived with barely enough timeto get an exemption, because they hadn't realized that marihuanawas what they were putting in their seed(18), and EricPartridge's Dictionary of Slang says "hemp" is a slangword for marijuana, since "it resembles thatplant"." _______________________________ 1)Dr. Edward H. Williams, "Negro Cocaine 'Fiends' Are aNew Southern Menace," The New York Times, Feb. 8, 1914. 2)Dr. Christopher Koch, Literary Digest, March 28, 1914, p.687. 3)Richard Ashley, Cocaine: Its History, Uses and Effects, p.60. 4)"The Growing Menace of the Use of Cocaine," NewYork Times, August 2, 1908. 5)Dr. Thomas Szasz, Our Right to Drugs, quoting a 1988 USAToday poll (38%) and a 1992 National Institute on Drug Abuse report (44%). Bothagree on the 12%. 6)Herbert Hill, Anti-Oriental Agitation, Society, 10:43-54,1973; p. 51 7)Andrew Sinclair, Era of Excess, p. 33 8)ibid, p. 17 9)Lawrence Kolb, Drug Addiction, pp. 145-146 10)Ronald Hamowy, ed, Dealing With Drugs, p. 12 11)ibid, Arnold S. Trebach, p. 159-161 12)Quoted in R.J. Bonnie and C.H. Whitebread, The MarihuanaConviction (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1974), p. 14. 13)Quoted in P. Jacobs and S. Landau, eds, To Serve the Devil(New York: Vintage, 1971), 1:241. 14)Quoted in Ernest L. Abel, Marihuana: The First 12,000Years, p. 207 15)ibid, p. 208 16)ibid, p. 211 17)Quoted in J. Helmer, Drugs and Minority Oppression (NewYork: Seabury Press, 1975), p. 63 18)Abel, op. cit., p. 244 1900 to1914 Prior to 1905 - Unregulated sales. Opium was included in the USA cost of living index in 1904.The going price was $4/pound (adjusted by CPI that becomes about$55/pound in current terms). 1905 - Increasing consumer awareness of contents of products.Coca-Cola removes cocaine from their drink. Pepsi-Cola follows The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 requires contents ofproducts to be on the label and to be pure. As a result, drugabuse starts a steady drop which lasts almost ten years. The Prohibitionist Movement 1914 to1920 The Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914 Few members of Congress would have dreamed that they werepassing what would later be considered a general drug prohibitionlaw. - Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs. Alcohol Prohibition 1920 to1932 The Experience of Prohibition The Wickersham Commission Report 1933 to1937 The End of Prohibition The Outlawing of Hemp In the ensuing story, one name stands above all the others inimportance. That name is Harry Anslinger. More than any othersingle person, Harry Anslinger is responsible for our marijuanalaws and much of our drug policy today. In order to properlyunderstand the reasons for our drug laws as they are today, it isnecessary to understand the motives and the evidence behindAnslinger's campaign for the drug laws. Listed below are someexcerpts from a few of the better books on this subject. reprinted from "Marijuana in America: a scientificconfrontation" by Dr. William D. Drake Jr. Harry Anslinger was placed in charge of the treasurydepartment's finger-in-the-dike operation to halt liquorsmuggling in 1926. in 1926, not by coincidence, the firstanti-marijuana stories began to appear in mass-circulationnewspapers, and the yellow press had a lot of fun trying outmarijuana's front-page possibilities. the first successfulanti-marijuana campaign in the country, was waged by the morningand evening papers of New Orleans. While the editors of thesepapers did hedge their bets with the sure fire winner of racism,the central point of their stories was that all them niggers hadfound a new way to get at your (white) kids, and the secretweapon they used was stuff called muggles (marijuana slang name). Whether or not the treasury department simulated the firstscare stories is a moot point. what did happen is that as aresult of the "anti-muggles" drive, local legislationwas passed swiftly in New Orleans. Interestingly enough, it waslegislation which equated marijuana, in terms of penalties, withrape & murder, the two crimes most feared & fantasized atthe time by whites in their non-relations with blacks. Moreover, Harry Anslinger & the anti-alcohol policebureaus, without authorization and exceeding their statutoryauthority, began circularizing sympathetic newspaper reprints ofsuch stories. as anti-marijuana press campaigns spread, more& more local legislation was enacted to protect thecitizenry. By the time that prohibition drew to a close, anawareness of the new drug menace had been generated among thepeople, and the Treasury responded in 1930 by creating a specialBureau of Narcotics. Harry Anslinger was appointed ascommissioner. With a commendable sense of tidiness, the narcotics bureauunder Anslinger moved through the thirties reprinting articleshere, giving out insider interviews there, ALL aimed toward theelevation of marijuana into a narcotic. This seems to have beenmotivated by the fact that there were not enough people who wereinto cocaine or opiates to give the bureau the kind of businessit needed to expand its budget and influence. It was the samesort of game which Hoover played with the communist menace in theforties & fifties, and with crime in the streets in thesixties, to expand his F.B.I. operations. but the tactics of thenarcotics bureau, while superficially crude, displayed a subtleunderstanding of the workings of the federal system which is thehallmark of talented bureaucrats in the search for power &security. Rather than expose their backsides by lobbying directlyin Congress for anti-marijuana legislation--an approach whichcould be looked upon as a power grab by their jealous competitorsamong federal agencies--the narcotics bureau simply stimulatedthe growth of a tangled web of local level anti-marijuanalegislation, and then, about 1935, began pointing out the needfor unifying legislation on the federal level. Within two yearsthe bureau was home free: The Marijuana Tax Stamp Act of 1937, apiece of unifying legislation if there ever was one, was passedvirtually unopposed by Congress. After this move, Harry Anslinger continued his career untilhis retirement grabbing more and more Washington power andstatus. prior to his death many years later, he was also seen asa prime mover in Joe McCarthy's similar power grab campaignagainst the communists in America's workplace. At one pointMcCarthy credited Anslingers style and background as aninspirational force behind McCarthy's own political climb. THE ANSLINGER ERA (c) Copyright 1983 by Peter StaffordA year of considerable importance to this history is 1930, whenTreasury Secretary Andrew W. Mellon appointed his niece's cousinCommissioner of the newly created U.S. Narcotics Bureau. Harry J.Anslinger reigned as Commissioner for three decades. Anslingerwas to the inhibition of _Cannabis_ use what Andrew Comstock hadat the turn of the century been to the inhibition of Americansexual freedom. Although not particularly concerned aboutmarijuana when he took office, he soon became obsessed with"the evils" of this weed, seeing a curse for humanityin the leaves and flowers of the _Cannabis_ plant. Fear about this largely unknown substance had already beenstirred up, especially in the southwestern states, where it wasused mainly by blacks and Mexicans. Prohibitions againstnonmedical usage had been enacted in California (1915), Texas(1919), Louisiana (1924), and New York (1927). In the mid-1930s,Anslinger did his best to escalate the fear into hysteria.Drawing on his experience as a journalist with a stacatto,sensationalist style, he came out with "Marihuana, theAssassin of Youth," the first in a series of articles andbooks recounting the horrors committed under the weed'sinfluence: murder, suicide, seduction of schoolchildren by"friendly strangers." (All of his examples have sincebeen refuted.) Once Anslinger got going, he showed little interest asCommissioner in any news about the drug unless it could be workedinto his atrocity file on "the Killer Drug," which heclaimed was "a powerful narcotic in which lurks Murder!Insanity! Death!" The nation's papers loved it. By 1937,forty-six of the forty-eight states had banned marijuana. Anslinger abandoned his earlier hopes for federalprohibition, because even he had come to doubt theconstitutionality of such a law. Someone suggested that the U.S.might impose a "transfer tax" to be collected by theU.S. Treasury. Nonpayment of the tax would constitute a felony.In the ensuing congressional hearings, the Narcotics Bureau tooka firm line; Anslinger even told legislators, "You smoke ajoint and you're likely to kill your brother." In all of thetestimony, only one person raised any substantive objection tothe Anslinger proposal. Dr. William Woodward, a legislativecounsel for the American Medical Association, argued that_Cannabis_ in medical preparations had not been abused and thatthe new provisions would cause hardship for doctors. He wasquickly hooted down. House hearings concluded with no significantchanges in the proposed bill, which then sailed through theSenate. In August 1937, FDR, who had come into office on aplatform of repealing Prohibition, signed the Marihuana Tax Act.In addition to imposing the tax requirement, the law alsodeclared _Cannabis_ a narcotic. The new penalties for its use ordistribution were five to twenty years for a first offense, tento forty for a second. ... After retiring from the Narcotics Bureau, the indefatigableAnslinger went on to head the American delegation to the U.N.concerned with drug use. By 1961, he managed in this capacity toget sixty nations to sign a "Uniform Drug Convention,"which pledged to end _Cannabis_ use within twenty-five years.Signing nations can, however, drop out by request. Shortly after,serious efforts to legalize marijuana usage got underway in theWest. --Stafford, Peter, PSYCHEDELICS ENCYCLOPEDIA, 1983. Tarcher. ISBN 0-87477-231-1. pp 166-168. The Marijuana Tax Act Harry Anslinger & the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 cited in a NIDA publication "...For Anslinger, the moral entrepreneur, 1936 shouldhave been a year of victory. In EVERY state the marihuana menacewas subjected to statutory control. But for Anslinger, thebureaucrat, 1936 seems to have been another year of defeat. Hisbudgetary appropriation remained near a low point that had notbeen seen in over a decade, which to some extent reflected thegeneral economic conditions of the time.... "Again in 1937 Anslinger, the moralist, would beexpected first to convince the general public that marihuana usewas evil and immoral, while Anslinger, the bureaucrat, would bemore concerned with attaining passage of legislation which wouldincrease the Bureau's powers and then proceed to generateenvironmental support for these powers. In fact, the latteroccured. The great bulk of Bureau-inspired publicity came afterthe Act, not before. "Faced with a steadily decreasing budget, the Bureauresponded as any organization might react: it tried to appearmore necessary, and it tried to increase its scope of operations.As a result of this response, the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 waspassed." The FBN and marihuana -- Dickson, Bureaucracyand morality, "Social Problems" (1968), pp. 152-155. Marijuana--Assassin of Youth. by H. J. Anslinger U.S. Commissioner of Narcotics. firstpublished by "the American Magazine" in 1937. Not long ago the body of a young girl lay crushed on thesidewalk after a plunge from a Chicago apartment window. Everyonecalled it suicide, but actually it was murder. the killer was anarcotic known to America as marijuana, and to history ashashish. Used in the form of cigarettes, it is comparatively newto the United States and as dangerous as a coiled rattlesnake.How many murders, suicides, and maniacal deeds it causes eachyear, especially among the young, can only be conjectured. Innumerous communities it thrives almost unmolested, largelybecause of official ignorance of its effects. Marijuana is theunknown quantity among narcotics. no one knows, when he smokesit, whether he will become a philosopher, a joyous reveler, a madinsensate, or a murderer. The young girl's story is typical. shehad heard the whisper which has gone the rounds of American youthabout a new thrill, a cigarette with a "real kick"which gave wonderful reactions and no harmful aftereffects. Withsome friends she experimented at an evening smoking party. Theresults were weird. Some of the party went into paroxysms oflaughter, others of mediocre musical ability became almostexpert; the piano dinned constantly. Still others foundthemselves discussing weighty problems with remarkable clarity.The girl danced without fatigue throughout a night ofinexplicable exhilaration. Other parties followed, finally therecame a gathering at a time when the girl was behind in herstudies and greatly worried. Suddenly, as she was smoking, thethought of a solution to her school problems came. Withouthesitancy she walked to a window and leaped to her death. Thusmadly can marijuana "solve" one's difficulties. It gives few warnings of what it intends to do to the humanbrain. Last year a young marijuana addict was hanged in Baltimorefor criminal assault on a ten year old girl. In Chicago, twomarijuana smoking boys murdered a policeman. In Florida, policefound a youth staggering about in a human slaughterhouse. With anax he had killed his father, mother, two brothers, and a sister.He had no recollection of having committed this multiple crime.Ordinarily a sane, rather quiet young man, he had become crazedfrom smoking marijuana. In at least two dozen comparativelyrecent cases of murder or degenerate sex attacks, marijuanaproved to be a contributing cause. In Ohio a gang of sevenmarijuana addicts, all less than 20, were caught after a seriesof 38 holdups. the boys story was typical of conditions in manycities. One of them said they first learned about"reefers" in high school, buying the cigarettes athamburger stands, and from peddlers who hung around the school.He told of "booth joints" where you could get amarijuana cigarette and a sandwich for a quarter, and of theshabby apartments of women who provided the cigarettes and roomswhere boys and girls might smoke them together. His recollectionof the crimes he had committed was hazy. "when you get to'floating', it's hard to keep track of things. If I had killedsomebody on one of those jobs, I'd never had known it. Sometimesit was over before I realized that I'd been out of my room."It is the useless destruction of the youth which is soheartbreaking to all of us who labor in the field of narcoticssuppression. 1941 to1945 - World War II - Hemp for Victory Despite the fact that production of hemp (marijuana) had beeneffectively outlawed in 1937, when World War II came along, theGovernment suddenly discovered they needed it for basics such asrope for suchs, and other cordage purposes. As a result, theyencouraged farmers to grow hemp (marijuana) in industrialquantities and even granted them exemption from military duty ifthey did. To encourage farmers to grow hemp (marijuana), theDepartment of Agriculture produced a film titled "Hemp ForVictory." This film will soon be coming to these pages inthe form of still frames of each of the significant scenes, andthe full text of the narration. The LaGuardia Commission The studies leading to the La Guardia Report in New York inthe early 1940s recorded nine psychotic outbreaks, of varyingduration, among a sample of 200 studied intensely. Most of thesewere found to be cases of already psychotic personalities, andone of the psychiatrists involved in the study wrote, in 1942,'Marijuana will not produce a psychosis de novo in awell-integrated stable person.' The team who observed New York's marijuana smokers for theperiod found them to be a rather passive, peaceful, and friendlygroup, distinctly not prone to violence (though above averageperpetrators of petty crimes). 1946 -1960 Communism and Drugs Some New Questions Arise 1960 to1980 The rise of the "drug culture" The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1980 tothe Present Reagan's War on Drugs A Change in the Wind Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-13IA031-000652-B036-103http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/whiteb1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124858 text/html 73436HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:48:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:40 GMTContent-length: 73218 History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs in the UnitedStates Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs in the UnitedStates by Charles Whitebread, Professor of Law, USC Law School A Speech to the California Judges Association 1995 annualconference Links to Related Documents This speech is derived from The Forbidden Fruit andthe Tree of Knowledge: An Inquiry into the Legal History ofAmerican Marijuana Prohibition by Professor Richard J. Bonnie& Professor Charles H. Whitebread, II In this speech, Professor Whitebread refers to the followingdocuments which are online in this library, either in whole or inpart. The Hearings of theMarihuana Tax Act and related documents. Marihuana, A Signalof Misunderstanding, by the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse. Introduction This session is going to be about the history of thenon-medical use of drugs. Let me say that, because this is goingto be a story, that I think it will interest you quite a bit. Thetopic is the history of the non-medical use of drugs and I thinkyou ought to know what my credentials are for talking about thistopic. As you may know, before I taught at the University ofSouthern California, I taught at the University of Virginia forfifteen years, from 1968 to 1981. In that time period, the veryfirst major piece that I wrote was a piece entitled, "TheForbidden Fruit and the Tree of Knowledge - The Legal History ofMarihuana in the United States". I wrote it with ProfessorRichard Bonnie, still of the faculty of the University ofVirginia. It was published in the Virginia Law Review in Octoberof 1970 and I must say that our piece was the Virginia Law Reviewin October of 1970. The piece was 450 pages long. It got a ton ofnational attention because no one had ever done the legal historyof marijuana before. As a result of that, Professor Bonnie wasnamed the Deputy Director of the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse and I was a consultant to that commission. As a result of Richard's two year executive directorship ofthe National Commission in 1971 and 1972 he and I were givenaccess to both the open and the closed files of what was thencalled the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, what hadhistorically been called the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and whattoday is called the Drug Enforcement Agency. Based upon ouraccess to those files, both open and closed, we wrote a bookcalled "The Marihuana Conviction- The Legal History of Drugsin the United States" and that book went through sixprintings at the University of Virginia press before being soldout primarily in sales to my friends at the FBI over the years.It is based upon that work that I bring you this story. The Situation in 1900 If you are interested in the non-medical use of drugs in thiscountry, the time to go back to is 1900, and in some ways themost important thing I am going to say to you guys I will sayfirst. That is, that in 1900 there were far more people addictedto drugs in this country than there are today. Depending uponwhose judgment, or whose assessment, you accept there werebetween two and five percent of the entire adult population ofthe United States addicted to drugs in 1900. Now, there were two principal causes of this dramatic level ofdrug addiction at the turn of the century. The first cause wasthe use of morphine and its various derivatives in legitimatemedical operations. You know as late as 1900, particularly inareas where medical resources were scarce it was not at alluncommon for you to say, let's say you would have appendicitis,you would go into the hospital, and you would get morphine as apain killer during the operation, you would be given morphinefurther after the operation and you would come out of thehospital with no appendix but addicted to morphine. The use of morphine in battlefield operations during the CivilWar was so extensive that, by 1880, so many Union veterans wereaddicted to morphine that the popular press referred tomorphinism as the "soldier's disease". Now I will say,being from Virginia as I am, that the Confederate veterans didn'thave any problems about being addicted to morphine because theSouth was too poor to have any, and therefore battlefieldoperations on the Confederate Army were simply done by choppingoff the relevant limb while they drank a little whiskey. But theNorthern troops heavily found themselves, as the result ofbattlefield operations and the use of morphine, addicted tomorphine. Now, the other fact that I think that is so interesting aboutdrug addiction at the turn of the century, as opposed to today iswho the addicts were, because they were the exact opposite of whoyou would think most likely to be an addict today. If I were toask you in terms of statistical groups who is most likely to beinvolved with drugs today, you would say a young person, a male,who lives in the city and who may be a minority group member.That is the exact opposite of who was most likely to be addictedto drugs at the turn of the century. In terms of statistical groups, who was most likely to beaddicted to drugs at the turn of the century? A rural living,middle-aged white woman. The use of morphine in medicaloperations does not explain the much higher incidence of drugaddiction among women. What does is the second cause of the highlevel of addiction at the turn of the century -- the growth anddevelopment of what we now call the "patent medicine"industry. I think some of you, maybe from watching Westerns on TV ifnothing else are aware that, again, as late as 1900, in areas,particularly rural areas where medical resources were scarce, itwas typical for itinerant salesmen, not themselves doctors, tocruise around the countryside offering potions and elixirs of allsorts advertised in the most flamboyant kinds of terms."Doctor Smith's Oil, Good for What Ails You", or"Doctor Smith's Oil, Good for Man or Beast." Well, what the purveyors of these medicines did not tell theirpurchasers, was that later, when these patent medicines weretested, many of them proved to be up to fifty percent morphine byvolume. Now, what that meant, as I have always thought, was the mostsignificant thing about the high morphine content in patentmedicines was it meant they tended to live up to theiradvertising. Because no matter what is wrong with you, or yourbeast, you are going to feel a whole lot better after a couple ofslugs of an elixir that is fifty percent morphine. So there wasthis tendency to think "Wow! This stuff works." Downyou could go to the general store and get more of it and it couldbe sold to you directly over the counter. Now, for reasons that we weren't able to full research, butfor reasons, I think, probably associated with the role of womenrural societies then patent medicines were much more appealing towomen than to men and account for the much higher incidence ofdrug addiction in 1900 among women than among men. If you want to see a relatively current portrayal of a womanaddicted to patent medicine you might think of Eugene O'Neil'splay "A Long Day's Journey Into Night". The motherfigure there, the one that was played by Katherine Hepburn in themovies was addicted to patent medicines. In any event, the use of morphine in medical operations andthe sale of patent medicines accounted for a dramatic level ofaddiction. Again, between two and five percent of the entireadult population of the United States was addicted to drugs aslate as 1900. Now if my first point is that there was a lot more addictionin 1900 than there is today and that the people who were addictedare quite a different group than the group we would be thinkingof today, my next point would be that if you look at drugaddiction in 1900, what's the number one way in which it isdifferent than drug addiction today? Answer: Almost all addictionat the turn of the century was accidental. People became involved with drugs they did not know that theywere taking, that they did not know the impact of. The firstpoint, then, is that there was more drug addiction than there isnow and most of it was accidental. The Pure Food and Drug Act Then the single law which has done the most in this country toreduce the level of drug addiction is none of the criminal lawswe have ever passed. The single law that reduced drug addictionthe most was the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act. The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 did three things: 1). It created the Food and Drug Administration in Washingtonthat must approve all foods and drugs meant for humanconsumption. The very first impact of that was that the patentmedicines were not approved for human consumption once they weretested. 2) The Pure Food and Drug Act said that certain drugs couldonly be sold on prescription. 3) The Pure Food and Drug Act, (and you know, this is stilltrue today, go look in your medicine chest) requires that anydrug that can be potentially habit-forming say so on it's label."Warning -- May be habit forming." The labeling requirements, the prescription requirements, andthe refusal to approve the patent medicines basically put thepatent medicine business out of business and reduced thatdramatic source of accidental addiction. The Pure Food and DrugAct of 1906, not a criminal law, did more to reduce the level ofaddiction than any other single statute we have passed in all ofthe times from then to now. The Harrison Act The very first criminal law at the Federal level in thiscountry to criminalize the non-medical use of drugs came in 1914.It was called the Harrison Act and there are only three thingsabout the Harrison Act that we need to focus on today. Number one is the date. Did you hear the date, 1914? Some ofyou may have come this morning thinking that we have used thecriminal law to deal with the non-medical use of drugs since thebeginning of the Republic or something. That is not true. Theentire experiment of using the criminal sanction to deal with thenon-medical use of drugs really began in this country in 1914with the Harrison Act. The second interesting thing about the Harrison Act was thedrugs to which it applied, because it applied to almost none ofthe drugs we would be concerned about today. The Harrison Actapplied to opium, morphine and its various derivatives, and thederivatives of the coca leaf like cocaine. No mention anywherethere of amphetamines, barbiturates, marijuana, hashish,hallucinogenic drugs of any kind. The Harrison Act applied onlyto opium, morphine and its various derivatives and derivatives ofthe coca leaf like cocaine. The third and most interesting thing for you all as judgesabout the Harrison Act was its structure, because the structureof this law was very peculiar and became the model for everysingle piece of Federal legislation from 1914 right straightthrough 1969. And what was that model? It was called the Harrison Tax Act. You know, the drafters ofthe Harrison Act said very clearly on the floor of Congress whatit was they wanted to achieve. They had two goals. They wanted toregulate the medical use of these drugs and they wanted tocriminalize the non-medical use of these drugs. They had oneproblem. Look at the date -- 1914. 1914 was probably the highwater mark of the constitutional doctrine we today call"states' rights" and, therefore, it was widely thoughtCongress did not have the power, number one, to regulate aparticular profession, and number two, that Congress did not havethe power to pass what was, and is still known, as a generalcriminal law. That's why there were so few Federal Crimes untilvery recently. In the face of possible Constitutional opposition to what theywanted to do, the people in Congress who supported the HarrisonAct came up with a novel idea. That is, they would masqueradethis whole thing as though it were a tax. To show you how itworked, can I use some hypothetical figures to show you how thisalleged tax worked? There were two taxes. The first (and again, these figuresaren't accurate but they will do to show the idea) tax was paidby doctors. It was a dollar a year and the doctors, in exchangefor paying that one dollar tax, got a stamp from the Governmentthat allowed them to prescribe these drugs for their patients solong as they followed the regulations in the statute. Do you seethat by the payment of that one dollar tax, we have the doctorsregulated? The doctors have to follow the regulations in thestatute. And there was a second tax. (and again, these are hypotheticalfigures but they will show you how it worked.) was a tax of athousand dollars of every single non-medical exchange of everyone of these drugs. Well, since nobody was going to pay athousand dollars in tax to exchange something which, in 1914,even in large quantities was worth about five dollars, the secondtax wasn't a tax either, it was a criminal prohibition. Now justto be sure you guys understand this, and I am sure you do, butjust to make sure, let's say that in 1915 somebody was found,let's say, in possession of an ounce of cocaine out here on thestreet. What would be the Federal crime? Not possession ofcocaine, or possession of a controlled substance. What was thecrime? Tax evasion. And do you see what a wicked web that is going to be? As aquick preview, where then are we going to put the law enforcementarm for the criminalization of drugs for over forty years -- inwhat department? The Treasury Department. Why, we are just outthere collecting taxes and I will show you how that works in aminute. If you understand that taxing scheme then you understand whythe national marijuana prohibition of 1937 was called theMarihuana Tax Act. The Early State Marijuana Laws But before we get to that next big piece of Federallegislation, the marihuana prohibition of 1937, I would like totake a little detour, if I may, into an analysis of the earlystate marijuana laws passed in this country from 1915 to 1937. Let me pause to tell you this. When Professor Bonnie and I setout to try to track the legal history of marijuana in thiscountry, we were shocked that nobody had ever done that workbefore. And, secondly, the few people who had even conjecturedabout it went back to the 1937 Federal Act and said "Well,there's the beginning of it." No. If you go back to 1937,that fails to take account of the fact that, in the period from1915 to 1937, some 27 states passed criminal laws against the useof marijuana. What Professor Bonnie and I did was, unique to ourwork, to go back to the legislative records in those states andback to the newspapers in the state capitols at the time theselaws were passed to try to find out what motivated these 27states to enact criminal laws against the use of marijuana. Whatwe found was that the 27 states divided into three groups byexplanation. The first group of states to have marijuana laws in that partof the century were Rocky Mountain and southwestern states. Bythat, I mean Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Montana. You didn'thave to go anywhere but to the legislative records to find outwhat had motivated those marijuana laws. The only thing you needto know to understand the early marijuana laws in the southwestand Rocky Mountain areas of this country is to know, that in theperiod just after 1914, into all of those areas was a substantialmigration of Mexicans. They had come across the border in searchof better economic conditions, they worked heavily as rurallaborers, beet field workers, cotton pickers, things of thatsort. And with them, they had brought marijuana. Basically, none of the white people in these states knewanything about marijuana, and I make a distinction between whitepeople and Mexicans to reflect a distinction that any legislatorin one of these states at the time would have made. And all youhad to do to find out what motivated the marijuana laws in theRocky mountain and southwestern states was to go to thelegislative records themselves. Probably the best singlestatement was the statement of a proponent of Texas firstmarijuana law. He said on the floor of the Texas Senate, and Iquote, "All Mexicans are crazy, and this stuff (referring tomarijuana) is what makes them crazy." Or, as the proponentof Montana's first marijuana law said, (and imagine this on thefloor of the state legislature) and I quote, "Give one ofthese Mexican beet field workers a couple of puffs on a marijuanacigarette and he thinks he is in the bullring at Barcelona." Well, there it was, you didn't have to look another foot asyou went from state to state right on the floor of the statelegislature. And so what was the genesis for the early statemarijuana laws in the Rocky Mountain and southwestern areas ofthis country? It wasn't hostility to the drug, it was hostilityto the newly arrived Mexican community that used it. A second group of states that had criminal laws against theuse of marijuana were in the Northeast, Connecticut, RhodeIsland, New York -- had one and then repealed it and then had oneagain -- New Jersey. Well, clearly no hypothesis about Mexicanimmigration will explain the genesis of those laws because, asyou know, the Northeast has never had, still doesn't really, anysubstantial Mexican-American population. So we had to dig alittle deeper to find the genesis of those laws. We had to go notonly to the legislative records but to the newspapers in thestate capitols at the time these laws were passed and what wefound, in the early marijuana laws in the Northeast, we labeledthe "fear of substitution." If I may, let me paraphrasean editorial from the New York Times in 1919 so we will getexactly the flavor of this fear of substitution. The New York Times in an editorial in 1919 said, "No onehere in New York uses this drug marijuana. We have only justheard about it from down in the Southwest," and here comesthe substitution. "But," said the New York Times,"we had better prohibit its use before it gets here.Otherwise" -- here's the substitution concept -- "allthe heroin and hard narcotics addicts cut off from their drug bythe Harrison Act and all the alcohol drinkers cut off from theirdrug by 1919 alcohol Prohibition will substitute this new andunknown drug marijuana for the drugs they used to use." Well, from state to state, on the theory that this newlyencountered drug marijuana would be substituted by the hardnarcotics addicts or by the alcohol drinkers for their previousdrug that had been prohibited, state to state this fear ofsubstitution carried, and that accounted for 26 of the 27 states-- that is, either the anti-Mexican sentiment in the Southwestand Rocky Mountain areas or fear of substitution in theNortheast. That accounted for 26 of the 27 states, and there wasonly one state left over. It was the most important state for usbecause it was the first state ever to enact a criminal lawagainst the use of marijuana and it was the state of Utah. Now, if you have been hearing this story and you have beenplaying along with me, you think "Oh, wait a minute,Whitebread, Utah fits exactly with Colorado, Montana, -- it musthave been the Mexicans." Well, that's what I thought at first. But we went and did acareful study of the actual immigration pattern and found, to oursurprise, that Utah didn't have then, and doesn't have now, areally substantial Mexican-American population. So it had to besomething else. Come on folks, if it had to be something else, what do youthink it might have been? Are you thinking what I was thinking --that it must have had something to do with the single thing whichmakes Utah unique in American history -- its association with theMormon church. With help from some people in Salt Lake City, associated withthe Mormon Church and the Mormon National Tabernacle inWashington -- with their help and a lot of work we found out whatthe genesis was of the first marihuana law in this country. Yes,it was directly connected to the history of Utah and Mormonismand it went like this. I think that a lot of you know that, in its earliest days, theMormon church permitted its male members to have more than onewife -- polygamy. Do you all know that in 1876, in a case calledReynolds against the United States, the United States SupremeCourt said that Mormons were free to believe what they wanted,but they were not free to practice polygamy in this country.Well, who do you think enforced that ruling of the Supreme Courtin 1876? At the end of the line, who enforces all rulings of theSupreme Court? Answer: the state and local police. And who werethey in Utah then? All Mormons, and so nothing happened for manyyears. Those who wanted to live polygamously continued to do so. In 1910, the Mormon Church in synod in Salt Lake City decreedpolygamy to be a religious mistake and it was banned as a matterof the Mormon religion. Once that happened, there was a crackdownon people who wanted to live in what they called "thetraditional way". So, just after 1910, a fairly large numberof Mormons left the state of Utah, and indeed left the UnitedStates altogether and moved into northwest Mexico. They wrote alot about what they wanted to accomplish in Mexico. They wantedto set up communities where they were basically going to convertthe Indians, the Mexicans, and what they referred to as "theheathen" in the neighborhood to Mormonism. By 1914, they had had very little luck with the heathen, butour research shows now beyond question that the heathen had alittle luck with them. What happened apparently -- now some ofyou who may be members of the church, you know that there arestill substantial Mormon communities in northwest Mexico -- wasthat, by and large most of the Mormons were not happy there, thereligion had not done well there, they didn't feel comfortablethere, they wanted to go back to Utah where there friends wereand after 1914 did. And with them, the Indians had given them marijuana. Now onceyou get somebody back in Utah with the marijuana it all becomesvery easy, doesn't it? You know that the Mormon Church has alwaysbeen opposed to the use of euphoriants of any kind. So, somebodysaw them with the marijuana, and in August of 1915 the Church,meeting again in synod in Salt Lake City decreed the use ofmarijuana contrary to the Mormon religion and then -- and this ishow things were in Utah in those days -- in October of 1915, thestate legislature met and enacted every religious prohibition asa criminal law and we had the first criminal law in thiscountry's history against the use of marijuana. That digression into the early state marijuana laws aside, wewill now get back on the Federal track, the year is 1937 and weget the national marijuana prohibition -- the Marihuana Tax Act The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Now, first again, does everybody see the date, 1937? You mayhave thought that we have had a national marijuana prohibitionfor a very long time. Frankly, we haven't. The marijuana prohibition is part and parcel of that era whichis now being rejected rather generally -- the New Deal era inWashington in the late 30s. Number two, you know, don't you, that whenever Congress isgoing to pass a law, they hold hearings. And you have seen thesehearings. The hearings can be extremely voluminous, they go onand on, they have days and days of hearings. Well, may I say,that the hearings on the national marijuana prohibition were verybrief indeed. The hearings on the national marijuana prohibitionlasted one hour, on each of two mornings and since the hearingswere so brief I can tell you almost exactly what was said tosupport the national marijuana prohibition. Now, in doing this one at the FBI Academy, I didn't tell themthis story, but I am going to tell you this story. You want toknow how brief the hearings were on the national marijuanaprohibition? When we asked at the Library of Congress for a copy of thehearings, to the shock of the Library of Congress, none could befound. We went "What?" It took them four months tofinally honor our request because -- are you ready for this? --the hearings were so brief that the volume had slid down insidethe side shelf of the bookcase and was so thin it had slid rightdown to the bottom inside the bookshelf. That's how brief theywere. Are you ready for this? They had to break the bookshelfopen because it had slid down inside. There were three bodies of testimony at the hearings on thenational marijuana prohibition. The first testimony came from Commissioner Harry Anslinger,the newly named Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.Now, I think some of you know that in the late 20s and early 30sin this country there were two Federal police agencies created,the FBI and the FBN -- the Federal Bureau of Investigation, andthe Federal Bureau of Narcotics. In our book, I talk at great length about how different thehistory of these two organizations really are. But, the twoorganizations, the FBI and the FBN had some surface similaritiesand one of them was that a single individual headed each of themfor a very long time. In the case of the FBI, it was J. EdgarHoover, and in the case of the FBN it was Harry Anslinger, whowas the Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics from 1930until 1962. Commissioner Anslinger gave the Government testimony and Iwill quote him directly. By the way, he was not working from atext that he had written. He was working from a text that hadbeen written for him by a District Attorney in New Orleans, a guynamed Stanley. Reading directly from Mr. Stanley's work,Commissioner Anslinger told the Congressmen at the hearings, andI quote, "Marihuana is an addictive drug which produces inits users insanity, criminality, and death." That was theGovernment testimony to support the marijuana prohibition fromthe Commissioner. The next body of testimony -- remember all of this took atotal of two hours -- uh .. You understand what the idea was,don't you? The idea was to prohibit the cultivation of hemp inAmerica. You all know, because there has been some initiativehere in California, that hemp has other uses than its euphoriantuse. For one, hemp has always been used to make rope. Number two,the resins of the hemp plant are used as bases for paints andvarnishes. And, finally, the seeds of the hemp plant are widelyused in bird seed. Since these industries were going to beaffected the next body of testimony came from the industrialspokesmen who represented these industries. The first person was the rope guy. The rope guy told afascinating story -- it really is fascinating -- the growth of ahemp to make rope was a principle cash crop right where I amfrom, Northern Virginia and Southern Maryland at the time of theRevolutionary War. But, said the rope guy, by about 1820 it gotcheaper to import the hemp we needed to make rope from the FarEast and so now in 1937 we don't grow any more hemp to make ropein this country -- it isn't needed anymore. If you heard that story, there are two things about it that Ifound fascinating. Number one, it explains the long-standingrumor that our forefathers had something to do with marijuana.Yes, they did -- they grew it. Hemp was the principal crop atMount Vernon. It was a secondary crop at Monticello. Now, ofcourse, in our research we did not find any evidence that any ofour forefathers had used the hemp plant for euphoriant purposes,but they did grow it. The second part of that story that, to me is even moreinteresting is -- did you see the date again - 1937? What did therope guy say? We can get all the hemp we need to make rope fromthe Far East, we don't grow it hear anymore because we don't needto. Five years later, 1942, we are cut off from our sources ofhemp in the Far East. We need a lot of hemp to outfit our shipsfor World War II, rope for the ships, and therefore, the FederalGovernment, as some of you know, went into the business ofgrowing hemp on gigantic farms throughout the Midwest and theSouth to make rope to outfit the ships for World War II. So, even to this day, if you are from the Midwest you willalways meet the people who say, "Gosh, hemp grows all alongthe railroad tracks." Well, it does. Why? Because these hugefarms existed all during World War II. But, the rope people didn't care. The paint and varnish peoplesaid "We can use something else." And, of theindustrial spokesmen, only the birdseed people balked. Thebirdseed people were the ones who balked and the birdseed personwas asked, "Couldn't you use some other seed?" These are all, by the way, direct quotes from the hearings.The answer the birdseed guy gave was, "No, Congressman, wecouldn't. We have never found another seed that makes a birdscoat so lustrous or makes them sing so much." So, on the ground that the birdseed people needed it -- didyou know that the birdseed people both got and kept an exemptionfrom the Marihuana Tax Act right through this very day forso-called "denatured seeds"? In any event, there was Anslinger's testimony, there was theindustrial testimony -- there was only one body of testimony leftat these brief hearings and it was medical. There were two piecesof medical evidence introduced with regard to the marijuanaprohibition. The first came from a pharmacologist at Temple University whoclaimed that he had injected the active ingredient in marihuanainto the brains of 300 dogs, and two of those dogs had died. Whenasked by the Congressmen, and I quote, "Doctor, did youchoose dogs for the similarity of their reactions to that ofhumans?" The answer of the pharmacologist was, "Iwouldn't know, I am not a dog psychologist." Well, the active ingredient in marijuana was first synthesizedin a laboratory in Holland after World War II. So what it wasthis pharmacologist injected into these dogs we will never know,but it almost certainly was not the active ingredient inmarijuana. The other piece of medical testimony came from a man named Dr.William C. Woodward. Dr. Woodward was both a lawyer and a doctorand he was Chief Counsel to the American Medical Association. Dr.Woodward came to testify at the behest of the American MedicalAssociation saying, and I quote, "The American MedicalAssociation knows of no evidence that marihuana is a dangerousdrug." What's amazing is not whether that's true or not. What'samazing is what the Congressmen then said to him. Immediatelyupon his saying, and I quote again, "The American MedicalAssociation knows of no evidence that marihuana is a dangerousdrug.", one of the Congressmen said, "Doctor, if youcan't say something good about what we are trying to do, whydon't you go home?" That's an exact quote. The next Congressman said,"Doctor, if you haven't got something better to say thanthat, we are sick of hearing you." Now, the interesting question for us is not about the medicalevidence. The most fascinating question is: why was this legalcounsel to the most prestigious group of doctors in the UnitedStates treated in such a high-handed way? And the answer makes aprinciple thesis of my work -- and that is -- you've seen it,you've been living it the last ten years. The history of drugs inthis country perfectly mirrors the history of this country. So look at the date -- 1937 -- what's going on in thiscountry? Well, a lot of things, but the number one thing wasthat, in 1936, President Franklin Roosevelt was reelected in thelargest landslide election in this country's history till then.He brought with him two Democrats for every Republican, all, oralmost all of them pledged to that package of economic and socialreform legislation we today call the New Deal. And, did you know that the American Medical Association, from1932, straight through 1937, had systematically opposed everysingle piece of New Deal legislation. So that, by 1937, thiscommittee, heavily made up of New Deal Democrats is simply sickof hearing them: "Doctor, if you can't say something goodabout what we are trying to do, why don't you go home?" So, over the objection of the American Medical Association,the bill passed out of committee and on to the floor of Congress.Now, some of you may think that the debate on the floor ofCongress was more extensive on the marijuana prohibition. Itwasn't. It lasted one minute and thirty-two seconds by my countand, as such, I will give it to you verbatim. The entire debate on the national marijuana prohibition was asfollows -- and, by the way, if you had grown up in Washington, DCas I had you would appreciate this date. Are you ready? The billwas brought on to the floor of the House of Representatives --there never was any Senate debate on it not one word -- 5:45Friday afternoon, August 20. Now, in pre-air-conditioningWashington, who was on the floor of the House? Who was on thefloor of the House? Not very many people. Speaker Sam Rayburn called for the bill to be passed on"tellers". Does everyone know "tellers"? Didyou know that for the vast bulk of legislation in this country,there is not a recorded vote. It is simply, more people walk pastthis point than walk past that point and it passes -- it's called"tellers". They were getting ready to pass this thingon tellers without discussion and without a recorded vote whenone of the few Republicans left in Congress, a guy from upstateNew York, stood up and asked two questions, which constituted theentire debate on the national marijuana prohibition. "Mr. Speaker, what is this bill about?" To which Speaker Rayburn replied, "I don't know. It hassomething to do with a thing called marihuana. I think it's anarcotic of some kind." Undaunted, the guy from Upstate New York asked a secondquestion, which was as important to the Republicans as it wasunimportant to the Democrats. "Mr. Speaker, does theAmerican Medical Association support this bill?" In one of the most remarkable things I have ever found in anyresearch, a guy who was on the committee, and who later went onto become a Supreme Court Justice, stood up and -- do youremember? The AMA guy was named William C. Woodward -- a memberof the committee who had supported the bill leaped to his feetand he said, "Their Doctor Wentworth came down here. Theysupport this bill 100 percent." It wasn't true, but it wasgood enough for the Republicans. They sat down and the billpassed on tellers, without a recorded vote. In the Senate there never was any debate or a recorded vote,and the bill went to President Roosevelt's desk and he signed itand we had the national marijuana prohibition. 1938 to 1951 Now, the next step in our story is the period from 1938 to1951. I have three stories to tell you about 1938 to 1951. The first of them. Immediately after the passage of thenational marijuana prohibition, Commissioner Anslinger decided tohold a conference of all the people who knew something aboutmarijuana -- a big national conference. He invited forty-twopeople to this conference. As part our research for the book, wefound the exact transcript of this conference. Ready? The first morning of the conference of the forty-two peoplethat Commissioner Anslinger invited to talk about marijuana, 39of them got up and said some version of "Gee, CommissionerAnslinger, I don't know why you asked me to this conference, Idon't know anything about marijuana." That left three people. Dr. Woodward and his assistant -- youknow what they thought. That left one person -- the pharmacologist from TempleUniversity -- the guy with the dogs. And what do you think happened as a result of that conference?Commissioner Anslinger named the pharmacologist from TempleUniversity the Official Expert of the Federal Bureau of Narcoticsabout marijuana, a position the guy held until 1962. Now, theirony of trying to find out what the drug did after it had beenprohibited -- finding out that only one person agrees with you --and naming him the Official Expert, speaks for itself. The next story from this time period was a particular favoriteof the police groups to whom I spoke at the FBI Academy, becauseit is a law enforcement story. After national marijuana prohibition was passed, CommissionerAnslinger found out, or got reports, that certain people wereviolating the national marijuana prohibition and using marijuanaand, unfortunately for them, they fell into an identifiableoccupational group. Who were flouting the marijuana prohibition?Jazz musicians. And so, in 1947, Commissioner Anslinger sent outa letter, I quote it verbatim, "Dear Agent So-and-so, Pleaseprepare all cases in your jurisdiction involving musicians inviolation of the marijuana laws. We will have a great nationalround-up arrest of all such persons on a single day. I will letyou know what day." That letter went out on, I think, October 24, 1947. Theresponses by the resident agents were all in the file. Myfavorite -- at the bottom line, there wasn't a single residentagent who didn't have reservations about this idea -- came fromthe Hollywood agent. This is the exact letter of the FBN agent incharge in Hollywood. "Dear Commissioner Anslinger, I have your letter of October 24. Please be advised that themusical community here in Hollywood are unionized and very tightwe have been unable to get an informant inside it. So, at thepresent time, we have no cases involving musicians in violationof the marihuana laws." For the next year and a half, Commissioner Anslinger got thosekinds of letters. He never acknowledged any of the problems thatthe agents said they were having with this idea and always wrotethem back the same letter. "Dear Agent so-and-so, Glad to hear you are working hard to give effect to mydirective of October 24, 1947. We will (and he always underlinedthe word 'will') have a great national round-up arrest ofmusicians in violation of the marijuana laws all on a single day.Don't worry, I will let you know what day." This went on -- and, of course, you know that some jazzmusicians were, in fact, arrested in the late 40's -- this allwent on until it ended just the way it began -- with somethingthat Anslinger said. I don't see anybody in here really oldenough to appreciate this point, but Commissioner Anslinger wastestifying before a Senate Committee in 1948. He was saying,"I need more agents." And, of course, the Senatorsasked him why. "Because there are people out there violating themarijuana laws." Well, you know what the Senators asked -- "Who?" And in a moment that every Government employee should avoidlike the plague, Anslinger first said, "Musicians." Butthen he looked up at that Senate committee and he gave them alittle piece of his heart and said the single line which provokedthe most response in this country's history about the non-medicaluse of drugs. Anslinger said, "And I don't mean goodmusicians, I mean jazz musicians." Friends, there is no way to tell you what a torrent ensued.Within 24 hours, 76 newspaper editorials slammed him, includingspecial editions the then booming trade press of the jazz musicindustry. With three days, the Department of the Treasury hadreceived fifteen thousand letters. bunches of them were still inbags when I got there -- never been opened at all. I opened afew. Here was a typical one, and it was darling. "Dear Commissioner Anslinger, I applaud your efforts to rid America of the scourge ofnarcotics addiction. If you are as ill-informed about that as youare about music, however, you will never succeed." One of the things that we had access to that really was funwas the Commissioner's own appointment book for all of his years.And, five days after he says "I don't mean good musicians, Imean jazz musicians." there is a notation: 10 AM --appointment with the Secretary of the Treasury." Well, Idon't know what happened at that appointment, but from thatappointment on, no mention is ever made again of the greatnational round-up arrest of musicians in violation of themarijuana laws all on a single day, much to the delight of theagents who never had any heart for it in the first place. The final story from this period is my favorite story fromthis period, by far, and, again, there is simply nobody here whois really old enough to appreciate this story. You know, if youtalk to your parents -- that's the generation we really need totalk to -- people who were adults during the late 30's and 40's.And you talk to them about marijuana in particular you would beamazed at the amazing reputation that marijuana has among thegeneration ahead of you as to what it does to its users. In the late 30's and early 40's marihuana was routinelyreferred to as "the killer drug", "the assassin ofyouth". You all know "reefer madness", right?Where did these extraordinary stories that circulated in thiscountry about what marijuana would do to its users come from? The conventional wisdom is that Anslinger put them over onAmericans in his effort to compete with Hoover forempire-building, etc. I have to say, in some fairness, that oneof the things that our research did, in some sense, was torehabilitate Commissioner Anslinger. Yes, there was some of thatbut, basically, it wasn't just that Anslinger was trying to dupepeople. The terrific reputation that marijuana got in the late 30s andearly 40s stemmed from something Anslinger had said. Doeseverybody remember what Anslinger said about the drug?"Marihuana is an addictive drug which produces in its usersinsanity, criminality, and death." Well, this time the magic word -- come along lawyers outthere, where's the magic word? -- Insanity. Marihuana use, saidthe Government, would produce insanity. And, sure enough, in the late 30s and early 40s, in fivereally flamboyant murder trials, the defendant's sole defense wasthat he -- or, in the most famous of them, she -- was not guiltyby reason of insanity for having used marijuana prior to thecommission of the crime. All right, it's time to take you guys back to class here. Ifyou are going to put on an insanity defense, what do you need?You need two things, don't you? Number one, you need an ExpertWitness. Where, oh where, in this story, are we going to find an expertwitness? Here it comes -- sure enough -- the guy from TempleUniversity -- the guy with the dogs. I promise you, you are notgoing to believe this. In the most famous of these trials, what happened was twowomen jumped on a Newark, New Jersey bus and shot and killed androbbed the bus driver. They put on the marijuana insanitydefense. The defense called the pharmacologist, and of course,you know how to do this now, you put the expert on, you say"Doctor, did you do all of this experimentation and soon?" You qualify your expert. "Did you write all aboutit?" "Yes, and I did the dogs" and now he is anexpert. Now you ask him what? You ask the doctor "What haveyou done with the drug?" And he said, and I quote,"I've experimented with the dogs, I have written somethingabout it and" -- are you ready -- "I have used the drugmyself." What do you ask him next? "Doctor, when you used thedrug, what happened?" With all the press present at this flamboyant murder trial inNewark New Jersey, in 1938, the pharmacologist said, and I quote,in response to the question "When you used the drug, whathappened?", his exact response was: "After two puffs ona marijuana cigarette, I was turned into a bat." He wasn't done yet. He testified that he flew around the roomfor fifteen minutes and then found himself at the bottom of atwo-hundred-foot high ink well Well, friends, that sells a lot of papers. What do you thinkthe Newark Star Ledger headlines the next day, October 12, 1938?"Killer Drug Turns Doctor to Bat!" What else do we need to put on an insanity defense? We needthe defendant's testimony -- himself or herself. OK, you putdefendant on the stand, what do you ask? "What happened onthe night of . ." "Oh, I used marijuana." "And then what happened?" And, if the defendant wants to get off, what is he or shegoing to say? "It made me crazy." You know what the women testified? In Newark they testified,and I quote, "After two puffs on a marijuana cigarette myincisor teeth grew six inches long and dripped with blood." This was the craziest business you ever saw. Every one ofthese so-called marijuana insanity defenses were successful. The one in New York was just outlandish. Two police officerswere shot and killed in cold blood. The defendant puts on themarijuana insanity defense and, in that case, there was nevereven any testimony that the defendant had even used marijuana.The testimony in the New York case was that, from the time thebag of marijuana came into his room it gave off "homicidalvibrations", so he started killing dogs, cats, andultimately two police officers. Commissioner Anslinger, sitting in Washington, seeing thesemarijuana insanity defenses, one after another successful, hewrites to the pharmacologist from Temple University and says,"If you don't stop testifying for the defense in thesematters, we are going to revoke your status as the OfficialExpert of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics." He didn't wantto lose his status, so he stopped testifying, nobody else wouldtestify that marijuana had turned them into a bat, and so theseinsanity defenses were over but not before marijuana had gottenquite a reputation, indeed. The next step -- and now we are going to move very quicklyhere -- in 1951. We get a whole new drug law called the Boggs Actand it is important to us for only two reasons. Number one, it reflects what I am going to call the formulafor drug legislation in this country. Here is the formula. Theformula really is always the same, think about it in ourlifetime. The formula is that someone, and by the way, that someone isusually the media, perceive an increase in drug use. What's theanswer? The answer in the history of this country is always thesame -- a new criminal law with harsher penalties in every singleoffense category. Where did the perception come from this time? Well, if youhave ever seen movies from this time period like High SchoolConfidential, the perception was that kids in high school werestarting to use drugs. What's the answer? The answer is alwaysthe same. The Boggs Act of 1951 quadrupled the penalties in everysingle offense category and, by the way, the Boggs Act had awhole new rationale for the marijuana prohibition. Do you remember the old rationale -- that marijuana was anaddictive drug which caused in its users insanity, criminality,and death? Just before Anslinger was to testify on the Boggs Act,the doctor who ran for the Government the Lexington, Kentuckynarcotics rehabilitation clinic testified ahead of Anslinger andtestified that the medical community knew that marijuana wasn'tan addictive drug,. It doesn't produce death, or insanity, andinstead of producing criminality, it probably produces passivity,said the doctor. Who was the next witness? Anslinger. And, if you see, that therug had been pulled out from under everything he had said in the1937 hearings to support the marijuana prohibition. In what Icall a really slick Federal shuffle -- Anslinger, you know, hadbeen bitten bad enough by what he said, he didn't want that again-- he said, the doctor is right, marijuana -- he always believed,by the way, that there was something in marijuana which producedcriminality -- is not an addictive drug, it doesn't produceinsanity or death but it is "the certain first step on theroad to heroin addiction." And the notion that marijuana wasthe stepping stone to heroin became, in 1951, the sole rationalefor the national marijuana prohibition. It was the first timethat marijuana was lumped with all the other drugs and nottreated separately, and we multiply the penalties in everyoffense category. By the way, I told you that the history of drug legislationreflects the history of the country. 1951, what's going on? TheKorean War, the Cold War. It didn't take the press a minute tosee this perceived use in drug use among high school kids as our"foreign enemies", using drugs to subvert the Americanyoung. In our book, we have ten or fifteen great politicalcartoons. My favorite is a guy with a big Fu Man Chu (mustache)labeled "Oriental Communism." He has a big needlemarked "Dope" and he has the American kids lying down-- "Free World" it is marked. There it was -- that ourforeign enemies were going to use drugs to subvert the Americanyoung. What did we do? We passed a new law that increased thepenalties in every offense category by a factor of four. Well, now once you buy it, the ball is going to roll likecrazy. 1956 and the Daniel Act 1956, we get another new drug law, called the Daniel Act,named for Senator Price Daniel of Texas. It is important to usfor only two reasons. One, it perfectly reflects the formulaagain. What is the formula? Somebody perceives an increase indrug use in this country and the answer is always a new criminallaw with harsher penalties in every offense category. Where did the perception in 1956 come from that there was anincrease in drug use? Answer: Anybody remember 1956? In 1956, wehad the first set ever of televised Senate hearings. And whosehearings were they? They were the hearings of Senator EstesKefauver of Tennessee about organized crime in America. These hearings, which everybody watched on their little setsshowed two things that we all know today, but it sure made theirsocks roll up and down then. Number one, there is organized crimein America and number two, it makes all its money selling drugs.There it was, that was all the perception we needed. We passedthe Daniel Act which increased the penalties in every offensecategory, that had just been increased times four -- times eight. With the passage of each of these acts, the states passedlittle Boggs acts, and little Daniel acts, so that in the period1958 to 1969, in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and Virginia wastypical, the most heavily penalized crime in the Commonwealth waspossession of marijuana, or any other drug. It led to a mandatory minimum sentence of twenty years, nopart of which you were eligible for parole or probation, and asto no part of it were you eligible for a suspended sentence. Just to show you where it was, in the same time period firstdegree murder in Virginia had a mandatory minimum sentence offifteen years. Rape, a mandatory minimum sentence of ten years.Possession of marijuana -- not to mention sales of marijuana withits mandatory minimum of forty years -- mandatory minimum oftwenty years. That is the situation in 1969 when we have a new drug law, thefirst one in this country's history that does not follow theformula. It is the 1969 Dangerous Substances Act. For he firsttime in this country's history, we have a perception of anincrease in drug use during the Sixties, but instead of raisingthe penalties, we lower them. And, further, in the DangerousSubstances Act of 1969, for the first time we finally abandon theso-called "taxing" mythology. In the 1969 Act, what the Federal law does is, it takes allthe drugs we know -- if you can't fill in this next blank, youare in trouble -- except two -- which two? Which two are nevergoing to be mentioned? Nicotine and alcohol. But, other thannicotine and alcohol -- every other drug. By the way, I tried this with the FBI for twenty years andthey wouldn't listen, and you won't listen either but, I am goingto try. If you are going to go out and talk about drugs andwhatever you are going to do with drugs, will you please discardthe entirely antiquated and erroneous word "narcotics."Narcotics are drugs that put people to sleep. Almost all of thedrugs that we are interested in today don't do that. So, in 1969, the Dangerous Substances Act gave up the effortto define what are narcotic drugs. What the 1969 act did, andwhat most state laws still do, is to classify all drugs exceptnicotine and alcohol by two criteria. What is the drug's medicaluse? And, what is the drug's potential for abuse? We put all the drugs, by those two criteria, in schedules, andthen we tie the penalties for possession, possession with intentto sell, sale, and sale to a minor to the schedule of the drug inquestion. Now, again, I am no good at this anymore, I have notkept up with the drug laws, I don't know who is in what schedule,and many states have abandoned the schedule but, to give you aflavor of it: The first schedule, Schedule One Drugs were drugsthat had little or no medical use and a high potential for abuse.What's going to go in there? LSD, marijuana, hashish, they areall in Schedule One -- little or no medical use and a highpotential for abuse. Then you get some medical use, high potential for abuse --what do you want there? Barbiturates, amphetamines,. Then we are going to get what? High medical use and highpotential for abuse. Morphine, codeine. Codeine is the best onebecause codeine is in almost every single prescription coughmedicine and it is addictive as can be. Then you go on down and get the antibiotics -- high medicaluse, almost no potential for abuse, and there you are. Once you schedule your drugs, you then tie the penalties forthe drugs to the schedule and then, because in 1969 they wantedto reduce the marijuana penalties they had to deal with marijuanaseparately and did so. But the 1969 act important for two reasons again: One, weabandoned the taxing mythology and; two, it was the first law inthis country's history that, instead of raising the penalties inevery offense category, lowered them. Well, then you know what happened. We get the War on Drugs.You know how it all went down. We got perceptions in the 80s thatthere was an increase in drug use, a great dramatic decision todeclare war on drugs and, predominantly, war on drug users. What I want to say to you is this, and this is where I thinksome of you are going to be a little surprised. You know as muchabout that process as I do. You watched it. You saw how we hadone law after another, raising the penalties so that as late as1990, thirty percent of the minority group population of the Cityof Baltimore who are male and between 20 and 29 are under courtsupervision for drugs. Thirty percent, that's the number you arelooking for. The War on Drugs, a very interesting war, because why? It wascheap to fight. It was cheap to fight at first -- why? You heardme in the "Recent Decisions" talk. What was last year'sbig moment, and the year before? The change in cheap and easyforfeiture. Criminal forfeiture was used to make this a costlesswar. That is, easy forfeiture from those who were caught allowedus to pay for the war in that way. I think we are going to havesome real questions about whether people want to pay for the waron drugs through their taxes because now the Court has madeforfeiture much, much more difficult in their overall concern forproperty rights. But here is what I think may surprise some of you. You guysknow as much about the War on Drugs as I do. I didn't come hearto talk, or to harangue, or to give you any opinions on thatpoint. I think it speaks for itself. It is a failure and I thinkit will be judged as a failure. What I wanted to bring youinstead was, instead of talking about that that everybody istalking about -- and you guys will ultimately resolve it and youguys are the ones who are seeing all the drug cases, day in andday out, and always will, until this changes. But, what I thoughtI could bring you was the part of the story you hadn't heard --how we got to where we were when the War on Drugs was declared. Conclusion - The Issue of Prohibition And one other thing I want to do with you this morning, andthat's this -- I want to say one thing. To tell you the realtruth, my interest isn't in drugs, or in the criminalization ofdrugs although I think we should abolish the criminal penaltiesfor drugs, and deal with it as the Europeans do in a medical way,but who cares? That's an opinion. What interests me though, isn't drugs. What interests me isthat larger issue, and the reason that I wrote the piece, and thereason they were my tenure pieces, I am interested in a muchlarger issue, and that is the idea of Prohibition -- the use ofcriminal law to criminalize conduct that a large number of usseem to want to engage in. And, for my purposes, -- now, Professor Bonnie went on to beassociated with NIDA and with all kinds of drug-relatedorganizations and continues to be interested in the drug laws --I am not. My interest is in criminal prohibitions and, for mypurposes, as a criminal law scholar, we could have used anyprohibition -- alcohol prohibition, the prohibition againstgambling that exists still in many states. How about theprohibition in England from 1840 to 1880 against the drinking ofgin? Not drinking, just gin -- got it? We could have used any ofthese prohibitions. We didn't. We chose the marijuana prohibitionbecause the story had never been told -- and it is an amazingstory. We could have used any of these prohibitions. We could haveused the alcohol prohibition. The reason we didn't is because somuch good stuff has been written about it. And are you aware ofthis? That every single -- you know how fashionable it is tothink that scholars can never agree? -- Don't you believe that --Every single person who has ever written seriously about thenational alcohol prohibition agrees on why it collapsed. Why? Because it violated that iron law of Prohibitions. What is theiron law of Prohibitions? Prohibitions are always enacted by US,to govern the conduct of THEM. Do you have me? Take the alcoholprohibition. Every single person who has ever written about itagrees on why it collapsed. Large numbers of people supported the idea of prohibition whowere not themselves, opposed to drinking. Do you have me? What?The right answer to that one is Huh? Want to hear it again? Large numbers of people supported the idea of prohibition whowere not themselves, opposed to drinking. Want to see it? Let me give you an example, 1919. You are a Republican inupstate New York. Whether you drink, or you don't, you are forthe alcohol prohibition because it will close the licensedsaloons in the City of New York which you view to be the corruptpatronage and power base of the Democratic Party in New York. Soalmost every Republican in New York was in favor of nationalalcohol prohibition. And, as soon as it passed, what do you thinkthey said? "Well, what do you know? Success. Let's have adrink." That's what they thought, "let's have adrink." "Let's drink to this." A great success,you see. Do you understand me? Huge numbers of people in this countrywere in favor of national alcohol prohibition who were notthemselves opposed to drinking. I just want to go back to the prohibition against the drinkingof gin. How could a country prohibit just the drinking of gin,not the drinking of anything else for forty years? Answer: Therich people drank whiskey and the poor people drank what? -- gin.Do you see it? Let's try the gambling prohibition. You know when I came toVirginia, this was a very lively issue, the gambling prohibition.By the way, I think it's a lively issue in California. Are youready for it? Have you ever seen the rhetoric that goes around the gamblingprohibition? You know what it is. Look, we have had a good time.We have been together yesterday, we have been together today, Ihave known a lot of you guys for ages. How about after the talk,we have a minute or two, let's go on up to your room and we willplay a little nickel, dime, quarter poker. Want to play somepoker this afternoon? Why not? It's a nice thing to do. Would we be outraged if the California State Police camebarreling through the door and arrested us for violation ofCalifornia's prohibition on gambling? Of course we would.Because, who is not supposed to gamble? Oh, you know who is notsupposed to gamble -- them poor people, that's who. My God, theywill spend the milk money. They don't know how to control it.They can't handle it. But us? We know what we are doing. That's it. Every criminal prohibition has that same touch toit, doesn't it? It is enacted by US and it always regulates theconduct of THEM. And so, if you understand that is the name ofthe game, you don't have to ask me, or any of the other peoplewhich prohibitions will be abolished and which ones won't becauseyou will always know. The iron law of prohibitions -- all of them-- is that they are passed by an identifiable US to control theconduct of an identifiable THEM. And a prohibition is absolutely done for when it does what?Comes back and bothers US. If, at any time, in any way, thatprohibition comes back and bothers us, we will get rid of it forsure, every doggone time. Look at the alcohol prohibition if youwant a quick example. As long as it is only THEM --- you know,them criminals, them crazy people, them young people, themminority group members --- we are fine. But any prohibition thatcomes back and bothers US is done for. Let's just try the marijuana prohibition as a quick one. Whodo you think was arrested 650,000 strong two years ago forviolation of the marijuana laws? Do you think it was all minoritygroup members? Nope. It was not. It was some very identifiablechildren of US -- children of the middle class. You don't have toanswer my opinion. No prohibition will stand -- ever-- when itcomes back and penalizes our children -- the children of US whoenacted it. And in fact, do you have any real doubt about that?Do you know what a fabulous sociological study we will be if webecome the first society in the history of the world to penalizethe sons and daughters of the wealthy class? Unheard of. And so, yeah, we will continue the War on Drugs for a whileuntil everybody sees its patent bankruptcy. But, let me say thatI am not confident that good sense will prevail. Why? Because welove this idea of prohibition. We really do. We love it in thiscountry. And so I will tell you what I predict. You will alwaysknow which ones are going out and which ones are coming in. And,can't you see the one coming right over the hill? Well, folks, weare going to have a new prohibition because we love this ideathat we can solve difficult medical, economic, and socialproblems by the simple enactment of a criminal law. We adorethis, and of course, you judges work it out, we have solved ourproblem. Do you have it? Our problem is over with the enactmentof the law. You and the cops work it out, but we have solved ourproblem. Here comes the new one? What's it going to be? No, it won't beguns, this one starts easy. This one is the Surgeon General haswhat? --Determined -- not "we want a little more checking itout", not "we need a few more studies", not"reasonable people disagree" -- "The SurgeonGeneral has determined that the smoking of cigarettes will killyou." Now, all you need, and here is my formula, for a newprohibition every time is what? We need an intractable,difficult, social, economic, or medical problem. But that is notenough. There has to be another thing. It has to divide by class--- by social or economic class, between US and THEM. And so, here it comes. ' You know the Federal Government has been spending a lot ofmoney since 1968 trying to persuade us not to smoke. And, indeed,the absolute numbers on smoking have declined very little. But,you know who has quit smoking, don't you? In gigantic numbers?The college-educated, that's who. The college-educated, that'swho doesn't smoke. Who are they? Tomorrow's what? Movers andkickers, that's who. Tomorrow's movers and kickers don't smoke.Who does smoke? Oh, you know who smokes out of all proportion totheir numbers in the society -- it is the people standing in yourcriminal courtrooms, that's who. Who are they? Tomorrow's movedand kicked, that's who. And, there it is friends, once it divides between the moversand kickers and the moved and kicked it is all over and it willbe all over very shortly. It starts with "You know, they shouldn't smoke, they arekilling themselves." Then it turns, as it has -- you see theads out here -- "They shouldn't smoke, they are killingus." And pretty soon, that class division will happen, wewill have the legislatures full of tomorrow's movers and kickersand they are going to say just what they are going to say anytime now. "You know, this has just gotta stop, and we got ananswer for it." We are going to have a criminal statute thatforbids the manufacture, sale, or possession of tobaccocigarettes, or tobacco products period. You know that the cigarette companies are expecting it. Whathave they been doing? They have been shifting all of theiroperations out of the United States and diversifying like crazy.Where are they going to sell their cigarettes? In China, that'swhere. And they are already moving, because they see it and I seeit. Ready? What are we going to have? You know what we are goingto have. One day -- when's it gonna happen, ten years, fifteen?-- some legislator will get up and, just as though it had neverbeen said before, "You know we gotta solve this smokingproblem and I got a solution -- a criminal prohibition againstthe manufacture, sale, or possession of tobacco cigarettes."And then you know what happens. Then everybody who did want acigarette here today, if there is anyone here who smokes, you aregoing to have to hide in the bathroom. And cigarettes are nolonger going to be three dollars a pack, they are going to bethree dollars a piece. And who's going to sell them to you? Whowill always sell them to you? The people who will sell youanything -- organized crime. You got the concept, we will gothrough the whole darn thing again because I am telling you thiscountry is hooked on the notion of prohibition. Let me conclude, and again this is my prediction -- I willtell you I don't think it is subject to opinion. Just look at it.Just take a look at what has happened now and what will happen. Iwill tell you how inexorable it is. If we get together here inthe year 2005, I will bet you that it is as likely as not thatthe possession of marijuana may not be criminal in this state.But the manufacture, sale, and possession of tobacco will be, andwhy? Because we love this idea of prohibitions, we can't livewithout them. They are our very favorite thing because we knowhow to solve difficult, social, economic, and medical problems --a new criminal law with harsher penalties in every category foreverybody. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B22-14IA031-000652-B036-137http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/ophs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124912 text/html 91308HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:49:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:59 GMTContent-length: 91090 History of Legislative Control Over Opium, Cocaine, andTheir Derivatives Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE HISTORY OF LEGISLATIVE CONTROL OVER OPIUM, COCAINE, ANDTHEIR DERIVATIVES by David F. Musto, MD Legislative control over dangerous drugs may be dated fromattempts in the nineteenth century to prevent acute poisoning bycertain substances that might be purchased in ignorance of theirlethal potential or might be too easily available to would-besuicides. Opium was being sold in a crude form containing about10 percent morphine, as well as in concoctions derived from crudeopium: paregoric, laudanum, and a solution in acetic acid knownas "black drop." Morphine had been isolated from opiumin 1805 by the German pharmacist, F. W. Serturner, but productionof the powerful active ingredient of opium on a large scale wasdelayed until the 1830s.1 From that time onward, in factories inGermany, Great Britain, and the United States, morphine wasproduced in great quantities. Thus when in 1868, Great Britaincame to enact pharmacy laws to control dangerous substances,"opium and all preparations of opium or of poppies" waslisted alongside such substances as oxalic acid as commoditiesthat could not be sold without being labeled "poison."' The Pharmacy Act of 1868 is an important symbol of legislativecontrol in a Western country. The act was not the most strictamong nations; perhaps the Prussian regulations were stricter andmore comprehensive, but establishment by the British of somelimitation on the availability of dangerous drugs-drugs thatwould eventually become more serious a problem for society asaddictive agents than as tools for suicide-was a policy alsofollowed by other European nations. It had an apparentlydiscouraging effect on the per capita consumption of opium,opiates, and cocaine in the late nineteenth century andcontributed to the low level of British consumption (at leastcompared to the American) right up to the 1960s.3 The experience of the United States stands in contrast toBritain's. The Pharmacy Act of 1868 was regulated in large partby the organized association of pharmacists, the PharmaceuticalSociety (established 1841). In order to retail, dispense, orcompound "poisons," or to assume the title of chemist,druggist, pharmacist, or dispensing druggist or chemist, theindividual had to be registered by the Pharmaceutical Society. Aswell as being the testing and registering body, the Society wasalso given the initial responsibility for adding new drugs to thepoison list. Thus the law, which ultimately would be enforced inBritish courts, was monitored by local members of thePharmaceutical Society as a tool in competition with unregistereddruggists, grocers, and anyone else who might attempt to purveythese drugs to the public. While the act presumably aided the public health by havingdangerous drugs sold or dispensed by individuals knowledgeableabout their qualities, it was also a convenient aid to the tradeof registered pharmacists. Although the drugs could be obtainedwith no specific restraint on the amount or frequency of sale,the bottles had to be labeled "poison." A strictercategory of substances also required that the purchaser be anacquaintance of the pharmacist or someone the pharmacist knew.This list included arsenic and "strychnine and all poisonousalkaloids and their salts." The impact of this modestobstacle to the acquirement of dangerous drugs should not beunderestimated. Further, the self-interest that would motivateregistered pharmacists to monitor breaches of the law provided anunpaid, but interested, drug enforcement cadre scatteredthroughout Great Britain. "Patent medicines" wereexcepted from these controls, and this led to a campaign againstthem later in the century, but the pure forms of the drugs, e.g.,morphine suitable for injection, were restricted in availabilityfrom the time of the Pharmacy Act onward.' In the United States,throughout the nineteenth century, both medicine and pharmacyremained essentially unorganized, although there were somephysicians and pharmacists attempting to organize theirprofessions. The American Medical Association, which was foundedin 1847 and which we now might think of as the dominant medicalorganization, was a small and nationally unrepresentative groupuntil about World War 1.5 The American PharmaceuticalAssociation, founded four years later, grew slowly and, like theAMA, lacked the authority to license practitioners. The pharmacyestablishment was divided sharply among drug manufacturers,wholesalers, and retailers, whose divergent interests the APhAtried to coordinate, but each segment of the profession came towork through its own organization: the National WholesaleDruggists' Association (1882), the National Association of RetailDruggists (1898), and many other groups.6 There was no nationalgroup for the health professions to which government could turnfor regulation, even if the American constitutional system hadpermitted such an arrangement. Licensing of pharmacists and physicians, which was the centralgovernment's responsibility in European nations, was, in theUnited States, a power reserved to each individual state. In theera of Andrew Jackson, any form of licensing that appeared togive a monopoly to the educated was attacked as a contradictionof American democratic ideals. State after state repealed themedical licensing laws adopted in earlier days. Practicalconcerns also supported repeal: Legislators preferred to leave itto the patients to decide which of the many competing theories ofmedicine was the best. Instead of moving toward a national systemof licensing for health professionals, therefore, individualstates were deregulating the professions. American medicalschools were similarly unregulated, and many flourished-some nobetter than diploma mills. The states did not beginreestablishment of medical licensing until the 1880s, and eventhen the movement was spotty, with a wide range of standards.'Pharmacists, also seeking to raise standards and limitcompetition, likewise fought at the state level for licensing,since the U.S. Constitution placed in the hands of states theregulation of the health professions. Although some requirementsfor labeling of over-the counter medicines would come with thePure Food and Drug Act of 1906 as an exercise of the federalright to regulate interstate commerce, in general, the nineteenthand early twentieth century interpretation of the Constitutionfavored a strict division between state and federal powers. The status of legislative control of dangerous drugs duringthe nineteenth century may be summed up as follows: The UnitedStates had no practical control over the health professions, norepresentative national health organizations to aid thegovernment in drafting regulations, and no controls on thelabeling, composition, or advertising of compounds that mightcontain opiates or cocaine. The United States not only proclaimeda free marketplace, it practiced this philosophy with regard tonarcotics in a manner unrestrained at every level of preparationand consumption. Through a slower pace of professional development, the UnitedStates also lagged behind Britain and other European countries inestablishing broadly based organizations representing thenation's physicians or pharmacists to which the centralgovernment could turn for regulation. Second, the form ofgovernment adopted in the United States, a federation of partlyindependent states, was a conscious attempt to preventestablishment of an all-powerful central governmentcharacteristic of Europe. In the nineteenth century, thisremarkably successful form of government entailed each statemaking its own regulation if it wished to; the result was anarray of controls that varied from one state to another. In fact,states made little attempt to control addictive drugs until quitelate in the last century, and those efforts did not prove veryeffective. During the first part of the nineteenth century, the amount ofopiates used in the United States may have been comparable tothat used in Britain, where some areas, notably the fen counties,had a fairly large per capita consumption. Inhabitants thereoften took a dose of laudanum or some form of opium daily to keepaway the fevers associated with the marshlands.8 More generally,parents reputedly purchased one or another form of opium to rubon the gums of teething infants or to spoon-feed a child toinduce sleep so that the mother without provision for child carecould work in the local factory. These accounts are anecdotal,but recent historical studies do suggest that the taking of someform of opium for pain, sleep, or to ward off illness was notuncommon. The occasional death of an infant from an overdose ofopium or the suicide of an adult by means of opium promptedparliamentary interest in the distribution and labeling of thedrug. In large measure, the 1868 Pharmacy Act was the result. Oneshould note however, that through the provisions of the act andthe designation of the Pharmaceutical Society as the mostresponsible body, the pharmacists also achieved some control overthe profession and a lead on the other health professions. Asomewhat similar victory for U.S. pharmacy would be found in thedetails of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914.9 In nineteenth-century America, the unimpeded importation ofopium and the free economy in opiates do give an advantage to thehistorian, for estimates of per capita consumption are morereliable when there are few restrictions on the importation,sale, and consumption of a product. Because the growth of poppieswithin the country and preparation of opium from them seem tohave been a minor contributor to American use, the importstatistics, begun in 1840 and continued to the present day, arereliable as a guide to domestic consumption until the HarrisonAct of 1914. Certainly the minimum level and the trend can beobserved. After the Harrison Act, these statistics grew lessreliable, for smuggling becomes a more uncertain variable, but wecan say that at least during the nineteenth century the annualper capita consumption rose steadily from about 12 grains in 1840(an average single dose being one grain) until the mid-1890s,when it reached 52 grains annually per capita. Then statisticsshow that average individual consumption gradually subsided up to1914, by which time the per capita rate had fallen back to thelevel of about 1880." In Great Britain, the per capitaconsumption declined during the latter half of the nineteenthcentury." During that same period, opium use in the UnitedStates rose dramatically. The peak of opiate addiction in theUnited States occurred about the turn of the century, when thenumber probably was close to 250,000 in a population of 76million, a rate so far never equaled or exceeded. 12 Heroin hadbeen introduced into the pharmacy in 1898 and had contrastingimpacts in Britain and the United States. In New York City, theaddiction capital of the United States, heroin became the drug ofchoice for recreational addicts, and the number of addicts wasmeasured in the tens of thousands by 1920. In Britain, theaddiction rate for heroin addicts by 1920 was minuscule. 13 Ofcourse, the use of drugs is determined by many factors, but Iwould like to suggest that the contrast in easy availability ofnarcotics in America and Britain-created by political and socialfactors removed from considerations of addiction-underlay thestrikingly different rates of addiction each country experiencedwell into this century. The rise in addiction with which we aremore familiar, that of the 1950s and more recently, appears to beassociated with additional factors that will be discussed later. Americans have something to learn from their earlier andextensive consumption of opiates, including heroin, and alsomassive consumption of cocaine, which occurred before World WarI. This era is forgotten. We commonly act as if the heroin"epidemic" of the 1960s or the current cocaine"epidemic" is a new phenomenon in the United States,that the widespread use of a drug implies that legalization or"decriminalization" is the only reasonable response.The history of attempts at legislative control in the UnitedStates suggests that other courses may be effective and thatthese alternatives to legalization appear to have reducedenormous opiate and cocaine consumption in the United Statesearlier in this century. Therefore, it is worthwhile to considerthese early efforts at narcotic limitation if we are to approachcontemporary policy issues with an appreciation of the range ofpolicy options that reduce or encourage ingestion of thesesubstances. For in spite of the great difference in addictionrates between the United States and Great Britain in 1920, theUnited States did reduce its addiction rate to a relatively smallnumber. On the other hand, the low heroin addiction rate in GreatBritain prior to the 1950s did not prove a protection againstdrug problems in that nation, although the level of use inBritain has not reached the proportions to which we areaccustomed in the United States. Clearly the social and legalfactors affecting drug use are complex, and there is no singleinfluence that determines a particular level of drug use andabuse. AMERICAN LEGISLATIVE CONTROL OVER OPIUM AND OPIATES TO 1914 The role of opium and its derivatives in the United States canbe traced independently from cocaine until 1914, when thesesubstances were linked together as "narcotics" throughthe Harrison Act. Technically, only the opiates are narcotics,that is, sleep-inducing, and they all have different effects.Nevertheless, most dangerous drugs, including cannabis, weregrouped under the rubric "narcotics" from at least the1920s until the 1960s. As mentioned above, opium was available in many forms derivedfrom crude opium long before the nineteenth century. In America,the two developments that spurred both consumption and concernabout opium were (1) the isolation of morphine and its injectioninto the body with hypodermic syringes and (2) the introductionof smoking opium, which had been brought to the United Statesmainly by a feared minority, Chinese laborers imported to helpbuild western railroads. The much greater ease of addictionthrough use of morphine compared to the more dilute formsemployed previously focused attention on the drug, medicalpractitioners, and modern technology in the form of thehypodermic syringe. Consumption of opium in the United States rose steadily beforeand after the Civil War. There had been complaints before the warabout "opium drunkards" by such prominent andprogressive physicians as Oliver Wendell Holmes, but in thesecond half of the century, physicians, as well as the generalpublic, widely deplored opium and morphine addiction. To beaddicted to morphine was to harbor a shameful secret to be hiddenfrom others at whatever cost, a point illustrated in EugeneO'Neill's moving play about his own family, Long Day's Journeyinto Night. Written in his later years, it was based on hismother's addiction by a thoughtless physician, and the pain ofthis memory had remained so great that O'Neill would not permitthe play's production during his lifetime. The leading Americansurgeon and the first professor of surgery at The Johns HopkinsHospital, William Stewart Halsted, was a morphine addict for thelast several decades of his life. His secret was kept hiddencarefully until the publication of Sir William Osler's privatediary in 1969." Osler had been Halsted's physician whileOsler was on the Hopkins faculty. Halsted's addiction did notappear to interfere with his work. Americans received opium and morphine not only from theirphysicians for pain; they could receive what they wanted, forwhatever reason they chose, over the counter or from mail ordercatalogues. The American free enterprise system, coupled with thefederal system of government, meant that a bottle heavily lacedwith morphine could be sold across state lines as an"addiction cure" and affirmed on the label to containno morphine whatsoever, quite within the law. States could passlaws restricting such advertising, but they were not inclined todo so. Patent medicine companies were the leading advertisers inAmerican newspapers. They developed an ingenious protection fromprying investigations or public pressure to reveal secretformulas, or from any state requirement to make only valid claimsfor effectiveness: The proprietary manufacturers included intheir lucrative contracts with newspapers a proviso that theadvertising agreement would be void if the state in which thenewspaper was published enacted any laws affecting the sale ormanufacture of the nostrums. 11 In the nation's capital, the manufacturers also fought offrequirements that their nostrums be labeled as to contents. Billsto enact such a law under the interstate commerce clause of theConstitution were defeated repeatedly, but in the 1890s a newreforming spirit was evident in the nation. These reforms wereextensive, ranging from control over the use of forest land, togovernment inspection of meat and other comestibles and lawsrelating to adulterants in foods, and to drugs considered unsafe.Attention to the danger of narcotics using the termbroadly-accompanied the peak of per capita consumption in theUnited States. It is clear that what were regarded as the mostnegative aspects of drug use led to the passage of the newlegislation. The simplest reform, correct labeling, was part ofthe Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. Any over-the-counter medicine- commonly these would be "patent medicines"-had to belabeled correctly as to inclusion of any of the following drugs:morphine, cocaine, cannabis, or chloral hydrate. A long-desiredreform, it simply informed the purchaser whether any of thesedrugs were present; it did not prevent purchase or restrict theamount of the drug. 16 Nevertheless, reports at the time indicatethat the amount of these substances dropped from a third to ahalf as a response to public concern.17 Although the newspapersremained quiet, widely read magazines such as Collier's andLadies Home Journal railed against patent medicines, especiallyagainst morphine and cocaine. Even after passage of thetruth-in-labeling laws, the magazines continued their exposesunabated until the next major step, which was restriction on theavailability of the drugs themselves." Tracing the movement to restriction, as opposed to labelingaccuracy, requires a step back to the mid-nineteenth century.Patent medicines are thought to have created some addiction, butthe number of addicts is difficult to estimate. That physiciansaddicted or assisted in the addiction of patients is morecertain. The problem of iatroaddiction initially was approachedby limiting renewal of prescriptions for opiates. These legalcontrols were mostly in the form of additions to the healthstatutes and depended for their efficacy on the judgments ofphysicians and pharmacists. These controls would not, of course,affect interstate commerce in narcotics or the familiar patentmedicines, which still could be bought over the counter. Noconsistent police efforts to enforce these laws appear to havebeen undertaken.18 As the public and leaders of the health professions becamemore aware of the growing number of those addicted to opiates,chiefly morphine, state laws were amended to be more stringent,and the police occasionally staged crackdowns. As will berecalled, however, the professions were pretty much unorganizedand struggling to achieve mandatory licensing; a threat to takeaway a license could not hold much fear until a license wasrequired to begin with. Legislators also felt, or at leastclaimed, a helplessness when neighboring states did not enactstrict laws-a circumstance more familiar to us with variationsin- the legal drinking age between states-with the result thatenforcement was weak. This circumstance, combined with a poorlytrained medical profession, a lack of professional organization,and an absence of laws controlling either patent medicine orinterstate commerce in drugs, left local controls more symbolicthan effective. The nineteenth century's last decade brought the rise of whatwould come to be called the Progressive Movement, a set ofreforms usually taking the form of federal laws affecting theentire nation with the ostensible purpose of improving thenation's morals or resisting the selfish actions of the rich andpowerful. Alongside it grew a temperance, soon a prohibition,movement that would eventuate in the Eighteenth Amendmentmandating prohibition of alcohol distribution for nonmedicalpurposes in the United States. In many ways, of course, theantialcohol movement was part of the Progressive Era; itsstartling success and later dramatic repeal have given thealcohol issue a somewhat separate development in our minds, butthe interrelation between the battles against alcohol and againstnarcotics is an important one. The antialcohol crusade helpedestablish the attitude that there could be no compromise with theforces of evil, that "moderation" was a false conceptwhen applied to alcohol: Prohibition was the only logical ormoral policy when dealing with this great national problem. Bythe nineteenth century a new wave of state prohibition laws wasenacted. These were tempered by the contemporary constitutionalunderstanding that a state prohibition law did not preventpurchase of liquor from a "wet" state, for that wouldbe a form of interstate commerce and not subject to the states'powers. This assumption helped placate some doubters aboutprohibition, but the staunch fighters against alcohol also soughtto remove that loophole. This they did through the Webb-KenyonAct of 1913. Without going into the details of the broad andinvolved movement that led to national prohibition, we shouldnote that the significance for the control of narcotics is thatanother dangerous substance, over which there was even moredispute as to the means of control, progressed inexorably towarda policy of "no maintenance" and no compromise. Themoral question of how to deal with a dangerous substance wasbeing fought out over alcohol, but the case would be strongereven with narcotics when that issue was brought to nationaldeliberation. The means by which the narcotics issue arose at the federallevel was accidental. Certainly it would have come to theattention of Congress and the president eventually as a corollaryto the alcohol prohibition movement or as a way of controllingaddiction, which was becoming a target of journalist reformersand physicians. It was acquisition of the Philippines through theSpanish-American War that occasioned action by the federalgovernment. Again, in order to understand how the Philippines forced thecentral government to take action on opium, it is necessary toappreciate the divisions between federal and state powers thatwere so marked until the last half-century. The Philippines,unlike a state, came directly and wholly under the control of thefederal government. At last, Congress could not avoid makingdecisions on such matters as the local availability of opium.Opium had been provided to Chinese on the Philippine Islandsthrough a Spanish government monopoly. Civil Governor WilliamHoward Taft considered whether the monopoly should bereinstituted. It was his judgment that this would be reasonableand that the profits from the opium monopoly could be used tohelp educate Filipinos, a task the United States eagerly acceptedas it sought to provide a model government for its first colony.20 It was at the point in 1903, when this reinstitution waspassing through the Philippine government under the eye of CivilGovernor Taft, that the moral question of compromising with"evil" affected the future of opium's legalavailability in that land. Missionaries in Manila and in theUnited States had learned that "tainted money" fromopium sales was to be employed for education, and they besoughtPresident Theodore Roosevelt to prevent this moral wrong. Heordered Taft to stop the bill, and that was the end of it. Themood of moral leaders in the United States was sufficient duringthe first few years of this century to prevent any such"maintenance" program, even if it was restricted, aspromised, to the Chinese in the Philippines. This immediatereaction to allowing opium to be used for purely"recreational" purposes, coming even before the Foodand Drug Act, gave a signal as to how the federal governmentwould respond to later questions regarding the legal supply ofopium to individuals, not for medical reasons but for enjoymentor to satisfy their addiction. In response to the veto from Washington, Governor Taftappointed an Opium Investigation Committee to consider how otherAsian territories handled the opium problem. This committeeintroduces us to Bishop Charles Henry Brent, the ProtestantEpiscopal bishop of the Philippines, who had come out with Taftto help in Americanization of this new possession. Bishop Brentlater would become world famous for his pioneer efforts to launchthe ecumenical movement among Christian churches, but his secondclaim to fame was as a world leader against nonmedicinal uses ofnarcotics. He was appointed to the committee, which traveled toJapan, Formosa, Shanghai, Saigon, and Singapore examining howother nations dealt with the opium user. He and the other membersof the committee found the Japanese policy in Formosa, a Japanesepossession since its seizure from China in 1895, to be the mosteffective and enlightened. Japan opposed smoking opium but didnot try to stop confirmed addicts abruptly from indulging intheir habit. Japan, hoped to "mature out" the opiumsmokers and leave an opium-free colony. In Japan, itself, opiumuse was controlled stringently by the government, rare even amongChinese aliens, and strongly deprecated by Japanese society. The Philippine Opium Investigation Committee recommended that(1) male opium smokers over 21 should be registered in order toreceive opium from a reinstituted government monopoly and (2)after a three-year period, the amount provided the smokers bereduced gradually until the smokers had been completely weanedfrom the drug. 1 But Congress reacted more sternly. Congressdecreed immediate opium prohibition, except for medicinalpurposes, for all native Filipinos; non-Filipinos-mostlyChinese-were allowed a three-year period of use. Over 12,000non-Filipino opium users were registered, and their usual dosagewas maintained for two-and-onehalf years. During the final sixmonths of the three-year leniency period ending March 1908, theopium provided was gradually reduced to zero. For officialpurposes, opium smoking had stopped in the Philippine Islands.One additional point: The opium dispensing stations establishedunder these laws were the first American narcotic clinics,although their goal was not long-term maintenance but ratherregistration and detoxification. The Philippine situation forced the federal government to takea stand on opium use for nonmedicinal purposes, and the decisionwas to prohibit. To Congress, once the question was posed,compromise with narcotics was not a politically practicalalternative. The Philippines also gave the United Statesleadership of the international control of narcotics, a role itstill holds. It was apparent to the Opium Investigating Committeethat the solution to the Philippine opium problem lay in thecontrol of international trafficking in opium, as well as in thecurtailment of opium production in the original producing states,such as India, China, Burma, Persia, and Turkey, to name some ofthe most prominent sites for the cultivation of the opium poppy. At the time that the Philippines were perceived to be a victimof external sources of opium, the United States was havingincreasing problems with the Chinese Empire. Owing tomaltreatment of Chinese in the United States, merchants in Chinaplanned a voluntary embargo on American goods. This worriedAmerican industrialists, wholesalers, exporters, and the federalgovernment. China had also embarked on a vigorous effort to riditself of opium use and, employing draconian methods, was havingsome success. As a means to indicate good will to China, to aidthe Philippine opium problem, and to take an internationalleadership position on a moral issue of the times, the UnitedStates proposed, following Bishop Brent's suggestion to PresidentRoosevelt, to convene an international meeting at Shanghai toconsider the opium traffic among nations and to suggest ways inwhich China's antiopium campaign might be aided. Thus, the Shanghai Opium Commission came into being. It wouldmeet during February 1909, with Bishop Brent as its electedpresident. The group was designated a "commission"because the United States was unable to gain approval for a morepowerful convocation, a "conference," which underinternational law could draft a treaty that would, if ratified,bind the signatory states. A "commission," on the otherhand, could make findings of only fact or opinion. In addition tothe United States and China, those who accepted invitations toShanghai were Great Britain, France, the Netherlands, Persia,Japan, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Germany, Portugal, Siam, andRussia. Turkey accepted but did not send a representative. Persiawas represented by a local merchant. The resolutions adopted by the commission were merelyrecommendations and, even as such, had a comfortable vaguenessthat allowed a latitude of interpretations. For example,Resolution Three, taking cognizance of the near unanimousagreement that opium for nonmedicinal uses should be prohibitedor "carefully regulated," called upon nations to"reexamine" their laws. This could hardly be considereda clarion call for prohibition of nonmedical uses, but it wasBrent's goal to achieve a series of resolutions that at leastpointed in the direction of action to control traffic innarcotics, with the hope that a future conference would enact atreaty initiating such control." The road from the Shanghai Opium Commission to the Hague OpiumConference, which convened in December 1911 and resulted in theOpium Convention of 1912, was a tortuous one, but after theShanghai meeting, the United States continued to press for asecond and more significant gathering. Eventually, the nationsgathered in The Hague, and once again Bishop Brent was electedthe presiding officer. The Hague Opium Convention (which concerned cocaine as well asopium) placed the burden of narcotic control on the domesticlegislation of each nation. Chapter Three of the conventioncalled for control of each phase of the preparation anddistribution of medicinal opium, morphine, heroin, cocaine, andany new derivative that could be shown to have similar properties.24 The convention was not put into force by the dozen nations whoattended the First Opium Conference, for it was agreed that therequirements would be held in abeyance until all forty-six worldpowers had signed and ratified the convention. Eventually threeconferences were held, the second in 1913 and the third in 1914,only weeks before the outbreak of World War 1. A compromise wasreached regarding the implementation of the treaty: Any ratifyingnation was permitted to put the treaty into effect in 1915, evenif ratification had not been unanimous. But only seven nationsdid this by the end of the World War and the beginning of theVersailles treaty negotiations in 1919. The United Statessupported incorporating the Hague Convention into the Versaillestreaty, so that ratification of the treaty ending World War Iwould at the same time bring the nation under the requirements ofthe Hague Convention, which required national and domesticlegislation to control the preparation and distribution ofopiates and cocaine. Of course, the United States never didratify the Versailles treaty, but it had already ratified theHague Convention in 1913 and had put it into effect in 1915. Onesignificant result of the inclusion of the Hague Convention inthe Versailles treaty was the passage in Britain of the DangerousDrugs Act of 1920, an action taken not because of any seriousproblem with addiction but because, by ratifying the Versaillestreaty, Britain had committed itself to comprehensive domesticlegislation. 25 DOMESTIC NARCOTIC LEGISLATION IN THE UNITED STATES During the year or so prior to the Shanghai Opium Commission,the United States suggested topics to be discussed in 1909, andone of the topics was a report on domestic antinarcoticlegislation. Americans understood that strong and enforceddomestic legislation in other nations would result in diminishingthe flow of drugs into the United States, but would other nationsunderstand why the United States had no national antinarcoticlegislation whatsoever? Americans knew that federal-stateseparation of powers made a national antinarcotic law ratherdifficult, but the State Department decided that something shouldbe on the books when the U.S. delegation arrived in Shanghai. The simplest law that could be framed and stand a chance ofpassage by the U.S. Congress before the commission opened was onethat excluded from the United States opium not intended forlegitimate medical uses or, in other words, opium prepared forsmoking. Here there was an ironic combination of politicalfactors. The United States hoped one of the major effects of theShanghai Commission would be to placate China with regard to thepoor treatment given Chinese nationals in the United States. Suchtreatment was in violation of our treaty obligations with China.The impetus for banning smoking opium from the United States,however, had developed from the fear and loathing of the Chinese,who were associated intimately with this particular manner ofingesting opium. Thus, the negative American attitude towardChinese aliens gave the push that passed a "facesaving" law designed to show China the good will of theUnited States. After the law was enacted on February 9, 1909, it wasannounced dramatically in Shanghai to the other nations as proofof American sincerity.26 And yet no one in the Americandelegation or within the State Department had any illusions thatthis law would control domestic narcotic use. Additionallegislation was seen as imperative both to curtail the Americannarcotics problem and to display an American example to othernations where the implementation of narcotics control programswas essential to the solution of the American domestic problem. Dr. Hamilton Wright, a physician with political interests whohad been appointed opium commissioner by the State Department in1908, oversaw the State Department's preparation for the Shanghaimeeting, which included culling information from policedepartments, physicians, pharmaceutical houses, etc., regardingthe narcotic problem and consumption in the United States. BishopBrent was the chairman of the delegation, but after his elevationto the commission's presidency, Wright became the acting head.Back in Washington after the commission meeting, Wright took upthe battle for an international meeting that could frame a treatyand played a leading role in the preparation of domesticantinarcotic legislation. He had opposition within the StateDepartment on both questions, but he finally won the assent ofPhilander C. Knox, the secretary of state, and moved ahead. Wright, who combined an aggressive personal style withself-righteousness and a thirst for political preferment, wasless effective than he otherwise might have been. He never gotthe prize plum for which he yearned, the ministry to China, andhis chief claim for notability, the Anti-Narcotic Act of 1914,known even then as the "Harrison" Act, left him at themoment of achievement with almost no further role in theantinarcotic movement. Eventually, he volunteered to help thewounded on the western front during World War 1, was injured 27there in an automobile accident, and died in 1917 in Washington.His indomitable wife, Elizabeth Washburn Wright, carried on his28 battle for world control of narcotics until her death in 1952. In late 1909 Dr. Wright proposed a domestic law that would bebased on the federal government's power of taxation. Thealternative federal power was that over interstate commerce, butWright believed that taxation would result in a detailedaccounting of narcotics from their introduction into the UnitedStates to their distribution to manufacturers, wholesalers, andretailers, including pharmacists and physicians. Heavy fineswould be levied on anyone not keeping records accurately orselling and transferring these products without proper reportingand payment of taxes. Wright tried to solve the federal/state dichotomy in thismanner: The information obtained by this proposed law would bemade available to state boards of pharmacy and medicine, whichwould then take appropriate action to ensure that "theproper relations . . . should exist between the physician, thedispensing druggist, [and] those who have some real need of thedrugs.' "29 So it is evident that at this early stage, twoyears before the Hague Convention, Wright and the StateDepartment did not envision a federal role in policing therelationships between, say, an addict and his or her supplyingpharmacist or physician. The sanctity of the state's policepowers would be maintained; the federal government would supplyonly information. Reformers believed that the information,however, could lead a responsible state agency to take only oneaction, that is, to curb the supply of narcotics to those who didnot have a medical need for it-and "mere" addicts didnot fall into that category. The Foster Anti-Narcotic Bill (1910-1911) Republican Congressman David Foster of Vermont introducedWright's bill in April 1910. In addition to opium and cocaine, asin the eventual Harrison Act, the bill was aimed at cannabis(marijuana) and chloral hydrate, the same substances the Food andDrug Act of 1906 required to be revealed on labels. It did notallow small amounts of the drugs in mild remedies such as coughsyrup to be exempt from the stringent reporting requirements andtheir severe penalties. Druggists feared the multitude of stampsand labels at each stage; the fines, which would range from $500to $5,000; and the one-to-five-year jail sentences. The word"knowingly" did not qualify the prohibited actions,making it likely that simple errors without any intention todeceive would result in horrendous punishments. Although supportfor the bill could be found, the individuals in the drug tradewould not endorse the detailed and hazardous provisions of theFoster Bill. It never came to a vote in the Sixty-first Congress,which ended in March 1911.30 The next Congress was marked by a significant change: For thefirst time in almost two decades, the Democrats gained control ofthe House of Representatives. The South now had achieved newimportance, in that committee chairmanships changed hands. In theSixty-second Congress the Foster Bill became the Harrison Bill,named after Francis Burton Harrison, a New York City Democrat whoserved on the Foreign Relations Committee. Dr. Wright continuedhis difficult task of trying to obtain the most stringent billconsistent with winning essential political support from themedical and pharmaceutical interests and now from the DemocraticParty. In order to mitigate the severity of the original FosterBill, the drug trades established the National Drug TradeConference, which would represent the major trade associationsand try to reach a compromise position on the complexantinarcotic bill. The NDTC, which first met in Washington, D.C.,in January 1913, provided the most powerful influence on thewriting of what would become known as the Harrison Act." The attitude of the newly influential southern Democratstoward any potential invasion of states' rights now had to betaken more seriously. These politicians feared an interferencewith the South's local laws, which enforced racial segregationand Negro disenfranchisement. They remembered the era of"reconstruction," when the North ruled the Southfollowing 1865, and wanted to maintain the authority the whitecitizenry had subsequently won with the withdrawal of troops and"carpetbaggers." The narcotic control proposalsthreatened to intrude federal authority into the states,affecting local pharmacists and physicians and threatening toreach right into a neighborhood and send an individual to federalprison. Furthermore, this example of using the federal tax powerprimarily to achieve a moral end-for the taxes were not intendedto bring in a significant revenue but rather to force disclosureand compliance with rules of narcotics distribution-could be aprecedent for other concerns brewing in the United States, suchas protecting Negro voting rights in the South. Dr. Wright, therefore, faced a new set of attitudes in theDemocratic-controlled House. He reacted by stressing the impactof narcotics, especially cocaine, on Negroes. He attributedattacks on whites to the crazed Negro cocaine fiend. He alsoargued that many poor Negroes would not have the energy orknowledge to send away for the cocaine, so the conclusion must bethat northern businessmen who did not care about the South'sconcerns were shipping-via interstate commerce-cocaine toNegroes. Further, unscrupulous or ignorant employers were said tobe supplying cocaine to their Negro workers .32 One further concern about the precedent the antinarcotic lawwould provide related to the flourishing prohibition movement. Asprohibition was achieved in state after state, the loophole forat least the upper and middle classes was that alcohol could beordered across state lines and shipped into a dry state, forinterstate commerce was regulated by the federal government,which so far was not teetotal. The Webb-Kenyon Act of 1913,however, was passed to close this loophole, survived PresidentTaft's veto, and, much to the surprise of many, was declaredconstitutional by the Supreme Court. This occurrence removed oneof the stumbling blocks to the Harrison Bill, for now a nationalantinarcotic law could not serve as a precedent for curtailinginterstate commerce in a dangerous substance. In the course of all this maneuvering, no one rallied to thedefense of any of the drugs named for control except thatoccasionally cannabis was described by someone as nothabit-forming or not as serious as opium or cocaine. Perhapsbecause the cannabis problem was not seen to be serious orbecause the drug did not seem so dangerous, it was dropped fromthe proposed law. Chloral hydrate, a sleeping medicine, was alsodropped. The attitude toward opium and cocaine, however, wasalmost totally condemnatory. The only question was how to controltheir distribution most efficiently, since they had medicinalvalue but were also considered dangerously addicting. This was insharp contrast with alcohol; its use divided the nation, and hugelegitimate industries depended upon its continued consumption. The government and the trades eventually reached agreement onthe proposed law by moderating the record-keeping provisions,reducing penalties, and allowing the sale of patent medicineswith small amounts of narcotics in them. Representative Harrisonintroduced it in June 1913, and it was passed quickly by theHouse. In the Senate some amendments were offered, a few with anapparent goal of destroying the bill's chances of passage. InAugust of 1914, though, the Senate passed the bill, albeit with afew modifications that were compromised in Conference Committee.Finally, on December 17, 1914, President Wilson signed it intolaw, to become effective March 1, 1915. At last the United Stateshad redeemed its pledge to other nations that it would enact astringent law, as it had urged every other nation to do. The significance of the Harrison Act to strategists like Dr.Wright, though, was more than just the satisfaction of redeemingpledges made to questioning representatives of other nations. Forhim, the Harrison Act was the implementation of the HagueConvention of 1912, which called upon signatories to enactdomestic legislation controlling narcotics supplies anddistribution. Understood as the fulfillment of treatyobligations, the Harrison Act would have the authority to usurpthe states' police powers, for the Constitution in Article Sixgives treaties concluded by the United States supremacy over thelaws of states. This would resolve the problem of states' rightsinterfering with the ability of a national law to require auniform compliance with strict narcotics control .33 Unfortunately, the Supreme Court at first did not give a verystrict interpretation to the Harrison Act. In the first Jin FueyMoy case (1916), the Court declared by a six-to-two majority thatthe Harrison Act could not be understood as having been requiredby the Hague Convention and that physicians could prescribe asthey saw fit, even to simple addicts. 34 This decision was astunning blow to federal enforcement, which, from the first dayof the act's implementation, was directed at pharmacists andphysicians who sold prescriptions or treated addicts without anyintent to cure them. World War 1, arriving at almost the same time as the HarrisonAct, profoundly affected American attitudes, creating an intensedesire to purify the nation as it girded itself to fight fordemocracy against the barbarism of the Kaiser. The fall of Russiaand the spread of Bolshevism intensified fears of contagion andthe desire to be sure that the United States remained pure andstrong. Prohibition took giant strides during World War 1. TheProhibition Amendment in an early form nearly passed the House inDecember 1914, a week after the passage of the Harrison Act. In1916 it did pass, and by January 1919 Prohibition had become partof the Constitution as the Eighteenth Amendment. Earlier,Congress had passed wartime prohibition, which was intended tosave grain for the war effort as well as to promote efficiency inwar production plants. Similarly, a battle was being fought tooverturn the Jin Fuey Moy decision, which had weakened thegovernment's intention for the Harrison Act. A TreasuryDepartment committee reported that the number of addicts in thenation was over a million." These exaggerated figures, aswell as a fear about returning veterans having become addicted onthe battlefield and the specter of alcohol prohibition, whichmight drive alcoholics to morphine and cocaine, led to a newattempt to put teeth into the Harrison Act. This time thegovernment was successful. In March 1919, two months after the ratification of theEighteenth Amendment (which would go into effect a year later),the Supreme Court ingeniously decided, five to four, that to calla prescription for narcotics intended to supply a"mere" addict with maintenance doses was an error, forsuch a script could not be considered a true prescription givenin the proper conduct of medical practice. Since it was not aprescription, the issuing physician had conveyed narcoticswithout the required tax; he had therefore violated the HarrisonAct and could be arrested. The four dissenting justices were theconservatives, who argued that this was an invasion of states'police powers, while the majority, including Holmes and Brandeis,felt that more power had to be given the government if it was tocarry out its duty to protect the public from such an insidiousevil .36 At last, the intent of the reformers had been achieved:Simple maintenance was outlawed, and the federal government couldtake action nationwide to arrest and convict health professionalswho practiced it. Narcotics now had a no-maintenance policy,which a few months later would also be the policy for alcohol.Enforcement of both prohibitions would be the responsibility of aunit in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, reflecting the similarityof the two conceptions. Enforcement During the 1920s Several additional laws completed the early legislativestructure of American control of opium and cocaine. Some wereminor, such as a stipulation that no finished products such asheroin or morphine could be imported into the United States.37The law stated that only coca leaves and crude opium could beimported and that the finished products, cocaine, morphine,heroin, codeine, etc., were to be manufactured in Americanpharmaceutical factories, which were given a monopoly to producethese substances. This may have made up for revenues lost, as theamounts sold legally in the United States fell after the HarrisonAct. Other laws dealt with transshipment of drugs 38 across theUnited States for foreign markets. Heroin Perhaps the most important addition to the Harrison Act'scontrol of opiates and cocaine came in 1924, when the UnitedStates banned the importation of opium to be used for themanufacture of heroin.39 The observance of federal-stateboundaries is evident in this law, for it does not ban themanufacture of heroin altogether but only the importation ofcrude opium for that purpose. Just that much seemed to be withinthe power of the federal government. Also, this did not requirethe seizure of heroin legally available in the United States forcough medicines (the original claim for heroin's value) or forcertain other purposes, chiefly pain control or "twilightsleep" during child birth. Heroin had been made available commercially by the BayerCompany of Germany in 1898 as a superior cough suppressant.40 TheBayer Company believed that the addition of acetyl groups to thebasic molecule would make morphine more palatable, and thisproduct, diacetylmorphine, the company named Heroin, a trademarkthat was protected until Germany lost such protections as aresult of losing the First World War. Similarly, by adding anacetyl group to salicylic acid to make it less irritating to thestomach when taken for joint pains, the Bayer Company launchedanother successful venture. In 1899 the company named sodiumacetyl salicylic acid Aspirin, which similarly was protected bytrademark until World War 1. Few pharmaceutical firms can takecredit for naming and distributing two drugs that remain amongthe most popular in Western society even after nearly a hundredyears. Heroin essentially had been unrestricted in the United Statesprior to the Harrison Act, and by 1912 in New York City it hadreplaced morphine as the drug of recreational choice amongyouthful males, according to the records of Bellevue Hospital.The addictive nature of heroin had been recognized ratherquickly, for the AMA issued a warning in 1902. Heroin was popularbecause it could be inhaled by sniffing, like cocaine, as well asinjected by needle. When injected into the bloodstream, heroincrossed the blood-brain barrier more quickly than morphine andtherefore gave a more intense, but briefer, "high."During the years of intense concern over social control, whichbegan with the First World War, heroin became linked with malegang violence and the commission of crimes. Some believed thatheroin stimulated the user to commit crimes or at least providedthe courage to pull off a bank robbery or mugging. In the early1920s most of the crime in New York City was blamed on drug use,chiefly the opiates, including heroin.41 The preference for heroin over morphine by recreational users,and the belief that other opiates could fulfill heroin's role asa painkiller and cough suppressant, led to a move to ban heroinfor medical purposes. The heroin problem also contributed toAmerican fear of foreign nations after World War 1, for the drugwas being manufactured in other countries and then smuggled intothe United States. The Swiss drug industries, for example,produced large amounts of heroin, which found its way into thiscountry. Heroin's image as a foreign product popular with feareddomestic groups helped support an isolationist stance,illustrated by the American refusal to join or even recognize theLeague of Nations. Influential congressmen, such as Stephen G.Porter, Republican chairman of the House Committee on ForeignRelations, urged that all heroin production in the United Statesbe stopped. As an example he would try to get other nations 42 tofollow at the Geneva Opium Conferences of 1924 and 1925. The United States did enact the legislation sought byCongressman Porter, but it failed to achieve its goals at themeetings in Geneva. In fact, in disgust at the refusal of othernations to agree to curb production of poppies and coca bushes,the ultimate source of heroin 43 and cocaine, the United Stateswalked out of the conference. The United States, which hadfounded the world antinarcotic movement in Shanghai and TheHague, now saw it taken over by the League of Nations (as theVersailles treaty had mandated) and controlled by the verynations the United States sought to shame or force into anarcotics policy that the United States viewed as responsible.American participation in the worldwide effort then fell to a lowpoint until the 1930s, when participation was resumed ininternational meetings. By the outbreak of World War II, theUnited States was again achieving significant participation ininternational antidrug activities. AMERICAN DOMESTIC CONTROL TO THE MARIJUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 The use of cocaine, which had been in "soft" drinkslike Coca-Cola until 1903 and was available easily to sniff as atreatment for sinusitis or hay fever, fell precipitously afterreaching a peak somewhere around 1905. By the 1930s cocaine usehad receded, and during the 1950s physicians and narcotics agentsalike described cocaine use as a problem that once was serious inthe United States but now was practically absent. Several reasonsfor its reduced use can be suggested. The drug had beenintroduced as a wonder substance-Freud had called it the firstmedicine that worked as an antidepressant. The Parke-DavisCompany manufactured it after 1885 in many forms for drinking,smoking, inhaling, or rubbing on the skin. Within about a decade,warnings surfaced. Consumption peaked about twenty years afterits initial distribution, and around the same time the accountsof its effect on the lives of its users and its popularlybelieved-although questionable-special link with southern blackscreated in the public's mind an image so fearful that cocaine'seffects became the extreme against which other drugs would becompared. Cocaine's association with violence, paranoia, andcollapsed careers made laws against it by 1910 a popular matter.The first strict antinarcotic law in New York State was passed in1913 and was directed at cocaine. Al Smith, later to be ananti-Prohibition candidate for president and critic ofProhibition in his state while he was governor, drew the strictanticocaine measure in his early years as a state assemblyman.44The combination of strict laws and intense public support ofcontrol measures brought on a reduction in consumption, which, atthe peak of its popularity, must have seemed most unlikely if notimpossible. The effect of the Harrison Act, its court interpretations, andsupplementary legislation also appear to have reduced greatly thenumber of opiate addicts. The medical and pharmacy professionswere denied an easy way of providing drugs. Although it is clearthat only a fraction of either profession was liberal in theirprovision, this nevertheless had been enough to maintain a largenumber of users. It had been argued recently that therecreational users began to stand out more prominently, as themedically addicted and more sedate group declined in numbers, andthat the relatively small number of addicts in the United States,about 50,000 in 1940, would have had an "underworld" orunsavory character even without the Harrison 45 Act'scriminalization of drug use. This point of view contrasts sharplywith the argument that the Harrison Act changed citizens who werenormal except for their addiction into criminals who had 46 toviolate the law to obtain their daily supply of opiates. Whateverthe reason, the number of those addicted fell from about aquarter million around 1900 to much less than half that number byWorld War II. The war effectively reduced supplies of narcoticsto the United States, and in 1945 the United States probably hadits lowest number of opiate addicts since the mid-nineteenthcentury. The rise of addiction after World War 11 may have builton the core of addicts left in the nation, but the dynamics ofthe addiction epidemic that began in the 1960s appear in certainrespects to have had a different character. NARCOTIC CLINICS, 1913-1925 In order to close the story of the decline in addiction after1900, it is necessary to consider the legendary narcotic clinicsthat, like the Philippine opium dispensaries, were intended todeal with addicts who no longer could receive opiate or cocainesupplies from local physicians .47 The first in the United Stateswas opened in 1912 by Charles Terry, the public health officer ofJacksonville, Florida, where he provided both opiates and cocaineto men and women, blacks and whites. Dr. Terry went on to becomea student of the opium problem in the United States and compileda classic book of reports, excerpts from articles, andstatistical information in The Opium Problem,published in 1928 and co-authored by Mildred Pellens. Other clinics followed, particularly after the TreasuryDepartment, in enforcement of the Harrison Act, prosecuted orthreatened with prosecution health professionals who suppliedaddicts indefinitely. A series of clinics in New England wereestablished at the suggestion of officials of the InternalRevenue Bureau. In New York State, the crackdown on druggists andphysicians emanated from state law, and clinics were establishedin upper New York State through state planning and authorization.Registration of addicts was permitted so that physicians wouldrestrict maintenance to those already addicted. In New York City, the Health Department did not wish toprovide opiates, morphine, and heroin on an indefinite basis butdid open a clinic at the city Health Department headquarters.This clinic provided heroin, but only as an inducement toregistration and eventual detoxification and rehabilitation.About 7,500 addicts registered, received their drug of choice indosages gradually decreased until uncomfortably small, usuallythree to eight grains of morphine daily, and were offeredcurative treatment. Most declined to be cured. Those who didreceive treatment, at North Brother Island, seemed bothunappreciative and very liable-the estimate was 95 percent - toreturn to narcotics available on the street or from a physicianor druggist. The Treasury Department, armed with fresh Supreme Courtdecisions of March 1919, started to close down the clinics, alongwith prosecuting the dispensing physicians and druggists. Oneargument was that the availability of easy maintenance inhibitedcures and also that giving legal permission for maintenanceclinics undercut the Treasury Department's position when itbrought action against a professional for reckless provision ofdrugs. From a legal point of view, the "reckless"provider was obeying the tax laws, as was the clinic, unless thefederal government wanted to get into the question of medicalcompetence, which was a state, not a federal, concern. Gradually the clinics were closed, the last one in 1925 inKnoxville, Tennessee. Some had been operated poorly, others quiteresponsibly with community support. Yet, because of theintricacies of the tax powers under which the federal lawoperated, all were closed, even if unfair harassment wasnecessary to discourage the operation. The number of registrantswas not large, about 3,000 if we exclude the New York Cityclinic, which was not intended for maintenance but for bait toget addicts into detoxification. The number of addicts registeredunder the New York State law, which provided for maintenance notonly in clinics but also from private physicians and pharmacists,eventually totaled about 13,000 in 1920. It can be assumed,therefore, that the clinics were not a major element in themaintenance of addiction in the United States. One side note: The13,000 addicted registrants in New York State in 1920 add up tothe largest number of legally supplied addicts recorded in anyWestern country this century, a number not approached yet byBritain under the socalled "British System." Althoughthe "American System" preceded and surpassed in sizeany scheme attempted then or subsequently in Britain, it was infact the large number of addicts in America that made maintenanceso unwieldy and unpopular. The demise of the clinics left drug peddlers and individualmembers of the health professions as the major targets of thefederal government. Generally, the physicians did not wish totreat addicts, nor did they have any sympathy with addicts. Thosephysicians who, for whatever reason, did continue to treataddicts with maintenance doses were threatened and arrested,unless the maintenance had been approved by the local narcoticagent. Some maintenance was permitted, but only on a case-by-caseevaluation. From reports prepared by agents upon investigatingnarcotic clinics, it appears that an acceptable life-style was arequirement for permission to be maintained.48 A theory had been advocated, mostly among maintainingphysicians in New York City, that longstanding addiction changedthe body's physiology in such a way that opiates were necessaryfor the patient to remain normal.49 Too little opiate and thepatient would experience withdrawal, too much and the patientwould be "high," but just the right amount would allownormal feelings and behavior. This, of course, is close to the argument made in the 1950s byDrs. Dole and Nyswander to justify methadone maintenance. After aseries of scientific studies shortly after World War 1, thegovernment concluded otherwise .50 Those physicians who insistedon maintaining patients without approval from a narcotics agentran a serious risk of arrest and, if convicted, loss of a medicallicense and time in a federal penitentiary. In spite of thedanger, of course, some physicians supplied narcotics withoutrestraint or with very poor judgment, but evidence shows thatother, responsible physicians were entrapped without good reasonin order to boost the number of an agent's arrests and therebybolster his chances for promotion.51 An aura of fear, therefore,accompanied a physician's decision to give an opiate to apatient, especially a new patient. On the other hand, thecasualness with which physicians once handed out morphine or someother opiate was reduced considerably. Along with the rejection of maintenance, physiciansunfortunately had no effective medical cure available foraddiction. Several had been promoted in many forms in thenineteenth and early twentieth century, but each had been foundto have no scientific merit .52 The problem devolved into adecision of whether to stop opiates abruptly and thereby causethe patient to go directly into full Withdrawalthe so-called"cold turkey" approach-or gradually to reduce theopiate over a few days or a few weeks. Because the addictedperson frequently has a threshold of average daily consumptionbelow which the user becomes acutely uncomfortable, and because ayearning for heroin or morphine often persists for months oryears after the beginning of withdrawal, the decision to detoxifyabruptly or gradually usually was a difficult path for thepatient. Nevertheless, detoxification was the preferred route forlegal reasons. Two ancient warnings about detoxification, thatthe patient would die in withdrawal, or that a supply cutoffwould precipitate a rash of suicides, did not materialize. During the 1920s and 1930s the number of addicts diminished inthe United States. Grossly exaggerated estimates came fromantidrug entrepreneurs like Captain Richmond Pearson Hobson, whohad been a Prohibition advocate before unleashing his energiesagainst heroin and later marijuana as the head of severalnational and international voluntary groups." Captain Hobsonattacked heroin in a most melodramatic manner, claiming therewere 4 million addicts in the United States and comparing themall to lepers. In spite of Hobson, the concern over opiateaddicts and cocaine users declined during the two decades afterWorld War I. MARIJUANA TAX ACT OF1937 With the battle against opiate addiction apparently at a morestable, less alarming level in the 1930s and the use of cocainehaving declined dramatically, a new dangerous drug appeared onthe American horizon: marijuana. Marijuana smoking arrived in theUnited States with Mexican farm workers who had crossed theborder, mostly to labor in agricultural fields in the Southwestand in sugar beet fields as far north as Montana and Michigan.During the prosperous 1920s, about half-a-million farm workerscame to the United States, but as the Depression's widespreadunemployment laid an increasingly heavy burden on the country'scitizens, the Mexicans became an unwelcome group, encouraged inall ways to return to Mexico. Entwined with the troubles theywere said to cause local citizens was the Mexicans' custom ofgrowing marijuana for their own use. Hence, marijuana was linkedto violence, dissolute living, and Mexican aliens.53 The greatest fear of marijuana in the United States lay in theWest and Southwest. The government was importuned to take action,but the recent experience with alcohol prohibition (which hadended in 1933) made the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) and itshead, Harry J. Anslinger, formerly of the Prohibition Bureau,hesitant to get involved in a drug that grew domestically andprolifically. Cocaine and heroin were both foreign imports andtherefore, at least theoretically, could be regulated moreeasily, but marijuana appeared to be almost impossible to curb,let alone eradicate. The FBN tried to address this drug byincluding it in a recommended uniform state narcotic law thatwould leave to localities the question of prosecution andallocation of enforcement resources. Then a curious law intendedto reduce the number of machine guns provided the federalgovernment with a mechanism to attack marijuana nationally and atthe federal level. The Firearms Act of 1934 decreed that a machine gun could notbe transferred in any way without the payment of a transfer tax(from which law enforcement personnel were exempted). As odd asthis mechanism may sound, the law was upheld by the Supreme Courtin 1937 as a legitimate use of the power of taxation for a moralobjective. Within weeks of this decision, the TreasuryDepartment, which housed the FBN, appeared before Congress askingfor a transfer tax for marijuana. Without a stamp permit and theproper tax stamps, marijuana could not be sold, bartered, orgiven away. Congress quickly approved the bill, and PresidentFranklin Roosevelt signed it into law later in 1937.Unfortunately for the enforcement of this law, the FBN did notreceive any more money or agents. Therefore, the FBN relied onobnoxious descriptions of marijuana to do the job. The substancewas described to the public as a danger at least equal to cocaineor morphine, and the penalties for its illegal use or possessionwere severe. Because use of marijuana does not seem to have beengreat in the 1930s, the law's extraordinary severity did notconcern the general public until the 1960s, when thousands ofusers were arrested as marijuana's popularity burgeoned.Furthermore, the contrast between the effects of marijuanaobserved in the 1960s and the longstanding claims of the FBNregarding marijuana led to a problem concerning the credibilityof official statements, which still affects popular perceptions. WORLD WAR II TO THE PRESENT The Second World War ended with relatively few opiate addictsand very little use of cocaine or marijuana in the United States.The only closely controlled drug rising in use was alcohol,consumption of which had increased in per capita rates since therepeal of Prohibition. During all this period, sleeping pills andother barbiturates were prescribed widely but did not appear tobe a similar problem. The same holds true for the amphetamines,which had been made available in the 1930s and continued to bemanufactured and prescribed without restriction. Treatment of hard-core addicts did take place at the twofederal narcotics hospitals in Lexington, Kentucky, and FortWorth, Texas. Each was, in fact, a prison in which addicts weretreated and forced to detoxify, but the patients/prisonersfrequently resumed their drug habits when they returned to theirprevious environments. Around 1950 a younger age group began tobe admitted for heroin addiction, an abuse that reached a veryhigh level in 1970 and remains high today. This threat elicitedtwo responses. First, the federal government enacted more severelaws that levied mandatory sentences for conviction of dealing innarcotics. The laws, enacted in 1951 and 1956, are the peak oflegal penalties against narcotics, including marijuana, in theUnited States.55 The second response reflected the domestic and internationaltensions of the time. The heroin menace-and it should bereemphasized that cocaine and marijuana were not seen as anythingbut potentially major problems in the 1950s-was ascribed to theinfiltration of the drug trade by Chinese Communists who hadtaken over the China mainland in 1949. The Red Chinesepurportedly sent heroin to the United States to undermine ourdemocracy and at the 56 same time obtain specie, for which theyhad a desperate need. By the 1970s, however, the United Stateswas defending the People's Republic of China against the samecharge, now levied by Soviet newspapers.57 Such are the vagariesof international relations and the domestic drug problem. Heroin addicts in the 1950s mainly were young malesconcentrated in black and Hispanic urban ghettos. These addictsconcerned the federal government, as well as reform-mindedlawyers, academics, and physicians. The latter groups found theharsh penalties and the loathing attitude toward the addicts tobe inhumane. Leaders of this countermovement included sociologistProfessor Alfred Lindesmith and the attorney Rufus King. Theybelieved a more relaxed approach would be much more successful,as well as more kind. Rather than depriving addicts of heroin,heroin should be provided them. Rather than jailing addicts, theyshould be hospitalized, if necessary, or just left alone.58 This alternative view competed with the more hard-line styleof law enforcement exemplified by Commissioner Anslinger. Afterforty or more years, treating addicts medically, which had beenpopular before World War I and had then been found inadequate tothe task of reducing addiction, became part of public policy inthe 1960s. Methadone, a synthetic opiate developed in Germany inWorld War 11, was used by Dole and Nyswander to providemaintenance under theories similar to those which had justifiedmaintenance prior to the restrictive Supreme Court decisions in1919. This marked a major break in American narcotic controlpolicies; maintenance again was legal, although not with heroinor morphine. Along with the possibility of maintenance, other milder formsof control were invoked by the federal government. Civilcommitment to a narcotic treatment center,, thought more humanethan prison sentences, became possible legally in 1966, althoughin subsequent years this did not prove a practical method eitherto reduce addiction or to cure addicts in any marked number.59 Also in the 1960s, an enthusiasm for drug consumption of allkinds, polydrug abuse, replaced the habitual use of one or twodrugs, which had been more common in the past. Marijuana becamevery popular with young people, and then gradually its popularityexpanded in both directions to even younger and to older ages.Psychedelic drugs, such as LSD, appeared on the scene, along withinjectable methedrine or "speed." Drugs came tosymbolize opposition to the government and older mores. Theturmoil and dissension caused by the Vietnam War added to thesense of alienation many young people already felt from the oldergeneration, which frowned on drug use other than alcohol andtobacco. In addition to cultural alienation and the rapidincrease in multidrug use, the drug problem in the 1960s wasintensified by the extraordinarily large number of young peoplein the ages most likely to experiment with drugs; the post-WorldWar 11 "baby boom" generation had reached the teenageyears. By 1970, marijuana was used commonly, and research was showingthat it did not have the awful effects ascribed to it from the1930s onward. Various groups and individuals initiated movementsto legalize the substance, perhaps along the lines of tobacco.The drug situation was perceived by the public and the federalgovernment to be so bad and yet so difficult to control that thisseemed a good time to reevaluate the nation's entire policy. ANational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse was establishedin 1971. In general, the members of the commission reflectedtraditional views on the subject of drug control, and thereforeit was with even greater impact that the commission recommendedin its first report, "Marijuana: A Signal ofMisunderstanding," that the substance be"decriminalized." By decriminalization was not meantlegalization but a step short of that position: Marijuanapossession for individual use no longer would be a crime, but itssale and distribution would be against the law. The purpose ofcontrol at this stage would be to relieve law enforcementagencies of the nuisance of arresting individual users andthereby allow more resources to be concentrated on investigatinglarge-scale crime and more dangerous drugs.6o The notion of"decriminalization" proved difficult for all tounderstand. Some foreign nations considered it to meanlegalization. President Nixon refused to receive the report inpublic or to comment on it except to affirm that marijuana wasnot going to be legalized if he had anything to say about it. The second and final report, published in 1973, dealt withdrugs more broadly.60 It attempted to draw attention to theactual, measurable damage done by drugs, reflected in hospitaladmissions and drug-related deaths, as opposed to the myths thathad evolved around many of them. Heroin, for example, wasmisperceived as causing more deaths annually than barbiturates.This approach intended to make more rational the discussion overdrug policy, but it also laid the groundwork for the inclusion ofcigarettes and alcohol in the antidrug crusade. It de-emphasized,however, the effects a drug such as cocaine has on judgment andefficiency, the less quantifiable but still real aspects of druguse. The enforcement of laws against individual possession or useof marijuana has fallen in the United States to a very low level.Moreover, dealers in relatively small amounts are reportedly notprosecuted either, because the largest dealers and smugglers, whoare involved with tons, not ounces or pounds of marijuana,require all the time of officials. There has been a de factodecriminalization throughout large parts of the country, even iflaws against individual use remain on the books. Possession ofmarijuana in some states is a small-scale misdemeanor, and thepenalty is a ticket, like a parking violation. Yet, the frequencyof marijuana use by high school seniors has been dropping since1978, and this reduction, coupled with a more conservativenational mood, has slowed further moves toward formal federaldecriminalization or more liberality in the drug laws. The rise in cocaine's availability and popularity, for thesecond time this century, has further complicated the control ofdrugs in the United States. The fact that first millions shoulduse marijuana, then millions more take cocaine raises questionsabout the ability of local and national governments to controlnarcotics. The corruption that follows the drug traffic and therestraints on resources that may be allocated to drug controlcombine to leave a sense of frustration with enforcement policy.What will be the result of these trends? It all remainsuncertain. We appear to be in an era of widespread drug use thatwould seem to make reasonable the revocation of antidrugstatutes. We should recall, however, that a similar conditionprevailed around 1900, shortly before an onslaught against druguse led to a substantial reduction in the use of opiates, heroin,cocaine, and alcohol. That such a national response could occurmust make us pause before offering predictions for the future. Footnotes 1. Rudolf Schmitz, "Friedrich Wilhelm Serturner and theDiscovery of Morphine," Pharmacy in History 27 (1985):61-74. 2. 31 and 32 Vict. ch. 121, 1868: Act to Regulate the Sale ofPoisons and Alter and Amend the Pharmacy Act 1852 (1868 PharmacyAct). 3. Virginia Berridge and Griffith Edwards, Opium and thePeople: Opiate Use in Nineteenth-Century England (New York: St.Martin's, 1981), pp. 147-49, 227, 254. 4. Ibid., pp. 113-31. 5. James G. Burrow, AMA: Voice of American Medicine(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1963), pp. 51-52, 62ff. 6. Glenn Sonnedecker, Krerners and Urdang's History ofPharmacy, 4th ed. (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1976), pp. 198-212. 7. R. H. Shryock, Medical Licensing in America, 1650-1965(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1967), p. 32ff. 8. Virginia Berridge, "Fenland Opium Eating in theNineteenth Century," British Journal of Addiction 72 (1977):275-84. David F. Musto, The American Disease: Origins of Narcotic Control (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973), p. 54ff. 10. Ibid., p. 3 11. Berridge and Edwards, Opium and the People, p. 14517f. 12. Musto, American Disease, p. 5; David T. Courtwright, DarkParadise: Opiate Addiction in America before 1940 (Cambridge:Harvard University Press, 1982), chap. 1, "The Extent ofOpiate Addiction," pp. 9-34. Opiate addiction is the regularuse of opiates to prevent painful and uncomfortable bodily andpsychic symptoms that would occur if the drug's use were abruptlystopped. Estimates of the number of addicts in the United Stateshave often been susceptible to ideological and politicalinfluences. After carefully considering contemporary surveys,importation statistics, and other estimates, and subjecting hisfindings to modern statistical analysis, Professor Courtwrightconcluded that the highest rate of addiction in the United Statesoccurred in the 1890s at the maximum rate of 4.59 per 1,000.Today that rate would result in 1. I million addicts, about twicethe current official estimate. 13. Musto, American Disease, p. 236. 14. Wilder Penfield, "Halsted of Johns Hopkins: The Manand His Problem as Described in the Secret Records of William0sler," Journal of the American Medical Association 210(1969): 2214-18. 15. James Harvey Young, The Toadstool Millionaires: A SocialHistory of Patent Medicines before Federal Regulation,(Princeton, N.J.: PrincetonUniversity Press,1961), p. 21 1 ff. 16. Public Law No. 384, 59th Congress, Session 1, 30 June1906. Section 8 names the drugs that need to be listed on thelabel. 17. J. P. Street, "The Patent Medicine Situation,"American Journal of Public Health 7 (1917):1037-42. Young, Toadstool Millionaires, p. 213ff. 19. Martin 1. Wilbert and Murray Gait Metter, Digest of Lawsand Regulations in Force in the United States Relating to thePossession, Use, Sale and Manufacture of Poisons andHahit-Forming Drugs, Public Health Bulletin no. 56, Nov. 1912(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1912). 20. Musto, American Disease, p. 25ff. 21. Report of the Committee Appointed by the PhilippineCommission to Investigate the Use of Opium and the TrafficTherein .... Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, 1905. 22. Musto, American Disease, pp. 261-62. 23. Arnold H. Taylor, American Diplomacy and the NarcoticsTraffic, 1900-1939 (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1969),pp. 47-81. 24. Ibid., p. 82ff. 25. Berridge and Edwards, Opium and the People, p. 268. 26. United States 60th Congress, Public Law No. 221. An Act toprohibit the importation and use of opium for other thanmedicinal purposes. Approved 9 February 1909. 27. Musto, American Disease, pp. 31-37, 40-45, 61-62. 28. Ibid., pp. 31, 198, 202. 29. Ibid., p. 41. 30. Ibid., pp. 40-48. 31. Ibid., pp. 54-68. 32. Hamilton Wright, "Report on the International OpiumQuestion as Seen within the United States and ItsPossessions," in Opium Problem: Message from the Presidentof the United States, Senate Document no. 377, 61st Congress, 3rdSession, 21 February 1910, p. 49. 33. Hamilton Wright to Charles Evans Hughes, 28 June 1916, inPapers of Dr. Hamilton Wright, U.S. National Archives, RecordGroup 43, entry 36. 34. U.S. v. Jin Fuey Moy, 241 U.S. 394 (1916). 35. Special Committee of Investigation, Appointed March 25,1918, by the Secretary of the Treasury: Traffic in Narcotic Drugs(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1919). 36. Webb et al. v. U.S., 249 U.S. 96 (1919); U.S. v. Doremus,249 U.S. 86 (1919). 37. 67th Congress, Public Law No. 227. To amend the act ofFebruary 9, 1909, as amended, to prohibit the importation and useof opium for other than medicinal purposes. Approved 26 May 1922. 38. 68th Congress, Public Law No. 274. Prohibiting theimportation of crude opium for the purposes of manufacturingheroin. Approved 7 June 1924, Section 2. 39. Ibid., Section 1. 40. David F. Musto, "Early History of Heroin in theUnited States," in P. G. Bourne, ed., Addiction (New York:Academic Press, 1974), pp. 175-85. 41. Gerhard Kuhne, "Statement of Gerhard Kuhne, Head ofthe Identification Bureau, New York City Department ofCorrection," in Conference on Narcotic Education: Hearingsbefore the Committee on Education of the House ofRepresentatives, December 16, 1925 (Washington, D.C.: GovernmentPrinting Office, 1926), p. 175. 42. Prohibiting the Importation of Opium for the Manufactureof Heroin: Hearings on HR 7079, House of Representatives,Committee on Ways and Means, 68th Congress, Ist Session, 3 April1924 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1924), p.41ff. 43. Taylor, American Diplomacy and Narcotics Traffic, p.2OOff. 44. Musto, American Disease, pp. 6-8; Laws of New York, 1913,ch. 470, pp. 9984-91, approved 9 May 1913. 45. Courtwright, Dark Paradise, pp. 146-47. 46. Alfred R. Lindesmith, The Addict and the Law (New York:Vintage Books, 1965), pp. 3-34. 47. Musto, American Disease, pp. 151-81. 48, Ibid., p. 167ff. 49. Ernest Bishop, The Narcotic Drug Problem (New York:Macmillan, 1920); see also, David F. Musto, "Social andPolitical Influences on Addiction Research," in SeymourFisher and Alfred M. Freedman, eds., Opiate Addiction: Originsand Treatment (Washington, D.C.: Winston, 1973), pp. 93-98. 50. David F. Musto, "The American Antinarcotic Movement:Clinical Research and Public Policy," Clinical Research 19(1970): 601-5. 51. H. T. Nugent, Field Supervisor of the Fl3N, Fourth AnnualConference of Pharmaceutical Law Enforcement Officials, Toronto,Canada, 25 August 1932, Stenographic typescript of Proceedings,Archives of the American Pharmaceutical Association, Washington,D.C., box 31, pp. 86-87. 52. Musto, American Disease, pp. 69-90. 53. Ibid., pp. 190-94. 54. David F. Musto, "Marijuana Tax Act of 1937,"Archives of General Psychiatry 26 (1972):101-8. 58. Lindesmith, Addict and the Law; Rufus King, The DrugHang-up: America's Fifty Year Folly (New York: Norton, 1972). 59. Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966, Public Law89-273, 89th Congress, approved 8 November 1966. 55. 82nd Congress, Public Law No. 255, approved 2 November 1951; 84th Congress, Public Law No. 728, approved 18 July 1956. 56. H. J. Anslinger and W. F. Tomkins, Traffic in Narcotics(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953), pp. 69-116. 57. For example, "Poisoners: How the Maoists SmuggleOpium," Literaturnaya gazeta, 19 March 1969, translated andreprinted in Current Digest of Soviet Press (Ann Arbor, Mich.:Joint Committee on Slavic Studies, 1969), vol. 21, p. 7. 60. Marijuana: ASignal of Misunderstanding: First Report of the NationalCommission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse (Washington, D.C.:Government Printing Office, 1972), p. 150ff. 61. Drug Usein America: Problem in Perspective, Second Report of theNational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse (Washington,D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1973). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B22-15IA087-000632-B016-59http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlrtoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091445 text/html 12053HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:14:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:48 GMTContent-length: 11835 Legal History of American Marijuana Prohibition - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies VIRGINIA LAW REVIEW VOLUME 56 OCTOBER 1970 NUMBER6 THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** 'Assistant Professor of Law, University ofVirginia. B.A., 1966, JohnsHopkins University; LL.B., 1969, University of Virginia. "Assistant Professor of Law, University ofVirginia. A.B., 1965, Princeton University; LL.B., 1968, YaleUniversity. Mr. Snell. What is the bill? Mr. Rayburn. It has something to do with something that iscalled marihuana. I believe it is a narcotic of some kind. Colloquy on the House floor prior to passage of the MarihuanaTax Act. Introduction We wish to express our sincere appreciation to the studentswho assisted us in the preparation of the tables at Appendix A.Because the drug statutes of the several states are particularlyconfusing and difficult to find, and because so manyjurisdictions have recently changed their drug laws, thepreparation of the chart required long, tedious work which somany were kind enough to perform. To them, our most sincerethanks. We should like to thank especially Michael A. Cohen, John F.Kuether, W. Tracey Shaw, Alan K. Smith, and Allan J. Tanenbaum,all students at the University of Virginia School of Law, whoseresearch assistance and tireless effort were invaluable. We are particularly indebted to Professor Jerry Mandel whosupplied us with much of the raw data used in the historical casestudies in this Article. In his excellent article on drugstatistics in the Stanford Low Review, Problems with OfficialDrug Statistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991 (1969), Professor Mandelsuggested in a footnote that someone should attempt a history ofthe passage of anti-marijuana legislation. We have followed hissuggestion and earnestly hope that our product will fill thisgap. A modified and expanded version of this Article will bepublished in book form in the spring of 1971. TABLE OF CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION II. THE ANTECEDENTS: CRIMINALIZATION OFNARCOTICS AND ALCOHOL A. A Review of the Temperance Movement B. Anti-Narcotics Legislation to 1914 1. Narcotics Use at the Turn of the Century: A Growing Problem 2. State Legislative Response Before 1914 3. Watershed: The Passage of the Harrison Act C. The judicial Role and the Constitutional Framework: The Police Power and Intoxicant Prohibition to 1920 1. Phase One: Prohibition of Sale and Manufacture of Alcohol 2. Phase Two: Prohibition of Sale of Opium 3. Phase Three: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol to 1915 4. Phase Four: Prohibition of Possession of Narcotics 5 . Phase Five: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol After 1915 6. A Postscript on the Police Power: The Cigarette Cases III. THE GENESIS OF MARIJUANA PROHIBITION A. Initial State Legislation: 1914-1931 1. Rationale in the West: Class Legislation 2. Rationale in the East: Substitution 3. The International Scene 4. Conclusion B. Judicial Corroboration IV. PASSAGE OF THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUGACT: 1927-1937 A. Origins of the Uniform Law B. Drafting the Law C. Passage of the State Laws 1. Use Patterns and Public Knowledge: 1931-1937 2. Role of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics 3. Legislative Scrutiny and Media Coverage 4. Available Medical Opinion Provisions of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act and Supplemental Virginia Marijuana Statute (a) Classification and Offenses (b) Penalties V. PASSAGE OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 A. State Enforcement of the Uniform Law B. Public Hysteria or Continued Public Ignorance? C. The Tax Act Hearings 1. Who Were Users? 2. What's Wrong with Marijuana? 3. How Dare You Dissent! D. Congressional "Deliberation" and Action E. Provisions of the Act VI. THE 1950's: HARSHER PENALTIES AND A NEWRATIONALE-THE "STEPPING STONE" THEORY A. The Boggs Act and Its Progeny: The First Escalation 1. The Problem: Increased Narcotics Use 2. The Solution: Harsher Penalties 3. Marijuana and the Boggs Act (a) Increased Use (b) Youthful Users (c) The Danger: A New Rationale 4. The State Response: Mindless Escalation B. The Late 1950's: Another Escalation of the Penalties 1. Provisions of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956 2. Marijuana: Along for the Ride 3. Trafficking Patterns 4. Origin and Use 5. Enforcement Patterns 6. The Epitome of Irrationality: Virginia's 1958 Amendment VII. MARIJUANA USERS IN THE COURTS:1930-1965 A. Statutory Fantasies: The Complications of Federal Legislation 1. Quadruple "Jeopardy" and the "Killer Weed 2. Statutory Presumptions B. Attacks on State Legislation C. Procedural Defenses and Entrapment 1. Search and Seizure 2. Entrapment D. The Pro Forma Trial VIII. THE PUBLIC DISCOVERS THE TRUTH ABOUTMARIJUANA A. Marijuana and the Masses B. Enforcement of the Marijuana Laws: 1960-1970 C. Emergence of Medical Opinion 1. Research Obstacles 2. Current Medical Knowledge (a) The Myths (b) Physical Effects (c) Psychomotor Effects (d) Psychological Effects IX. MARIJUANA LEGISLATION CLASHES WITHJUDICIAL SKEPTICISM AND EMERGING VALUES-PIECEMEAL JUDICIALRESPONSE: 1965-1970 A. Multiple Offenses: Untying the Statutory Knots 1. Federal Developments 2. State Developments B. Procedural Objections to Enforcement Practices 1. Search and Seizure 2. Entrapment 3. Other Prosecution Practices C. Sufficiency of Evidence D. Sanction X. THE HEART OF THE MATTER-SUBSTANTIVE CONSTITUTIONALCHALLENGES TO THE MARIJUANA LAWS: 1965-1970 A. The Burden of Justification: The Importance of Having a Presumption on Your Side 1. Due Process and Equal Protection: Rationality of the Classification.. 2. Cruel and Unusual Punishment: Rationality of the Sanction B. Should the Burden Be Shifted?-Marijuana and Fundamental Rights 1. The Robinson-Powell Argument 2. Free Exercise of Religion 3. Right of Privacy 4. The Ninth Amendment-The Forgotten Kitchen Sink C. Another Constitutional Perspective: The Police Power XI. LEGISLATIVE RECONSIDERATION: 1965-1970 A. Virginia Legislative "Reform": Publicity Begets Tokenism B. The Dodd Bill: Half a Loaf C. Postscript: The Dodd Bill Becomes the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 XII. CONCLUSION: BEFORE THE FALL A. Public Policy Formation Process B. Twentieth Century Values and the Marijuana Laws 1. The Premise 2. Statutory Recommendations APPENDIX A. STATUTORY TABLES APPENDIX B. BIBLIOGRAPHY Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B22-16IA086-000619-B005-201http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033438 text/html 95497HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:47 GMTContent-length: 95279 Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse I. Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco History of Marihuana Legislation* This chapter traces the legislative histories of marihuana,alcohol, and tobacco. In the first section, "History of MarihuanaLegislation," the origins of the intoxicant use of cannabisin this country during the early 20th century are noted alongwith the subsequent state and federal statutes enactedprohibiting use, distribution, production and sale. Proscriptions began appearing on the books after about 1914and continued through 1971, which brings the reader to the pointsubsequently covered by the rest of this Appendix. Early colonial laws regarding alcohol are described in thebeginning of the next section, "History of AlcoholProhibition." From that point in history, the nationalmovements which spread over the next two centuries, culminatingin the enactment of National Prohibition from 1920 to 1933, aredescribed. The various state modes of control which appeared after Repealare then briefly enumerated along with a discussion of thepresent state controls over production, distribution, and sale ofintoxicating beverages. The introduction of tobacco cultivation in 1613 in the colonyof Virginia opens the third section, "History of TobaccoRegulation." The widespread use of tobacco in the latter1800's into the first half of the 20th century is traced alongwith the increasing pressure from groups fearful of tobacco'sdeleterious effects on health. Federal sumptuary regulations are outlined along, with adiscussion of the impact further federal controls might have onthe tobacco economy. History of Marihuana Legislation* *This section is drawn from the manuscript of The MarihuanaConsensus: A History of American Marihuana Prohibition, in press1972, by Professors Charles H. Whitebread, 11, and Richard J.Bonnie of the University of Virginia Law School. "Marihuana" or Indian hemp, labeled Cannabis SativaL. by Linneas in 1753, has been used for centuries in Asia andAfrica for its intoxicant properties. It was cultivated as asource of fiber in North America in the early 17th century. Yet,cannabis was not used as an intoxicant in North America until thelate 19th century, and in the United States until the early 20th. Cannabis use was prevalent in Mexico by 1898. Widelycultivated and growing wild, the drug was readily available foreating, drinking, or smoking, the latter being by far the mostcommon method of ingestion. Soldiers in Pancho Villa's army arereputed to have used the drug freely. The path of theintroduction of marihuana smoking for pleasure into the UnitedStates was not via Europe, which transmitted the fiber, oil, andmedicinal uses of hemp, but via Mexico and the West Indies. The plant and its intoxicant use in the United States in thefirst decades of the 20th century encountered a political andsocial climate which was not particularly conducive to heartygrowth. Gradually criminal prohibitions appeared on the statutebooks of nearly every state where the drug was used. Well into the thirties, however, marihuana smoking attractedlittle attention from the national policy and opinion apparatuswhich was deeply ensnared in drug matters of much wider socialimpact than the limited, regional use of this new drug. The "villain" theory of American marihuanaprohibition - attributing the drug's illegal status to theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and its longtime head, Harry J.Anslinger - has been particularly popular in recent years. Although the federal narcotics bureaucracy, with CommissionerAnslinger at the helm, was to become marihuana's leadingantagonist in the mid-thirties, a restrictive, public policytoward the drug was well-rooted locally before that time. Duringthe "local" phase of marihuana prohibition, lastingroughly from 1914 to 1931, practically every state west of theMississippi, except for two, had prohibited use of the drug fornon-medical purposes. The real story of marihuana policy in the United States beginsas a series of distinctly local tales. STATE PROHIBITION: 1914-1930 Marihuana use was a familiar phenomenon in the border towns ofTexas and New Mexico after 1910. First to note the use of thedrug were El Paso law enforcement officials who quickly secured alocal ordinance in 1914 banning sale and possession of the drug.El Paso officials and local representatives of the Customs andAgriculture Departments of the Federal Government agitated forstate and federal legislation to combat the "killerweed." After an official request by the Secretary of Agriculture, theSecretary of the Treasury issued a decision under the Food andDrug Act prohibiting importation of cannabis after 1915 for otherthan medical purposes. On the state level in Texas, legislation was slow in coming.Marihuana use was still a local problem in the 'border towns andit attracted little statewide interest. The Texas Legislatureincluded marihuana when it passed a general narcotics statute in1919, prohibiting transfer of listed narcotics except for medicalpurposes (Texas, 1919: 278). In 1923, the statute was tightenedto prohibit possession with intent to sell (Texas, 1923:156-157). The legislature's failure to prohibit simple possessionor use reflected an objection to interfering with privateconduct. The degree of public interest in narcotics and marihuana iswell-illustrated by the limited newspaper coverage. In its onlydirect reference to the 1923 marihuana legislation, the AustinTexas Statesman, which had given the legislature extensivecoverage, stated: The McMillan Senate Bill amended the anti-narcotic law soas to make unlawful the possession for the purpose of sale ofmarihuana or other drugs. Marihuana is a Mexican herb and is saidto be sold on the Texas-Mexican border (Austin TexasStatesman, 1923). Even more surprising is the fact that the El Paso Times didnot mention the McMillan bill before or after its passage. New Mexico in the same year prohibited sale, cultivation andimportation of cannabis. Mere possession was not expresslyprohibited but anyone found in possession was presumed to haveimported the marihuana illegally (New Mexico, 1923: 58-59). TheSanta Fe New Mexican, hometown newspaper of the bill's sponsorspaid scant attention, noting only that: The Santa Fe representative, however, had better luck withhis bill to prevent sale of marihuana, cannabis indica, Indianhemp or hashish as it is variously known. This bill was passedwithout any opposition. Marihuana was brought into localprominence at the penitentiary board's investigation last summerwhen a convict testified he could get marihuana cigarettesanytime he had a dollar. The drug produces intoxication whenchewed or smoked. Marihuana is the name commonly used in theSouthwest and Mexico (Santa Fe New Mexican, 1923). In addition to coming in via Mexico, marihuana was beingsmuggled in by sailors from Cuba and other points in the Indiesvia New Orleans. Dr. Frank Gomila, Commissioner of Public Safetyof New Orleans, began his campaign for federal legislation whichwould later bear fruit. He observed that the traffic was quiteorganized amounting to thousands of kilograms a year: ... [T]he custom was to keep [marihuana] In warehouses orstorerooms for further distribution. It was sold by thewholesaler to the retailer who In turn put the 'weed' through aprocess known as 'sweating.' The dried leaves and stems weresoaked in sugar water and dried on butcher's brown papers (Gomilaand Lambow, 1938: 29). According to Dr. Gomila and the newspapers, the demand in NewOrleans in the mid-twenties was so great that the"peddlers" were able to become exceptionally prosperousby dividing the market. One had exclusive jurisdiction over theblacks unloading the fruit boats, another over the lobby in acertain hotel, and so forth. It should be noted that marihuanawas also available at the local pharmacy without a prescriptionbefore 1923 in Texas and 1921 in Louisiana. After that marihuanahad to be bought on the street unless the user could successfullyforge a prescription. Different pictures emerge, of the marihuana user in El Pasoand San Antonio on the one hand and New Orleans and Galveston onthe other. In the border towns, he was a Mexican laborer,indolent to some, volatile to others. Local authorities were, byand large, unable to generate any significant public or politicalinterest, although there were no political objections to makingthe Mexican weed illegal. In the port cities, however, the marihuana user was a"dope fiend," the basest element of American society.He was a narcotics addict, a pimp, or a gambler; she was aprostitute. In New Orleans, marihuana was simply another narcoticin a city with a major narcotic problem. It was always open tosensationalism. Even before public attention was excited, however, theprevalence of marihuana use came to the attention of thePresident of the Louisiana State Board of Health, Dr. OscarDowling. On August 21, 1920, he advised the Governor of theincreasing availability of marihuana, a "powerful narcotic,causing exhilaration, intoxication, delirious hallucinations, andits subsequent action, drowsiness and stupor. . ." (Jones,1920). At the same time, Dr. Dowling wrote to the Surgeon General ofthe United States, Dr. Hugh Cummings, to advise him of theincreasing traffic in morphine, opium, and marihuana, and to seekfederal cooperation. An interesting sidelight of this request for assistance fromWashington is that four months later Dr. Dowling was to becomeembroiled in a bitter battle with the Federal Government over anorder to close his pet project, the New Orleans morphine clinics(Dowling, 1920). Ultimately he would lose, and one of theearliest attempts to deal with narcotics addiction would besuppressed for a half century (Lindesmith, 1967: 135-161). Very little, however, was done about the marihuana issue untilthe press seized upon it. In the fall of 1926, the New OrleansItem dispatched an army of reporters among the smoking andselling population. A series of articles published by the more widely circulatedMorning Tribune (both the Item and the Tribune were owned by thesame publishing company) exposed the immense profits being madeand commented upon the volatile effects of the drug upon its"addicts." It was reported that marihuana: Numbs the sense, creates wild fancies and has a hypnoticeffect upon the user, making his will easily subordinated to thatof others. What emerged from these articles, however, was not a vision ofaddicts on the streets and pushers on the docks but ratherpeddlers who lurked on playgrounds seeking to entrap young minds."Over two hundred children under fourteen are believed to beaddicted to the marihuana habit," the paper reported, and"at least 44 schools were definitely being infected"(Gomila and Lambow, 1938: 29-31). Local policy-makers wasted no time. The New Orleans PoliceDepartment immediately launched a round-up. They arrested morethan 150 persons for violation of a law which had lain dormantfor two years (Gomila and Lambow, 1938: 29-31; WCTIT, 1928). Dr. Dowling soon circulated "a warning to parents,guardians, and teachers of children against this menace"(WCTIT, 1928: 1). The Women's Christian Temperance Union jumpedon the bandwagon, focusing its attacks on the "softdrink" bars which had sprung up all over New Orleans duringProhibition: The soft drink stand and the corner drug store have takenthe place of the saloon as a social meeting place. Here is wheremarihuana and liquors can sometimes be bought (WCTU, 1928:3). Beyond these immediate effects, a more substantial impact ofthe local policy reaction in New Orleans was the formation of atightly knit coterie of New Orleans law enforcement, publichealth, and social welfare officials who would carry theircampaign to Washington, with ultimate success. The drug and the practice of smoking it spread during themid-twenties from the Gulf Coast and border town points-of-entryin two directions north and west from the border together withits ethnic identity and north and east from New Orleans with itsidentity as a narcotic and enslaver of youth. Practically every state west of the Mississippi Riverprohibited the possession or sale of marihuana during the period1915 to 1930. Most of them acted by 1930: California (1915), Iowa(1921), Nevada (1923), Washington (1923), Arkansas (1923),Nebraska, (1927), and Wyoming (1929). The Bureau of Immigration records the entry of 590,765Mexicans during this period, two-thirds of them remaining inTexas, the others settling in states in the Rocky Mountain area,most of them as farm laborers (U.S. Bureau of Immigration, 1915to 1930). Whether motivated by outright ethnic prejudice or by simplediscriminatory disinterest, the proceedings before statelegislatures resembled those in Texas in 1923. There was little,if any, public attention and no debate. Pointed references weremade to the drug's Mexican origins and sometimes to the criminalconduct which inevitably followed when Mexicans ingested the"killer weed.," The Colorado Legislature first prohibited possession,cultivation and sale of the drug in 1927, the year after the useof marihuana noticeably increased (Colorado, 1927: 309). At thattime., according to a subsequent newspaper report, the drug was" used almost exclusively . . . by the Mexican populationemployed in the beet fields" (Rocky Mountain News, 1931). Similarly, in 1929, the Montana Legislature amended itsgeneral narcotic law to marihuana, prohibiting use, sale orpossession without a prescription (Montana, 1929: 5). On sevendifferent days from June 24 to February 10, the date of thebill's passage, the Montana Standard succinctly noted theprogress of the bill through the legislature. The legislature'sattitude was characterized in the January 27 issue: There was fun in the House Health Committee during the weekwhen the marihuana bill came up for consideration. Marihuana isMexican opium, a plant used by Mexicans and cultivated for saleby Indians. "When some beet field peon takes a few rares ofthis stuff," explained Dr. Fred Fulsher of Mineral County,"he thinks he has just been elected President of Mexico sohe starts out to execute all his Political enemies. I understandthat over in Butte where the mexicans often go for the winterthey stage imaginary bullfights in the 'Bower of Roses' or put ontournaments for the favor of 'Spanish Rose' after a couple ofwhiffs of marihuana. The Silver Bow and Yellowstone delegationsboth deplore these international complications." Everybodylaughed and the bill was recommended for passage (MontanaStandard, 1929: 3). About the same time, Mexican laborers bad begun to appear inIdaho and the mayor of Boise remarked: 'The Mexican beet field workers have introduced a newproblem-the smoking in cigarettes or pipes of marihuana or grifo.its use is as demoralizing as the use of narcotics. Smoking grifois quite prevalent along the Oregon Short Line Railroad; andIdaho has no law to cope with the use and spread of thisdangerous drug (WCTU, 1928: 3). Idaho passed a law in 1927 (Idaho, 1927: 98). By 1931, the Texas Legislature finally got around toprohibiting possession of marihuana. By now alcohol prohibitionhad withdrawn any philosophical barrier to making possessionillegal. The San Antonio Light reported that: At last the state legislature has taken a definite steptoward suppression of traffic in a dangerous andinsanity-producing narcotic easily compounded of a weed(marihuana) indigenous to this section. This newspaper has urgedthe passage of prohibitory legislation and is gratified that thesolons at Austin have acted, even if tardily, in the suppressionof traffic in a drug which makes, the addict [read Mexican]frequently a dangerous or homicidal maniac (San AntonioLight, 1931). In the East, appearance of the practice was not a necessaryprerequisite for prohibition. That Maine (1913), Massachusetts(1914), Vermont (1915), and Rhode Island (1918) barred the saleof cannabis without a prescription before 1920 does not indicatethat marihuana smoking had appeared there on any significantscale. Rather, in the course of anticipating and implementing thenational anti-narcotics policy declared by the Harrison Act in1914, medical representatives on the drafting committeesrecommended the inclusion of "another narcotic" towhich addicts could resort once the other opiates becamedifficult to obtain. The New York Times in 1914 described cannabis as a"narcotic [having] practically the same effect. as morphineand cocaine," (New York Times, 1914: 6) and it noted in aneditorial that: [T]he inclusion of cannabis indica among the drugs to besold only on prescription is only common sense. Devotees ofhashish are now hardly numerous enough here to count, but theyare likely to increase as other narcotics become harder to obtain(New York Times, 1914: 8). By 1923, the New York Times referred to marihuana as thecity's "latest habit-forming drug" when reporting itsexhibition at a Women's Club meeting (New York Times, 1923: 24).Finally, in 1927, whether responding to an increase in use or tothe substitution admonition, the legislature included marihuanain its definition of "habit forming drugs" in acomprehensive narcotics bill (New York, 1927: 1695). The situation in Chicago paralleled that in New York until1927. Large Mexican communities developed in Chicago and Gary,Indiana, during the twenties and marihuana smoking became commonin these areas and among journeymen musicians as well. As in NewYork, there was little public concern. The New Orleans patterntook over around 1927, however, when the attention of local lawenforcement officials was suddenly drawn to the Mexicans andtheir "muggles." One law enforcement official reportedthat: There are about 7,000 Mexicans in Gary, 10,000 in IndianaHarbor and 8,000 in South Chicago.... The Mexicans depend on thesteel mills, railroads, and construction gangs for employment.Many are drifters when slack labor conditions prevail....[T]wenty-five percent of these Mexicans smoke marihuana. In fact,many of them make their living by raising and peddling the drug (Paul,1929: 4). A situation perceived to be so widespread was naturallyconsidered likely to infect the rest of the community. As in NewOrleans, reports started to appear that high school students weresmoking the weed (Paul, 1929: 1; Chicago Tribune, June 3, 1929). Since there was then neither state nor federal legislationprohibiting sale of marihuana, the local United States attorneydeclared war armed with an Internal Revenue statute prohibitingproduction and transfer of "a cigarette substitute" onwhich tax had not been paid. In June 1929, he raided wholesalehouses "believed to have disposed of large quantities ofmarihuana cigarettes, sold to school pupils and other youthfulthrill seekers." He arrested nine men "most of themMexicans" (Chicago Examiner, June 22, 1929). At the sametime, local officials began to use a statute which prohibitedtransfer of "any cigarette containing any substancedeleterious to health" (Chicago Examiner, June 19, 1929). The Chicago Tribune, lobbying heavily for anti-marihuanalegislation then pending before the Illinois Legislature,reported that day-to-day progress of the enforcement activity(Chicago Tribune, July and October, 1929). Every stall in thelegislature earned a banner headline such as: BAN ON HASHISH BLOCKED DESPITE RAVAGES OF DRUG In an article appearing in June, 1929, the paper noted: The number of addicts is growing alarmingly according toauthorities, because of the ease with which [marihuana] can beobtained. The habit was introduced a dozen years ago by Mexicanlaborers . . . but it has become widespread among American youthsand girls even among school children. The legislation, however, was killed. Marihuana prohibition had become widespread. In states whereeither Mexicans or the drug had appeared, its use was quicklysuppressed. Soon after being apprised of its presence, local lawmakersinvoked the criminal law. In New Orleans, Denver, and Chicago thespectre of a doped school population was the cornerstone of theprohibitory effort. And, during alcohol prohibition, paralleled by the local phaseof marihuana prohibition, it was naturally imperative to suppressa drug which frustrated alcohol users might substitute, for theircustomary intoxicant. THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUG ACT Following the ad hoc local phase of marihuana legislation inthe United States was the nationalization phase. During thisperiod marihuana became integrated at both the state and federallevels with the nation's narcotics policy which had beenmanifested forcefully in Congress' adoption of the HarrisonNarcotics Act in 1914. The Harrison Act, a taxing measure, required registration andpayment of an occupational tax by all persons who imported,produced, dealt in, sold or gave away opium, cocaine or theirderivatives. The Act required all legitimate handlers of thesenarcotics to file returns setting forth in detail their use ofthe drugs. Since the Act also provided that only legitimate users couldregister and no one but a registered user could obtain thespecified form, any transfer by an illegitimate user was aviolation of the Act. For those failing to comply with itsregistration requirements, the original Harrison Act providedpenalties of not more than $2,000 in fines or more than fiveyears imprisonment, or both. Drafted as a tax law rather than an outright criminal statute,the Act was intended to do indirectly what Congress believed itcould not do directly: regulate possession and sale of theopiates. However, because the Act essentially was arevenue-raising measure imposing a tax on transfers of narcotics,it could not effectively prohibit the possession of drugs. This indirect regulation of narcotics traffic had a number ofsignificant consequences. First, since the Act could not penalizeusers of addiction directly, there was an immediate need forcomplementary residual state legislation in order to dealeffectively with the drug problem. Second, the enforcement of the Act was as signed to theInternal Revenue Service in the Treasury Department. The firstenforcement agency for the Harrison Act was the NarcoticsDivision of the Prohibition Unit of the Internal Revenue Servicecreated in 1920 (Schmeckebier, 1929: 143). This division wasincorporated in the Prohibition Bureau which was created in 1927(Act, 1927:1381). In 1930, the enforcement of the narcotics laws was severedfrom the Bureau of Prohibition and established as the separateBureau of Narcotics in the Treasury Department (Act, 1930: 585).The existence of this separate, agency has done as much as anysingle factor to influence the course of drug regulation from1930 to 1970 (King, 1953: 736). Although the impact of the Bureau on the passage of theUniform Narcotic Drug Act and the Marihuana Tax Act will beexplained in detail in subsequent sections, it is important hereto note that the existence of a separate bureau havingresponsibility only for narcotics enforcement and for educatingthe public on drug problems inevitably led to a particularlyprosecutorial view of narcotics addiction and the use and abuseof all drugs. After the passage of the Harrison Act in 1914, there remaineda considerable lack of uniformity regarding the offensesprohibited and the penalties imposed by the several states. In 1919, the American Medical Association asked theCommissioner of Internal Revenue to call a conference, toconsider better control of traffic in narcotic drugs. Theprofession was uncertain of its obligations in the matter becausethey were faced with an amalgam of conflicting laws. The A.M.A.asked that the wholesale, retail, and manufacturing druginterests be among those attending, along with delegates from themedical profession in each state. The proposal received noofficial or unofficial response either from the Commissioner ofInternal Revenue or the Bureau of Prohibition. Nevertheless, the American Medical Association, through itsown Council on Health and Public Instruction, did hold aconference in early 1922 during which a uniform state narcoticcontrol law was presented. At the November meeting of thatconference, there were present 15 representatives of 10pharmaceutical organizations and two representatives of themedical profession. The draft of a uniform law was approved unanimously by allpresent. The American Medical Association set out to codify thedraft and to send it for approval to each of the constituentorganizations (White, August 3, 1932; Woodward, August 6, 1932).After securing approval, all the associations agreed to pursueenactment first in New York. The general lack of uniformity in anti-narcotics legislation,the weakness of state enforcement procedures, and the growinghysteria about dope fiends and criminality converged in severalrequests outside the medical community for a uniform statenarcotic law (Anslinger and Tompkins, 1953: 159). The drafting of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act must also beviewed against the background of two larger movements: (1) thetrend toward the creation and dissemination of uniform state lawsby the National Commissioners on Uniform State laws, a group towhich each state sent two representatives appointed by thegovernor; and (2) the general concern in the late 1920's andearly 1930's with interstate crime, manifested , for example, bythe creation in 1930 of the nearly autonomous Federal Bureau ofInvestigation. Because the concept of states' rights and narrowlyconstrued federal power was then so powerful, an appeal to theNational Commissioners was the inevitable recourse for thosepressing for uniform anti-narcotic regulation. DRAFTING THE UNIFORM ACT By 1924, the Commissioners had appointed Committee to draft auniform narcotic drug act At the 1925 meeting of Commissioners,the chair man of the Committee reported that he himself hadprepared a first tentative draft based on the New York Act, theWashington state legislation, the Harrison Act, and a bill thenbefore the New York Legislature. Presumably this was the ondrafted by the A.M.A. Conference after its 192 meeting. The chairman noted, however, that Dr. William Woodward, headof the A.M.A.'s Bureau of Legal Medicine and Legislation, withwhom he had only recently conferred, had made "some veryvaluable suggestions." Because the tentative draft hadalready been printed before these suggestions, he requested thatit "not be read but be re-committed to the Committee"(1925 Handbook: 977-985). This first draft included cannabis inthe list of "habit-forming drugs," although all suchdrugs could be distributed and used for medical purposes (1925Handbook: 978). A second tentative draft was presented in 1928 and again thedraft was not discussed at the conference but recommitted forfurther study. The second draft was essentially an exact copy ofthe 1927 New York Statute. It also included cannabis in the classof habit-forming drugs (1928 Handbook: 75-78,323-333). There was a lack of concern on the part of the Commissionersthemselves with the whole narcotics problem between 1924 and1928. The President of the Conference, introducing Dr. Woodward,said: In view of the importance of the act I think it would notbe amiss to listen to the Doctor for a few minutes, that he maypoint out to us why it is important. In some of the states we donot recognize the importance because it has not been called toour attention (1928 Handbook: 76-77). Nor was the Bureau of Prohibition particularly concerned atthis time with the cannabis provision. Lack of official concernand interest continued to be the Bureau's attitude toward thesecond tentative draft (Nutt, June 13,1929). Since neither the Commissioners nor federal narcoticsofficials were particularly concerned about state and localcontrol of narcotics generally and marihuana in particular, itseems clear that neither was responsible for the inclusion ofmarihuana in the category of "habit-forming drugs. Rather,it would appear that it was included in the first draft becausethat had been drawn from the 1923 Washington statute which hadlisted cannabis. Insofar as the second draft was a copy of the 1927 New YorkAct, inclusion of cannabis in this draft is not unusual. Few, ifany, of the persons involved in the drafting were concerned aboutmarihuana smoking or even aware of its use. Two third drafts were submitted, the first in 1929 and thesecond in 1930. The initial one closely resembled the secondtentative draft, and once again it included cannabis in thecategory of "habit-forming drugs.` Again, the growth,distribution, and possession of cannabis was prohibited exceptfor medical purposes. The nascent Congressional interest in marihuana in 1929 andthe Bureau of Prohibition's subsequent resistance to amending,and thereby endangering, the Harrison and Export and Import Acts,caused the Bureau to take full notice of this 1929 third draft.Like its predecessors, however, the initial third draft wasrecommitted for further study (1929 Handbook : 43, 332-346). The second third tentative draft, submitted in 1930, was thefirst to remove cannabis from the definition of"habit-forming drugs" and to include only asupplemental provision for dealing with the drug (1930 Handbook:485,97). When the Conference of Commissioners met to consider thesecond third tentative draft, Judge Deering, the Chairman of theCommittee on the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, recommended itsrecommission for further study because the Committee had not yethad an opportunity to consult the newly created Bureau ofNarcotics. At the time of this conference, August 14, 1930, no one hadyet been appointed Commissioner of the Bureau, although Harry J.Anslinger was Acting Commissioner (1930 Handbook: 126-127). TheSenate confirmed Anslinger's appointment as Commissioner onDecember 18, 1930. The Bureau of Narcotics their became actively involved in thedrafting process. Commissioner Anslinger was pressing forinclusion of the cannabis provision. He stated that he felt thelimited medical use for cannabis was far outweighed by the needto control potential cannabis addiction (Anslinger, July28,1930). Dr. Woodward and the pharmaceutical industry advocatedoptional inclusion of marihuana on the one hand, and federalnarcotics representatives urged not only inclusion butelimination of medical use, on the other. The fourth tentative draft retained the optional cannabisprovision. At a session before the convening of the fullConference of Commissioners from September 9-12, 1931,Commissioner Anslinger and A. L. Tennyson of the Bureau met withJudge Deering to discuss the Bureau's feelings about the fourthtentative draft. At this time Commissioner Anslinger stated that the Bureaufelt strongly that inclusion of cannabis in the state law oughtto be mandatory. Moreover, the Bureau urged that the onlysuccessful way to deal with the marihuana drug traffic, becauseof its domestic nature and the easy availability of the weed, wasto prohibit the cultivation of the plant altogether and to findsome substitute for the limited medical use (Tennyson, September16, 1931). However, the fourth tentative draft presented to theConference of Commissioners included the optional marihuanaprovision. And, the Conference tentatively approved the fourthtentative draft and directed the Committee to prepare a finaldraft (1931 Handbook: 127-128, 390-402). The American Medical Association played a key role in thedrafting process prior to 1931. Their efforts had been largelyresponsible for consideration of the Uniform Drug Act in thefirst place. From the beginning in 1925, Dr. William Woodward,the Director of the A.M.A.'s Bureau of Legal Medicine andLegislation, actively assisted in the drafting of the Act andwidely circulated the drafts to interested persons for theircomments. It appears, however, that Dr. Woodward's personal style andthe preeminent position of the American Medical Association inthe drafting process were resented by the two remaining interestgroups-the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and the retail andwholesale pharmaceutical associations. The Bureau had beencommenting on drafts only after they had been drawn by the A.M.A.and did not feel it was playing an active role in the draftingprocess. The pharmaceutical industry felt that their interestswere considered only peripherally and that they had been excludedfrom the heart of tire, drafting process. As a result of the dissent, a conference of interested partieswas scheduled before the final draft was to be presented to theConference of Commissioners. Present at this preliminary conference on September 15, 1932,were representatives of the Drug Committee the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics, the Department of State, the Public Health Service,the American Medical Association, and delegates from the drugindustry and other medically related industries andorganizations. The final version of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Actwas hammered out at this session. The Bureau was central to thedrafting process and Commissioner Anslinger made a major effortto involve the drug manufacturers and the wholesale and retaildrug trade in it to protect the Act from possible subsequentpolitical disagreement (Anslinger, August 1, 1932): Finally, theconference agreed on a draft to be presented to the NationalConference. The manufacturers of drug products were strongly opposed tothe inclusion of cannabis under any criminal regulatory scheme.Representatives of the industry opposed a mandatory cannabisprovision. The final conclusion reached by all the partiespresent was: After considerable comment, it was decided to eliminateSection 12 (Cannabis) and leave it to the Conference ofCommissioners as to whether it should be included under thegeneral provisions of the Act (Report of PreliminaryConference, 1932: 23). The Bureau was no longer insisting on the mandatory inclusionof in absolute marihuana prohibition; it did not want to risk theopposition of the drug industry to the, entire Act. The fifth tentative draft did, however, include a significantchange in form which would have important consequences in thedecades to come. Although the marihuana provision remainedsupplemental to the main body of the Act, any state wishing toregulate the sale and possession of marihuana was instructed,simply, to add cannabis to the definition of "narcoticdrugs." All the, other provisions of the, Act would theirapply to marihuana as well as to the opiates and cocaine. TheCommissioners adopted this form as it had been prepared at theSeptember 15, 1932, preliminary Conference. The only recorded opposition to the adoption of the finaldraft came from some Commissioners who objected to tying theUniform State Law to the terms of the federal Harrison Act. Thislast obstacle was over-come by the argument that a number ofstates already had passed such legislation so that the states'rights problem need not stand in the way. The Act was adopted 26to 3 (1932 Handbook: 107). ENACTMENT OF THE UNIFORM ACT BY THE STATES After final acceptance of the Uniform Act, the Bureau set towork at once to secure state enactment-including an adequatemarihuana provision. A comprehensive campaign was undertaken inthe press, in legislative chambers, and in any other forum togain public support for the Uniform Act. In addition, perceiving the absence of public awareness ofmarihuana and needing to encourage positive action to overcomethe drug's optional status, the Bureau also sought to arousepublic interest in marihuana through "an educationalcampaign describing the drug, its identifications and its evileffects" (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1937 : 59). That there was little general knowledge about cannabis isillustrated by the fact that as late as 1934, it was necessary toshow marihuana to the New York police so that they couldrecognize it growing or in dried, smokable form (New York Times1934: 6). The Bureau's district supervisors and local agents werecampaigning actively in the legislatures before which the Act waspending. A press campaign was conducted across the country togain the support of civic groups and other interested parties.Mr. Anslinger sought editorial support in newspapers (Anslinger,October 22, 1936) and assisted in the, drafting of articles forpopular magazines (Anslinger, December 23, 1936). To mobilize theBar, Bureau officials wrote an article for law journalsexplaining the need for the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act (Anslinger,1932: 52; Tennyson, 1932: 55). Despite these efforts, it appears that the Uniform Act had arough time in state legislatures during its early life. By April26, 1933, only two states had enacted it in full. As late asMarch 1935, only 10 states had enacted the Uniform Law. A number of significant objections had emerged in the statelegislatures considering the passage of the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct. First among these was the potential cost to the state ofenforcing the Act. Second, there was concern over the number ofregistrants who would have to be licensed due to the belief thatthe Uniform Act would require special licensing of doctors,dentists, and veterinarians. Third, the limit on the amount ofexempt preparations which could be sold caused a great deal oftechnical difficulty with the Act. Fourth, many criticized theright of the court to revoke or suspend the license to practicemedicine or pharmacy. And finally, there seemed to be widespreadmisunderstanding of the record-keeping requirements of the Act. Although these objections were largely administrative, theynevertheless posed what appeared to be serious stumbling blocksto the successful passage of the Uniform Law in all the states. The combination of public apathy and administrative resistancenecessitated a new approach in generating public interest.Beginning in late 1934, Commissioner Anslinger gradually shiftedthe focus of the FBN's educational campaign away from theliability of federal law enforcement agencies to deal effectivelywith the local drug problems to the need to cope with the newdrug menace-marihuana. The clearest reflection of the, change in Bureau policy isfound in two official statements of Commissioner Anslinger, onemade in 1933 and the other in 1936. One 1933 statement explains the need for a Uniform NarcoticDrug Law and emphasizes United States international obligations,the need for more effective coordination in law enforcement, andthe impact the law will have on the dangers of morphine, cocaine,and opium addiction (FBN Paper, July 1933). In the laterstatement, however, more than half of the time is devoted to adiscussion of the "worst evil of all" the marihuanaproblem. To aid the new approach's objective, Commissioner Anslingermade speeches and contributed articles to journals. The mostinfluential of his efforts was "Marihuana Assassin ofYouth" which appeared in the widely circulated AmericanMagazine in July 1937 (Anslinger and Cooper,1937). The FBN files contain more than 50 letters addressed to theCommissioner which say: "Your article was the first time Iever heard of marihuana." Among the most effective proponents of the Uniform Act was theHearst newspaper chain. These papers began editorializing infavor of enactment within days after the Act had been approved in1932. The Hearst chain was not alone. A Birmingham, Alabama, paperon August 22, 1935, emphasized the need to control marihuana as areason for adopting the Act (Birmingham Age Herald, August 22,1935). A Washington Post columnist in September, 1934, devotedthree quarters of his article to marihuana with quotes fromAnslinger and Stanley urging adoption of the Uniform Act(Washington Post, September 29, 1934). Other large-city newspapers such as the Cleveland Plain,Dealer and the St. Louis Star Times kept a steady, ifintermittent, stream of anti-marihuana articles flowing in the,period just before the passage of the Uniform Act in those areas.In Missouri, especially, local concern generated by the extensivecoverage in the Star Times speedily pushed the legislature toadopt the Uniform Act. Often it has been supposed on the basis of this increasedcoverage that the use of marihuana increased around 1935. Sincethere was some larger design involved, however, a firm conclusionis unwarranted. At the same time, it is possible that use, didspread after the publicity campaigns, especially among the young. Judging from the tremendous expansion in coverage by the NewYork Times beginning in 1935, the evidence supplied by theLaGuardia Commission in its 1944 Report and the, leap inenforcement activity, marihuana, finally came to New York City inthe 1930's, though then probably on a smaller scale than inDenver land the, border towns of Texas. Apart from the press, another influential participant in themarihuana campaign, especially after the Repeal of Prohibition,was the Women's Christian Temperance Union. Although the WCTU haddistributed a pamphlet on marihuana as early as 1927, theirpublication, the Union Signal, does not reflect any significantinterest either in the Uniform Act or marihuana, until 1934.Before that year the "narcotic" receiving the mostattention was nicotine. Beginning in 1936, however, the UnionSignal had a direct line to the FBN national office, and fromthen on every issue contained material on marihuana (WCTU boundvolumes, yearly). The World Narcotic Defense Association and its head, RichmondP. Hopson, were also involved in the drive for state enactment.They were continually in postal contact with almost every statelegislator in the country (WNDA, 1937). The most well-financedgroup in the campaign, the Association underwrote nationalbroadcasts and distributed a lengthy pamphlet on marihuana, in1936. The General Federation of Women's Clubs also contributedenergetically. The Federation educated its membership about theneed for the Uniform Act and about the evils of marihuana inparticular. The Chairman of the Federation's department oflegislation noted: The situation concerning club women particularly is theaccessibility of the frightening degenerating marihuana weed,which is rolled in cigarettes ... and has been playing such havocwith young high school boys and girls (WCTU, 1936: 285). The state and local clubs immediately began to unite locallegislators and to conduct educational campaigns for parents,teachers and children (WCTU, 1937: 36; Wood, January 13, 1936).An FBN agent appeared at a New York meeting of the localFederation with two marihuana plants. They were exhibited at alocal flower show: Marihuana Plant exhibit at Flower Show of Katrina Trask Garden Club Tomorrow, 3 P.M. on at the Casino This plant is the cause of a dread menacewhich in being fought by the State Department of Health. Public Invited to Show-25 cents (Saratogian,1936: 5) Other groups such as the YWCA , the National PTA and theNational Councils of Catholic Men and Women were all in touchwith the Bureau and were made, aware of the Bureau's dual aims of"influencing and creating public opinion in favor of thepassage of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act and awakening theparents of the country to the increasing danger of the use ofmarihuana." (Anslinger, March 28, 1935). However, arousing public opinion alone was not the ultimategoal of the campaign. The FBN was interested in the enactment ofthe Uniform Act along with prohibitory marihuana legislation inall the states. By early 1935, only 10 states had adopted the Uniform Act.And, three of these states had not included marihuana (Anslinger,March 1, 1935). The Bureau embarked upon its marihuana strategyin 1935, the turning point in state enactment. Whether or notpublic interest actually existed, public opinion-makersinfluenced legislative opinion and created a "feltneed" for legislation. Within the next year, 18 more states adopted the Act and everyone of them which did not have previous legislation includedmarihuana (Anslinger, January 13, 1936; WCTU, 1937: 75). ENACTMENT OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT Despite the public opinion campaign conducted in the early1930's the general public was largely unaware of the drug, itsuse, or its alleged effects; only regional interest was aroused. A change seems to have occurred after 1935. The increasednational awareness played a significant role in the decision ofthe Treasury Department to seek federal legislation. On April 14,1937, the "Secretary of the Treasury, on behalf of theCommissioner of Narcotics," submitted the"administration proposal to Congress to impose an excise andtransfer tax on dealings in marihuana" (Schaller, 1970: 70). The scheme of the Marihuana Tax Act was threefold: arequirement that all manufacturers, importers, dealers, andpractitioners register and pay a special occupational tax; arequirement that all transactions be accomplished through use ofwritten order forms; and the imposition of a tax on all transfersin the amount of $1 per ounce for transfer to registered personsand a prohibitive $100 per ounce for transfers to unregisteredpersons. The key departure of the marihuana tax scheme from that of theHarrison Act is the notion of the prohibitive tax. Under theHarrison Act, a person not required to register, that is, anon-medical user, could not legitimately buy or possessnarcotics. To the dissenters in the Supreme Court decisionsupholding the Act, this clearly demonstrated that Congress'motive was to prohibit conduct rather than to raise revenue. The seemingly bizarre legal formulation of this tax measurewas precipitated by the recognized need for the FederalGovernment to take action forbidden to it under prevailingconstitutional doctrine. Hearings on the proposed marihuana taxation were held beforethe House Ways and Means Committee. During five mornings oftestimony by FBN officials, government witnesses, and industryrepresentatives, the Bureau presented the following four-foldargument: (1) marihuana was a disastrous drug; (2) its use wasincreasing alarmingly and had generated public hysteria; (3)state legislation was incapable of meeting the threat posed bythe drug, thus, federal action was required; and (4) thegovernment might best act through separate legislation ratherthan through an amendment to the Harrison Act. No definite scientific study of the effects of marihuana waspresented to substantiate the position that marihuana was adangerous drug. No synthesis of available scientific informationwas submitted nor was there any statement by the Public HealthService. Neither of the government's own public health experts,Assistant Surgeon General, Dr. Walter Treadway, and Dr. LawrenceKolb, testified, nor did Drs. Walter Bromberg or J. F. Siler whohad recently published scientific articles on the effects ofcannabis in humans (Siler, et. al., 1933: 269-280; Bromberg,1934). Instead, the scientific aspects were presented by a lawenforcement agency, the FBN: Despite the fact that medical men and scientists havedisagreed upon the properties of marihuana, and some are inclinedto minimize the harmfulness of this drug, the records offer ampleevidence that it has a disastrous effect upon many of its users.Recently we have received many reports showing crimes of violencecommitted by persons while under the influence of marihuana. The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the drug renderit highly dangerous to the mind and body upon which it operatesto destroy the will, cause one to lose the power of connectedthought, producing imaginary delectable situations and graduallyweakening the physical powers. Its use frequently leads toinsanity. I have a statement here, giving an outline of casesreported to the Bureau or in the press, wherein the use ofmarihuana is connected with revolting crimes (U.S. Congress,1937: 30). Instead of having one of the few researchers who had done anysignificant research into the effects of cannabis on humans, theBureau chose a Temple University pharmacologist, Dr. James Munch,whose experience was confined to experimentation of the effectsof cannabis on dogs. The second component of the Bureau's case was the contentionthat marihuana use had spread alarmingly in recent years,provoking a public outcry. To demonstrate this, the Bureausubmitted, for the record, the Gomila article cited earlier, anda 1936 letter from the city editor of the Alamoosa Daily Courier(U.S. Congress, 1937: 32-37). The letter described an attack by aMexican-American, allegedly under the influence of marihuana, ona girl of his region.: I wish I could show you what a small marihuana cigarettecan do to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents.That's why our problem is so great; the greatest percentage ofour population is composed of Spanish speaking persons most ofwhom are low mentally, because of social and racial conditions (Baskette,September 4, 1936). The third component of the Bureau's case was that even thoughevery state now had marihuana legislation, local authoritiescould not cope with the marihuana menace. To support thisproposition editorial pleas from the Washington newspapers wereoffered along with Bureau testimony that officials of severalstates had requested federal help. Senator Brown asked Commissioner Anslinger "to make clearthe need for Federal legislation." He continued: You say the states have asked you to do that. I presume itis because of the freedom of interstate traffic that the statesrequire the legislation. Anslinger agreed: [W]e have had requests from the states to step in becausethey claimed it was not growing in that state, but that it wascoming in from another state (U.S. Congress, 1937:16). Nothing was presented to support that statement; no lettersfrom local authorities and no investigative reports by FBN agentsdescribing the trafficking apparatus. The congressmen and senators participating in the hearingsaccepted the Bureau's argument. In fact, Senator Brown, Chairmanof the subcommittee which considered the legislation in theSenate, and Chairman Doughton of the Ways and Means Committee,had been thoroughly briefed by the Bureau in advance of thehearings. There was no probing of the Government witnesses. Infact, the Government made its case in the House in one session,and the next three sessions were devoted to countering thetechnical objections of the oilseed, birdseed, and hempindustries (U.S. Congress, 1937:59-65 67-86 . On the last morning of scheduled hearings, Dr. William C.Woodward appeared on behalf of the AMA to oppose the bill. Dr.Woodward objected to H.R. 6385 because he believed that itsultimate effect would be to so restrict medical use by red tapethat any medical use would be impossible. He admitted that therewere currently few therapeutic applications but he observed thatthe bill inhibited further research which might bear fruit. Hewent even further to imply that the bill was designed with thisobjective in mind. He noted that if federal legislation wasconsidered necessary, it could be achieved without sacrificingmedical usage by simply amending the Harrison Act. Dr. Woodward's most pointed attack was directed against theassumption that federal legislation was needed to control themarihuana habit. He argued that existing state legislation wasmore than sufficient if properly enforced and that if lack ofcoordination was the problem, that was the FBN's fault. Noting that the FBN already had the authority to "arrangefor the exchange of information concerning the use and abuse ofnarcotic drugs in [the] states and for cooperation in theinstitution and prosecution of suits . . .," he assertedthat the Bureau had not done its job: If there is at the present time any weakness in our statelaws relating to cannabis or to marihuana, a fair share of theblame, if not all of it, rests on the Secretary of the Treasuryand his assistants who have had this duty imposed upon them for 6and more years (U.S. Congress, 1937: 93). Dr. Woodward also contended that the law would be a uselessexpense to the medical profession and unenforcible. He noted:"Since marihuana grows so freely, and every landowner was apotential producer, whether wittingly or unwittingly, fullenforcement would require inspection of the entire land area ofthe country, a task which would be unseemly for the FederalGovernment to undertake" (U.S. Congress, 1937: 94-95). Finally, Dr. Woodward wondered why, if federal legislation wasconsidered necessary, the Congress did not simply amend theHarrison Act. To the Bureau's argument that such a course wouldbe unconstitutional, he inquired how Treasury's counsel couldargue that the present bill was constitutional since thetechnique was identical. Dr. Woodward's own view was that theamendment of the Harrison Act would be constitutional and thatsuch a course would dispel the professional objections which heraised (U.S. Congress, 1937:97). After accusing Dr. Woodward of obstructionism, evasiveness,and bad faith, the Committee did not even thank him for histestimony (U.S. Congress, 1937: 121). When the Senate FinanceCommittee conducted hearings on the bill, now styled H.R. 6906,two months later, Dr. Woodward submitted instead a short letterwhich stated the AMA's reasons for opposing the bill (U.S.Congress, 1937: 33-34). Both Committees reported the bill favorably despite Woodward'sobjections. The Ways and Means Report stated: Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed andall power of directing and controlling thought is lost.Inhibitions are released. As a result of these effects, itappeared from testimony produced at the hearings that manyviolent crimes have been and are being committed by persons underthe influence of the drug Not only is marihuana used by hardenedcriminals to steel them to commit violent crimes, but it is alsobeing placed in the hands of high-school children in the form ofmarihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Cases were citedat the hearings of school children who have been driven to crimeand insanity through the use of the drug. Its continued useresults many times in impotency and insanity (U.S. Congress,1937: 1-2). The Marihuana Tax Act passed the House of Representatives verylate in the afternoon of a long session on June 14, 1937; theonly opposition came from congressmen who had no idea whatmarihuana was and desired further information before voting(Congressional Record, 1937: 5575, 5689). Instead of a detailedanalysis they received a statement of one of the members of theWays and Means Committee, which repeated uncritically the luridcriminal acts attributed to marihuana users at the hearings.After less than two pages of debate, the Act passed without aroll call (Congressional Record, 1937: 5575). TIGHTENING THE LAW After the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act, the FBN began witha four-pronged enforcement policy: Control of cultivation of the plant for legitimate purposes and eradication of wild growth; Pacification of marihuana-sensationalism in the press; Education of the federal judiciary toward strict application of the law; and Allocation of federal enforcement resources toward major trafficking rather than petty possession offenses. The scope of the plant's growth, the transportability of theseeds, the dormancy of the seeds, and the lack of a highlyefficient herbicide militated against a comprehensive eradicationprogram. The cost of such a program would have been substantialeven if success were assured. No active effort was undertaken toconduct an acre-by-acre survey of the United States. The eradication "program" became simply a matter ofreaction to routine information-letters from farmers who hadidentified the plant and discoveries of acreage by lawenforcement agents. As the Bureau's interest in marihuana subsided during the1940's, so did the effort to eradicate the wild growth. In fact,the Federal Government encouraged the cultivation of hemp duringthe war, even though an inactive strain had not been developed,because sources of sisal rope had been severed by Japan'soccupation of the Philippines. All over the United States, theweed remained plentiful and largely undetected. After passage of the Act, Commissioner Anslinger directed hisagents to discourage local officials from playing up any allegedinvolvement of marihuana with crime to the press. On April 11,1938, the Commissioner told his New York District Supervisorthat: Our present policy is to discourage undue emphasis onmarihuana for the reason that in some sections of the countryrecently press reports have been so exaggerated that interest inthe subject has become almost hysterical and we are thereforetrying to mold public opinion along more conservative and sanerlines (Anslinger, April 11, 1938). Immediately following passage of the Act, the FBN alsodirected an "educational" effort toward the federaljudiciary to emphasize the need for severe sentences formarihuana offenders. The Bureau also concentrated on the stiflingof suppliers, large interstate traffickers, and smugglers. Smallpossession cases were to be left to local authorities. Several factors, however, served to frustrate this policy.First, marihuana traffic was highly disorganized and there was nonational or regional network as such (New York City, 1945).Second, use was still concentrated geographically andsocioeconomically and was not a major enterprise. Finally, duringthe war years, the Bureau abandoned responsibility for mostmarihuana law enforcement to the states, where the disorganizedtraffic and regional use could be most effectively controlled.The FBN chose instead to concentrate on the opiates. After the relative quiet of the war years there was apparentlya significant increase in narcotic drug abuse in the late, 1940'sand the public began to be concerned with the spread of narcoticaddiction, particularly among young persons. Congressional furorwas aroused by the assertion that the use of marihuana inevitablyled to the use of these harder drugs, particularly heroin. The new legislation came in two waves. In 1951, Congresspassed the Boggs Act (Boggs Act, November 2, 1951: 767) whichincreased penalties for all drug violators. For the first time infederal drug legislation marihuana and the narcotic drugs werelumped together, since the Act provided uniform penalties for theNarcotic Drugs Import and Export Act (Boggs Act, November 2,1951: 767) and the Marihuana Tax Act (21 USC 1964). The statesfollowed the federal lead. Then, in 1956, Congress passed theNarcotic Control Act, escalating the penalties still further.Once again the states responded in kind. The hearings before the Subcommittee of the House Ways andMeans Committee and the floor debate indicate that the Boggs Actwas motivated by a. perceived increase in narcotic use in theperiod 1948 to 1951 (Kefauver Committee Hearings, 1951: 240-241;New York Times, 1951). Representative Boggs, speaking during the Congressional debateon his bill, enunciated a concern which was reflected in manyother quarters. After noting that there had been a 24% increasein arrests for narcotic violations between 1949 and 1950 and a70% increase between 1948 and 1950, Representative Boggs stated: The most shocking part about these figures is the fact thatthere has been an alarming increase in drug addiction amongyounger persons. In the first six months of 1946, the average ageof addicted persons committed . . . at Lexington, Kentucky, was37.5 years. Only three patients were under the age of 21. Duringthe first six months of 1950, only four years later, the averagehad dropped to 26.7 years and 766 patients were under the age of21... (Congressional Record, 1951: 8197). Representative Boggs and others supported the mandatoryminimum sentences for drug peddlers because they felt that somefederal judges had been lax in enforcing the narcotic laws(Congressional Record, 1951: 8197, 8207, 821 1). Public opinionwas overwhelming that harsh sentences, including the deathpenalty for peddling narcotics to minors, would strangle the drugmonster then stalking the American youth (Kefauver CommitteeHearings, 1951: 430-431). The Boggs Act was directed in large part at the federaljudiciary since a key provision removed judicial discretion insentencing by providing that upon conviction for a second orsubsequent offense the imposition or execution of the sentencecould not be suspended nor probation granted. There had been no concerted lobbying effort by the judicialcommunity during the legislative process; however, James V.Bennett, Director of the U.S. Bureau of Prisons, aroused thejudges in the Fifth U.S. Circuit District into eventuallyrecommending the amendment of the law to remove provisions formandatory minimum sentences (Yew Orleans Statesman, May 28, 1954;New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 28, 1954). Even while the Boggs Act was still pending in Congress, theBureau of Narcotics encouraged the states to modify theirexisting narcotic and marihuana legislation to enact"penalties similar to those provided in the Boggs Bill[which] would be of material assistance in the fight against thenarcotic traffic" (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1950: 6). Seventeen states and the territory of Alaska responded bypassing "little Boggs Acts" by 1953 and 11 other statesincreased their penalties by 1956. Two of the latter group, Ohioand Louisiana, enacted penalty provisions which weresubstantially more severe than those passed previously in anyjurisdiction (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1956: 28). The Ohio law, approved June 16,1955, provided a 20 to 40 yearsentence for the sale of narcotic drugs. The Louisiana measure,adopted the following year, provided severe prison sentenceswithout parole, probation, or suspension for the illegal sale,possession, or administration of a narcotic drug. The sentencesranged from a five-year minimum to a 99-year maximum (FederalBureau of Narcotics, 1951: 8). Underlying the inclusion of marihuana in the scheme ofincreased penalties was the progression theory. In the Boggshearings many witnesses testified to the link between marihuanause and ultimate heroin addiction. Commissioner Anslinger, forexample, testified: The danger is this: Over 50 percent of these young addictsstarted on marihuana smoking. They started there and graduated toheroin; they took the needle when the thrill of marihuana wasgone (Boggs Act Hearings, 1951: 206). Representative Boggs himself summed up the stepping-stonethesis in House floor debate: Our younger people usually start on the road which leads todrug addiction by smoking marihuana. They then graduate intonarcotic drugs-cocaine, morphine, and heroin. When these youngerpersons become addicted to the drugs, heroin, for example, whichcosts from $8 to $15 per day, they very often must embark oncareers of crime ... and prostitution ... in order to buy thesupply which they need (Congressional Record, 1951:8197-8198). The stepping-stone theory thus supplanted the older hypotheseswhich had linked marihuana to addiction, insanity and violentcrime. In a paper filed as an exhibit to the hearings on the BoggsAct, Dr. Harris Isbell, Director of Research at the Public HealthService Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, stated that marihuanawas not physically addictive, although he paid lip service to thepsychological dependence hypothesis (Boggs Act Hearings, 1951:147-148). Acknowledging the possibility of "temporarypsychosis" in "predisposed individuals," Isbellotherwise disputed the crime and insanity thesis. Before theKefauver Committee in the Senate he testified that: [M]arihuana smokers generally are mildly intoxicated,giggle, laugh, bother no one, and have a good time. They do notstagger or fall, and ordinarily will not attempt to harm anyone. It has not been proved that smoking marihuana leads tocrimes of violence or to crimes of a sexual nature. Smokingmarihuana has no unpleasant after-effects, no dependence isdeveloped on the drug, and the practice can easily be stopped atany time. In fact, it is probably easier to stop smokingmarihuana cigarettes than tobacco cigarettes (KefauverCommittee Hearings, 1951: 119). Some observers felt that the narcotics problem had disappearedalmost entirely from the national scene after the Boggs Act waspassed. Nevertheless, state and federal law enforcementauthorities, armed with data suggesting that the strengthening ofthe drug laws had at least halted the increase in drug use,pressed for further increases in penalties in order to root outthe drug menace entirely (Federal Bureau of Narcotics. 1956: 28).Without extended debate or widened public interest, Congresspassed the Narcotic Control Drug Act in 1956 (Daniel CommitteeHearings, 1955: 57). There was less attention paid to marihuana duringCongressional debate in 1956 than had been the case in 1951. But,the established precedent of classifying marihuana with hardnarcotics continued and resulted in a proliferation of marihuanaoffenses and a, further increase in penalties based on the theorythat the end of the American narcotics experience could therebybe assured. However, efficacy of still higher penalties was not uniformlyaccepted among law enforcement officials; the Deputy Commissionerof the FBN suggested that more severe penalties might press grandjuries not to indict and the petty juries not to convict in drugcases. Others rejected this view and felt strongly that moresevere penalties were imperative if society was to be rid of itspresent peddlers and if new entrants into the narcotics businesswere to be deterred (Good, July 31, 1954). Among congressmen considering the Bill, there was no dissentfrom the proposition that harsher penalties were the means toeliminate the illicit use and sale of all drugs (CongressionalRecord. 1956: 10689). In addition to facilitating enforcement of narcotics lawsthrough a number of ancillary provisions, the Narcotics ControlAct of 1956 established the following penalties: Possession Minimum sentence First offense 2 years Second offense 5 years Third and subsequent offense 10 years Fine $20,000 Sale Minimum sentence First offense 5 years Second offense 10 years Sale to minor by adult 10 years Parole or probation were made unavailable to all except firstoffenders in the possession category (26 TTSC, 1964). The Act also created a new offense by prohibiting illegalimportation of marihuana. Simple possession was by statutesufficient to convict the possessor of knowingly receivingillegally imported marihuana (21 USC, 1964). Few legislators recognized that marihuana was in any waydifferent from the physically addictive narcotics. The HouseSubcommittee on Narcotics, which produced what became theessentials of the 1956 Act, had inserted a footnote to the majorheading "Narcotics" which stated in fine print that theterm narcotics included marihuana (U.S. Code Cong. and Ad. News,1956: 3294). Only once during the Congressional debates on theHouse and Senate versions of the Bill was the subject ofmarihuana as a separate substance even raised. Moreover, in a statement reflecting the general acceptance ofthe stepping-stone concept, Senator Daniel, Chairman of theSenate Subcommittee that investigated the drug problem, describedmarihuana: That is a drug which starts most addicts In the use ofdrugs, Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some ofthe worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to thehabit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then tothe final destruction of the persons addicted (U.S. CodeCong. & Ad. News, 1956: 3294). By the fifties, marihuana had been fully integrated into thenarcotics legislation of every state in the Union and of thenational government. Possession of the drug, even for one's ownuse, was a felony everywhere, and the user was subject to longperiods of incarceration as punishment for his indulgence. 1960-1970: NEW LEGISLATIVE APPROACH From the mid-fifties to the mid-sixties, federal activity inmarihuana and narcotic law enforcement was relatively stable. Thenumber of offenders apprehended and convicted in both areasremained constant (U.S. Courts, 1956-1964). However, in the early and mid-sixties a new phenomenon wasoccurring. Drug abuse began to spread. It no longer confineditself to the ghettos and certain socioeconomic and ethnicgroups; the new users were the sons and daughters of the middleclass. It began striking home at the average American and becamea national, major issue of concern (Rosevear, 1967: 117-131; U.S.Bureau of Narcotics, 1966: 40). The new middle class use of marihuana induced significantmedical inquiry into the nature of the drug and spurred a newlegislative approach. One commentator stated: Nobody cared when it was a ghetto problem. Marihuana-well,it was used by jazz musicians or the lower class, so you didn'tcare if they got 2 to 20 years. But when a nice, middle-classgirl or boy in college gets busted for the same thing, then thewhole community sits up and takes notice. And that's the name ofthe game today. The problem has begun to come home to roost-inall strata of society, in suburbia, in middle-class homes, in thecolleges. Suddenly, the punitive, vindictive approach wastouching all classes of society. And now the most exciting thingthat's really happening is the change in attitude by the people.Now we have a willingness to examine the problem as to whetherit's an experimentation, or an illness rather than 'an evil' (NewYork Times, Feb. 5, 1970: 14). Congress initially acted by passage of the Drug Abuse ControlAmendments of 1965 (Public Law 89-74,1965). This legislationestablished a Bureau of Drug Abuse Control within the Food andDrug Administration and created criminal, misdemeanor penaltiesfor the illegal manufacture and sale of depressant and stimulantdrugs and hallucinogens. The dramatic increase in the use of marihuana and other drugsduring the latter 1960's was a matter of high public visibility.In response, President Johnson offered Reorganization Plan No. 1of 1968 (H. Doe. No. 249,1968). This reorganization was effectiveon April 8, 1968 and placed the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (ofTreasury) and the Bureau of Drug Abuse Control (of FDA) in theDepartment of Justice and designated it the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs. What had been obvious with the passage of the 1965 DrugAmendments became glaring with this reorganization, that is, thetremendous disparity in penalties for violations involvingdangerous drugs as opposed to narcotics and marihuana. As aresult of increased medical and scientific inquiry, LSD andseveral other drugs 'were acknowledged as being more powerfulhallucinogens than marihuana. To compound the disparity, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), themajor active ingredient in marihuana, was placed under controlswhereby someone in unauthorized possession of THC was subject tono penalty, but someone in possession of marihuana was subject toa minimum mandatory penalty of two years imprisonment (FederalRegister, 1968: 14880). Congress then changed the possessionpenalty, tinder the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, to amisdemeanor and increased the penalties for sale or manufactureof LSD and the other controlled drugs to up to five years (PublicLaw 90-639, 1968). Nevertheless, a great disparity regarding penalties for thesesubstances still existed. The atmosphere for change was ripe.Adding pressure to the situation was the criminalization ofincreasing numbers of young persons whose sole crime waspossession of marihuana for their own use. In late 1968, the newly formed Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs drafted legislation which would nationalizecontrol of the drugs under the Bureau's jurisdiction. Theproposed law vested on the commerce clause rather than on thetaxing powers. The change in authority was prophetic because the Learydecision, which was handed down by the Supreme Court on May 19,1969, held that the order form procedure necessary to meet therequirements of the Marihuana Tax Laws, forced an individual toincriminate himself in violation of the Fifth Amendment (Leary v.U.S., 1969). Ostensibly, this decision left BNDD with nomarihuana possession law and was another factor in evidence ofthe need for a revision of the law. This new bill , H.R. 13742, covered the regulation of narcoticdrugs, "dangerous drugs" and marihuana. It wastransmitted by President Nixon on July 14, 1969. Emerging from this legislation was an overall balanced schemeof criminal penalties. Minimum mandatory offenses wereessentially abolished and the offense of possession of acontrolled substance for one's own use was made a misdemeanor.Further, in first-offense, simple possession cases, the court wasgiven the discretion to place a defendant on probation, for up toone year. If, at the end of the probation period, the defendantbad not violated any of the conditions of the probation, hisconviction could be expunged. The same misdemeanor penalty and opportunity for firstoffender treatment was provided for the distribution of a smallamount of marihuana for either: (1) no remuneration; or (2) thecost of the drug. This provision was included in recognition of the large numberof such transactions which take place among youth and inrecognition of a phenomenon which surfaced as a substantialchallenge to the traditional picture of the national marihuanatrade. Legislators had formerly stereotyped the"seller" as the vicious criminal pushing his wares forhigh profit and felt that extraordinarily harsh penalties werejustified for sellers (Narcotics Legislation Hearings, 1969: 4). But several studies showed that the structure of marihuanatraffic bore little or no relation to the traditional stereotype.One survey of 204 users found that 44% had sold to friends atleast once. Many casual users sold to leave themselves enoughprofit to cover the amount of their own use (Goode, 1969: 7).Under the new Act, they would not be punished as distributors. The new legislation also made a distinction between marihuanaand narcotic drugs. Marihuana was placed in a category withhallucinogenic drugs and their difference from narcotics wasemphasized by the difference in penalties as follows: Maximum sentences Marihuana and other non-narcotic controlled substances Narcotics lst offense 2nd offense lst offense 2nd offense Simple possession:* Years 1 2 1 2 Dollars 5,000 10,000 5,000 10,000 Unlawful distribution, possession with intent to distribute, manufacture, importation or exportation: Years 5 10 15 30 Dollars 15,000 30,000 25,000 50,000 * Distribution of small amounts of marihuana for noremuneration is treated the same as simple possession. The bill was passed by Congress (and signed into law byPresident Nixon) on October 27, 1970, as the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. In conjunction with this new federal law, a uniform state actwas drafted by the National Conference of Commissioners onUniform State Laws and approved by them as the Uniform ControlledSubstances Act at their annual conference August 1-7, 1970. The following statement in the preface of the Act explains itspurpose: This Uniform Act was drafted to achieve uniformity between thelaws of the several states and those of the Federal Government.it has been designed to complement the new federal narcotic anddangerous drug legislation and Provide and interlocking trellisof Federal and state law to enable government at all levels tocontrol more effectively the drug abuse problem. The Uniform Act does not recommend penalties except withrespect to possession for one's own use. For such offenses, theConference recommended that it be treated as a misdemeanor. To date, 26 states and three territories have adopted the Actin its entirety or in a varied form. Currently, 10 to 15 statesare considering it. The most recent chapter in the legal history of marihuanaappears in other pages of this Appendix. The appointment of theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse and the issuanceof its Report are themselves significant events from anhistorical point of view. References Act of June 14,1930, Ch. 488,46 Stat. 585. Act to Create a Bureau of Customs and a Bureau of Prohibitionin the Department of the Treasury, Ch. 348, 44 Stat. 1381 (1927). Anslinger, H. J., letter to Dr. Woodward (July 28,1930). "The Reason for Uniform State Narcotic Legislation,"Georgetown Law Journal, 21: 52 (1932). letter to Judge Deering (August 1, 1932). letter to Reverend John J. Burke (March 1, 1935). letter toMiss Agnes Regan, Executive Secretary of the National Council ofCatholic Women (March 28, 1935). letter to Mrs. Roberta Lawson, President of General Federation ofWomen's Clubs (January 13, 1936). letter to Frank Allen of the Cleveland Plain Dealer (October 22,1936). letter to F. J. Reynolds, Director, Readers Research Bureau, P.F. Collier and Son Corporation (December 23,1936). letter to Williams (April 11, 1938). and Cooper, C. R.: "Marihuana: Assassin of Youth,"American Magazine, 18-19 (July, 1937). and Tompkins, W.: The Traffic in Narcotics, New York: Funk andWagnalls Co. (1953), P. 159. Austin Texas Statesman (Austin, Texas), June, 1923. Baskette, Floyd K., letter to Federal Bureau of Narcotics(September 4,1936). Birmingham Age-Herald (Birmingham, Alabama), August 22, 1935. Boggs Act, Chapter 666, 65 Stat. 767 (November 2, 1951). Boggs Act Hearings, "Hearings on H.R. 3490 before theSubcommittee on Narcotics of the House Committee on Ways andMeans," 82nd Cong., 1st Sess., 147-148 (1951). Bromberg, Walter, "Marihuana Intoxication: A ClinicalStudy of Cannabis Sativa. Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry (91) 1934. Chicago Examiner (Chicago, Illinois), June 19, 1929. June22,1929. Chicago Tribune (Chicago, Illinois), June 3, 1929. July 1,1929. October 17,1929. Colorado, "Colorado Laws." Chapter 95, 309 (1927). Congressional Record, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., 5575, 5689-5692(1937). 82nd Cong., 1st Sess., 8197-8198, 8207, 8211 (1951). 102:10689 (1956). Daniel Committee Hearings, "Hearings on Illicit NarcoticsTraffic Before the Subcommittee on Improvements In the FederalCriminal Code of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary,"84th Cong., 1st Sess., 57 (1955). Dowling, Dr., letter to Acting Surgeon General Periz (December3, 1920). Federal Bureau of Narcotics,: "The Need for UniformNarcotic Drug Act-White Paper" (July, 1933). : "Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs," 59(1937). "Traffic in Opium," 6 (1950). 8 (1951). 28 (1956). Federal Register, 33: 14880 (October 4, 1968). Gomila, F. R. and Lambow, M.C.: Marihuana: America's New DrugProblems, Philadelphia: Lippincott (1938), pp. 29-31. Good, 0. S., letter to H. J. Anslinger (July 31, 1954). Goode,E.: "The Marihuana Market,": Colum. P., 12: 7 (Winter,1969). 1925 Handbook of the National Conference of Commissioners onUniform State Laws and Proceedings, pp. 977-985 (1925). 1928 pp. 75-78. 323-3-33 (1928). 1929 pp. 43, 332--340 (1929). 1930 pp. 97, 126-427, 485 (1930). 1931 pp. 127-128, 390-402 (1931). 1932 P. 107 (1932). House Document No. 249, Transmitted to 90th Cong., 1st Sess.(February, 1968). House Report No. 91-1444 (Part 1) 91st Cong., 2d Sess.(September 10, 1970). Idaho, "Idaho State Laws," p. 98 (1927). Jones, letter in U.S. Surgeon General's files to R. P. Smith(August 21, 1920). Kefauver Committee Hearings, "Hearings Before the SpecialSenate Committee to Investigate Organized Crime in InterstateCommerce," 82d Cong., Ist Sess., pt. 14, exhibit 1,119,240-241, 430-431 (1951). King: "The Narcotic Bureau and the Harrison Act,"Yale Law Journal, 62: 736, 737-739 (1953). Leary v. United States, 395 U.S., 6, 89 S. Ct. 1532 (1969). Lindesmith, A. R.: The Addict and the Law, Bloomington:Indiana University Press (1967), pp, 135-161. Los Angeles Daily News (Los Angeles, California), June 18,1951. Montana, "Montana Laws," Chapter 6, p. 5 (1929). Montana Standard (Butte-Anaconda, Montana), January 22, 1929,p. 3, col. 6. Narcotics Legislation Hearings, "Hearings Before theSubcommittee to Investigate Juvenile Delinquency of the SenateCommittee on the Judiciary," 91st Cong., 1st Sess., 267, 4(1969). New Mexico, "New Mexico Laws," Chapter 42, Sections1-2, pp. 58-59 (1923). New Orleans Statesman (New Orleans, Louisiana), May 28, 1954. New Orleans Times-Picayune (New Orleans, Louisiana), May28,1954. New York, "New York Laws," Chapter 363, p. 1695(1927). New York City Mayor's Committee on Marihuana: TheMarihuana Problem in the City of New York, Lancaster: JacquesCattell. Press (1945), p. 12. New York State Senate: "Joint Legislative Committee toInvestigate the Laws In Relation to the Distribution and Sale ofNarcotic Drugs," Final Report, Doe. No. 35 (1918), as quotedby Terry & Pellens, The Opium Problem (1928), p. 834. New York Times (New York, New York), July 30, 1914, pp. 6,8,col. 12. January 11, 1923, p. 24, col. 1. September 16,1934, p. 6, col. 3. June 19,1951, p. 25, col, 1. February 5,1970, p. 14. Nutt, Colonel L. C., Deputy Commissioner, Bureau ofProhibition, letter to Walter Clephane, Chairman, Section onSocial Welfare, Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws(June 13, 1929). Paul, A. E., Memorandum from Chief, Chicago Station, Food, Drug and Insecticide Administration, U.S. Department ofAgriculture, to Chief, Central District, pp. 1, 4 (June 27,1929). Public Law 89-74, H.R. 2 (July 15, 1965). Public Law 90-639, H.R. 14096 (October 24, 1968). "Report of Preliminary Conference on Fifth Tentative.Draft of the Uniform State Narcotic Law," pp. 9-10, 23(September, 1932). Rocky Mountain News (Denver, Colorado), September 27, 1931. Rosevear, J.: Pot: A Handbook of Marihuana, New Hyde Park:University Book (1967), pp. 117-131. San Antonio Light (San Antonio, Texas), May 4, 1931,editorial. Santa Fe New Mexican (Santa Fe, New Mexico), January 31, 1923. Saratogian (Saratoga, New York), September 9, 1936, P. 5. Schaller, Michael: "The Federal Prohibition ofMarihuana," Journal of Social History, 4: pp. 61-78 (1970).Schmeckebler: "The Bureau of Prohibition," in BrookingsInstitute for Government Research Service Monograph (57) :143(1929). Siler, J. S., et al., "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"Military Surgeon, 73: 269-280 (1933). Tennyson, A. L.: "Consideration of a Uniform StateNarcotic Law by the National Conference of Commissioners ofUniform State Laws at Atlantic City, New Jersey, September 9-12,1931," memorandum for file dated September 16,1931. _: "Uniform State Narcotic Law," Federal BureauAssociation Journal 1: 55 (1932). Terry, C. and Pellens, M.: The Opium Problem (1928), p. 834. Texas, "General Laws," Chapter 150, p. 278 (1919). Texas, "Special Session Laws," Chapter 61, pp.156-157 (1923). U.S. Bureau of Immigration: "Commissioner General ofImmigration Annual Report" (1915-1930). U.S. Bureau of Narcotics: "Traffic in Opium," 2: 40(1966). 21 U.S. -Code, 174 (1964). 26 U.S. Code, 4741-4776, 7237 (1964). U.S. Code Cong. and Ad. News, 3294 (1956). U.S. Congress, "Hearings Before the House Committee onWays and Means on H.R. 6385," 75th Cong., 1st Sess.,Washington (1937), 6, 30, 32-37, 59-65, 67-86, 92, 93-95, 97,121. -, "Hearings Before the Senate Finance Committee on H.R.6906," 75th Cong., 1st Sess., Washington (1937), 16, 33-34. "Report of the Committee on Ways and Means on H.R.6385," 75th Cong., Ist Sess., Washington (1937), 1-2. U.S. Courts, "Disposition of Defendants Charged with theViolation of Narcotic Drug Laws," Administrative Office,Division of Information Systems (1956-1964). Washington Post(Washington, D.C.), September 29,1934. White, Dr. William, letter to Surgeon General Treadway (August3, 1932). Women',, Christian Temperance Union: Marihuana, Evanston: WCTUPublishing House (1928), pp. 1, 3. "Union Signal" (Evanston, Illinois), 1936, p. 285. January 30, 1937, pp. 36, 75. (yearly bound volumes). Wood, Will S., letter to Mrs. Roberta Lawson, President ofGeneral Federation of Women's Clubs (January 13, 1936). Woodward, William, letter to Dr. S. L. Hilton (August 6,1932). World Narcotic Defense Association, letter to legislators(February,1937). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B22-17IA086-000619-B005-236http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc2a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033505 text/html 90671HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:26 GMTContent-length: 90453 History of Alcohol Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse History of Alcohol Prohibition* *This section is based in large part on a paper preparedfor the Commission by Jane Lang McGrew, an attorney fromWashington, D.C. In 1920, the national policy of Prohibition began. The 18thAmendment to the Constitution had been officially ratified: It sought, by law, to make the whole Nation into enforcedteetotalers and to put an end to all evils associated withdrinking. It sought to eradicate a taste deeply rooted in thehabits and customs of a large part of the population throughoutlawing the business that ministered to its satisfaction(Hu, 1950: 48). 1650-1750: THE FIRST HUNDRED YEARS In fact, it started earlier. "Ministers shall not givethemselves to excess in drinkinge, or riott, or spending theirtyme idellye day or night," ruled the Virginia ColonialAssembly in 1629 (Cherrington, 1920:16). Massachusetts ordered that no person shall remain in anytavern "longer than necessary occasions" in 1637, whilePlymouth Colony in 1633 prohibited the sale of spirits "morethan 2 pence worth to anyone but strangers just arrived"(Cherrington, 1920: 18). This sampling of the earliest colonial laws is representativeof the attempt, continued since those times, to control excessiveconsumption. Excessive drinking, it was considered, producedbehavior unseemly in some, such as ministers, and dangerous inothers, such as Indians. But drinking per se was not frowned upon. Indeed, when thePuritans set sail to Massachusetts, they had taken care to carrywith them 42 tons of beer (in contrast with 14 tons of water) and10,000 gallons of wine (Lee, 1963: 15). The regulation of liquor consumption was a matter ofconsiderable concern in certain colonies. Thus, for a time,Massachusetts went so far as to prohibit the drinking of healthsin 1638 (Lee, 1963: 19). The law was soon abandoned for reasonsobvious, albeit unrecorded. It rapidly became clear, however,that liquor laws could do more and perhaps better, than controlconsumption: they could provide a source of revenue. By the turnof the 18th century, the regulatory impulse was concentrated onfines, excise taxes and license fees. Fines were imposed for drunken behavior, unlawful sales to adrunken tippler or to Indians, and for selling without a license.Court records indicate that these laws were enforced withreasonable regularity (Krout 1967: 29-30). Licenses often carriedtheir own fees, and excise taxes were levied upon distilledspirits as well as beer and fermented drink in many cases. Until the 18th century, however, there was no attempt toprohibit the manufacture, importation, sale, or consumption ofalcoholic beverages. Quite the contrary, at least oneindividual-in some cases a reluctant individual-was required inmany towns to run the local inn or public house for visitors andtravelers. Although colonial statutes made it clear that tipplers andidlers were unwelcome, the diary of a colonial traveler, SarahKemble Knight, suggests that such laws were unsuccessful incontaining the ribaldry which took place in many such houses.Madam Knight complained: I could get no sleep, because of the Clamor of some of theTown Tope-ers in the next room.... I heartily fretted &wish't 'am tongue tyed.... They kept calling for Tother Gill, Wchwhile they were swallowing, was some Intermission, But presently,like Oyle to fire, encreased the flame (Miller, Johnson,eds., 1963: 430-431). Persons other than Madam Knight were to become more outspokenabout their concern for the use of spirits. The, most significantpremonition was the Colony of Georgia's action in 1735 when thefirst prohibitory statute against the importation of "ardentspirits" was enacted. At the same time, however, theconsumption of beer was encouraged (Grant, 1932: 1). The time fortemperance had not yet arrived. 1750-1825: TEMPERANCE STIRRINGS As the evils of intemperance began to attract the attention ofthe ministry, John Wesley denounced the sin of distilling -anddeclared for its Prohibition in 1773 (Cherrington, 1920: 37-38). On his heels came the publication of a pamphlet entitled"The Mighty Destroyer Displayed and Some Account of theDreadful Havoc Made by the Mistaken Use, As Well As the Abuse, ofDistilled Spiritous Liquors," by Anthony Benezet, a memberof the Society of Friends, advising against the use of any drink"which is liable to steal away a man's senses and render himfoolish, irrascible, uncontrollable, and dangerous"(Cherrington, 1920: 38). Nevertheless, typical of the century's ambivalence, the firstmaster at Harvard was fired when it was found that Harvardstudents had been left "wanting beer betwixt brewings a weekand a week and a half together" (Lee, 1963: 16). Concern for the effect of liquor upon the public weal wasexpressed by John Adams who noted in his diary on February 29,1760, that the taverns were "becoming the eternal haunt ofloose, disorderly people . . ." (Cherrington, 1920: 37).Worst of all he continued: ... These houses are become the nurseries of ourlegislators. An artful man, who has neither sense nor sentiments,may, by gaining a little sway among the rabble of the town,multiply taverns and dram shops and thereby secure the votes oftaverner and retailer and of all; and the multiplication oftaverns will make many, who may be induced to flip and rum, tovote for any man whatever (Dobyns, 1940: 215). The health argument in behalf of temperance was first made byNathaniel Ames, in the 1752 edition of his Almanack, who wrotethat Strong Waters were formerly used only by the Direction ofPhysicians; but now Mechanicks and low-li'd Labourers drink Rumlike Fountain-Water, and they can infinitely better endure itthan the idle. unactive and sedentary Part of Mankind, but DEATHis in the bottom of the cup of every one (Lee, 1963: 22). Dr. Benjamin Rush shared his concern, publishing in 1785 hisnow famous "Inquiry into the Effects of Ardent Spirits Uponthe Human Body and Mind." Enumerating the diseases of thebody and mind which plague the drinker of distilled liquors, Dr.Rush outlined the symptoms, including "unusual garrulity,unusual silence, captiousness ... an insipid simpering ...profane swearing ... certain immodest actions" and"certain extravagant acts which indicate a temporary fit ofmadness" (Rush, 1943: 323, 325-326). Although the rumblings of the temperance movement were thusperceptible in the late 18th century, there is no evidence thatits effects were felt. In 1766, it is recorded that the repeal ofthe Stamp Act was greeted in Providence, Rhode Island with"32 of the most loyal, patriotic and constitutionaltoasts" (Lee, 1963: 18). Notwithstanding this evidence ofdevotion to His Majesty. it was often thereafter the tavern whichprovided the meeting places for the most defiant revolutionaries. Subsequently, when the colonial period disappeared into thepost-Revolutionary era, Alexander Hamilton adopted the ideaearlier effected by the individual colonies, to tax distilledliquors for revenue purposes. In 1791 , the tax was enacted aspart of the Revenue Act. The following year, the Second Congressof the United States added license fees for distilleries andtaxes on liquors distilled from imported materials. Incensed by this federal action, farmers in WesternPennsylvania mobbed revenue collectors and armed to resist thisintrusion by the new Federal Government. It required 15,000militia to bring the so-called Whiskey Rebellion to an end(Peterson, 1969: 119-120). Such was the first indication that theliquor industry in the United States would be a force with whichthe government would have to reckon. Toward the end of the 18th century, a temperance movement, assuch, became discernible. The Methodist Church took a staunchposition against the sale or imbibing of ardent spirits"unless in cases of extreme necessity." Five yearslater, in 1789, even the exception was excised (Cherrington,1920: 50). A similar platform was adopted by the PresbyterianSynod of Pennsylvania and by the Yearly Meeting of Friends of NewEngland (Cherrington, 1920: 51, 58). On a non-clerical level, the movement began to organize.Although there is some dispute as to the identity of the originaltemperance society, it appears that as early as 1778, there wasan organization calling itself the Free African Society whichexcluded men of drinking habits, followed soon thereafter by theOrganization of Brethren, and the Litchfield, ConnecticutAssociation of "the most respectable farmers" inConnecticut determined to discourage the use of spirits(Cherrington, 1920: 49, 58). The turn of the century saw the vitalization of the temperancespirit. Religious leaders, including Cotton Mather, Dr. LymanBeecher, John Wesley and Reverend Andrew Elliott inveighedagainst the consumption of liquors. Temperance activity figuredprominently in the concerns of the Presbyterian, Methodist,Universalist, Baptist, and Friends churches. "Had. the temperance reform in America awaited for anon-church or a non-Christian leadership," theorizes onehistorian, ... the temperance revolution of the past century would yetremain to be accomplished.... Every successful temperancemovement of the last century has been merely the instrument-themachinery and equipment through which the fundamental principlesof the Christian religion have expressed themselves in terms oflife and action (Cherrington, 1920:92). Whatever the Christian input , however, it is also apparentthat a desire to reform was aroused in the country, very muchlike that which was to be experienced a century later during theProgressive Movement. Thus, Massachusetts Society for theSuppression of Intemperance of 1813, damned not only rum, but allof the "kindred vices, profaneness and gambling" andbeseeched members to "discourage... by ... example andinfluence, every kind of..... immorality" (Lee, 1963: 23).Mingling with the potential temperance leaders during this periodwere the future spokesmen of abolitionism, feminism, andutopianism. In the meantime, the industry was able to report triumphantlythat the federal taxes on distilling and importing spirits wererepealed in 1802. From 1813 until 1817, the retailers' anddistillers' licenses bore a federal tax, but beginning in 1818the industry enjoyed a tax-free era which was to last until 1862.Thomas Jefferson rejoiced-"as a moralist"-explainingthat: It is an error to view a tax on that liquor as merely a taxon the rich. It is a prohibition of its use in the middling classof our citizens, and a condemnation of them to the poison ofwhisky, which is desolating their houses. No nation is drunkenwhere wine is cheap; and none sober, where the only antidote isthe bane of whisky (Peterson, 1969: 122-123). Future prohibitionists would likewise castigate the governmentfor drawing its revenues from the liquor industry andparticipating in the profits of evil thereby. 1825-1870: THE PLEDGE Temperance was not always equated with teetotalism. Beer andusually wine were initially exempt from denunciation in bothsermons and treatises. There developed in the mid-19th century,however, the conviction that all brews, be they "ardentspirits," beer, ale, or wine, were anathema. The, new temper of the movement was epitomized by the travelsof Father Theobald Matthew of Ireland who toured the UnitedStates from 1849 to 1851, administering the pledge of totalabstinence to some 600,000 persons in 25 states. A White Housedinner and a Senate reception stamped official approval upon hissojourns (Furnas, 1968: 80). Thus did temperance drift into a newphase, with its ardent spokesman, Congressman Gerrit Smith,crying that: I would that no person were able to drink intoxicatingliquors without immediately becoming a drunkard. For, who, thenwould . . . drink the poison that always kills, or jump into thefire that always burns? (Furnas, 1968: 15). It was in this atmosphere that the first prohibitionexperiments were undertaken on a statewide basis. "Until theliquor traffic is abolished . . . all efforts at moral reformmust languish," judged one of the earliest prohibitionists. In "Grappling with the Monster," T. S. Arthurstated, "The CURSE is upon us, and there is but one CURE:Total Abstinence, by the help of God, for the Individual, andProhibition for the State" (Furnas, 1968: 15). In 1847, the first such cure was enacted for the state ofMaine (Cherrington, 1920: 134). (Actually, the first Prohibitionlaw went into effect in 1843 in the territory of Oregon. This wasrepealed five years later.) A wave of prohibition statutes followed. Delaware, on theheels of Maine, passed its first prohibition law only to have itdeclared unconstitutional the following year. Similar laws wereenacted in Ohio, Illinois, Rhode Island, Minnesota,Massachusetts, Connecticut, Pennsylvania and New York during thenext few years. They met with varying fates, including veto bythe governors, repeal by the legislatures and invalidation by thestate supreme courts. The evaluations by several historians of these early trialswere to he heard again in the 20th century: the enactments lackedsupport from a large portion of the population, makingenforcement exceedingly difficult. Ultimately, all but one of thestates repealed the prohibition statutes of the 19th century(Grant, 1932: 5; Peterson, 1969: 123). Notwithstanding this record, prohibitionists took heart."This thing is of God," cried Lyman Beecher from thepulpit. "That glorious Maine law was a square and grand blowright between the horns of the Devil" (Furnas, 1968: 167).Temperance societies, established in all but three states by 1832and destined to proliferate, began to consolidate as well. The American Temperance Society, later to become the AmericanTemperance Union, was organized in 1826. It quickly begatauxiliaries, so that by 1835, 8,000 locals existed (Cherrington,1920: 92-93). As the years passed, they witnessed the founding of moretemperance, organizations of a general and national characterthan during any other period in the United States' history. TheWashingtonian movement, organized in the City of Baltimore in1840, was followed by the Martha Washington movement in 1841. The Sons of Temperance came into existence in 1842, at, thesame time the Order of Rechabites was organized, and theCongressional Temperance Society of 1833 was revived on the basisof total abstinence. They took heart at their early state,successes and fought against the defeats of repeal. In the meantime, however, the United States government, whichhad heaped honors upon Father Matthew, concluded a treaty withKing Kamehameha III of Hawaii in 1850 permitting the introductionand sale of liquor on his island. As further evidence of the national dichotomy, Chicagoans inthe 1850's fought virulently against the enforcement of Sundayclosing laws. To protest, an armed mob burst into the businessdistrict of the city, to be met by police. Fortunately, the mobwas dispersed before the mayor found it necessary to use thecannon he had hurriedly planted around City Hall (Peterson, 1969:120). It was the time when patent medicines, 40 proof and more,began to develop their clientele. And although the Demon Rummight threaten their health and life, Lydia Pinkham's Compoundoffered a cure for any and all ails and aches. By the time of the Civil War, both the assimilative andcoercive traditions of the temperance movement had crystallized:that is, temperance proponents were determined to save the weakand to destroy the recalcitrant (Gusfield, 1963: 69-70). Thehardening of positions was accompanied by the development ofpolitical consciousness in the movement and recognition ofpolitical objectives. These processes were only temporarilyblunted by the Civil War in the 1860's and the diversion ofinterest to the abolitionist cause. Part of the heritage of the Civil War was the tax on liquorand beer imposed in 1862. Rates were increased several timesbetween 1863 and 1868, so that the tax imposed at the rate of 20cents per gallon rose to $2 per gallon. An interesting phenomenon was noted by the Federal Government:as the rates increased, the revenue did not. In fact, the numberof gallons reported actually declined. As the decade went on,attempts were made to enforce the tax laws and in 1868, $25,000was actually appropriated to detect violators. Fraud continuedalmost unabated. Stockpiling of liquor was popular to hedgeagainst future, increases, for they were not applicable to liquoron hand. The infamous Whiskey Ring was active in these days and was notfinally broken up until 1875, when, in a peak of nerve, membersestablished a corruption fund in the District of Columbia to haltthe prosecution of 321 persons charged with violations of therevenue laws. Before then, however, Congress apparently hadsecond thoughts about the implications of the revenue collectionsand reduced the tax from the high of $2 per gallon to 50 cents in1869. The happy result was to see a rise in collections from$13.5 million in 1868, to $45 million in 1869, and $55 millionthe following year. Taking further precautions, the governmentstipulated that new stamps be developed to precludecounterfeiting and tampering (History of the Alcohol 14-20;Cherrington, 1920: 156162). Congress did not escape unscathed by criticism and reaction.It came from both sides of the temperance issue. Temperanceadvocates such as Senator Wilson of Massachusetts and SenatorPomeroy of Kansas decried the fact that federal revenues would bedrawn from the liquor industry. At the same, time, however, the industry revolted, leading tomass tax evasion schemes and devices and the organization oftheir first industry lobby, the United States BrewersAssociation. The Association rapidly launched a, legislativecampaign and succeeded in 1863 in reducing the tax rate of beerfrom $1 to 60 cents (Cherrington, 1920:157). By 1870, the Civil War dust had cleared and the temperancebattle lines were drawn, already tested by the skirmishes of the1840's and 1850's. The most interesting feature of their warstrategy was soon to become apparent: women and children werewelcomed at the battlements. 1870-1913: TOWARD A NATIONAL CONSCIENCE A series of "isms" was aroused in this era:feminism, unionism, socialism, and progressivism. Prohibitionabsorbed elements of them all, and vice versa. The feminist movement originated early in the 1800's. Untilthe 1870's, however, feminine involvement in the temperanceeffort was largely peripheral. The Women's Crusade of 1873 andthe organization of the Women's Christian Temperance Union in1874 marked the formal entrance of women into the temperancemovement. The WCTU was devotedly headed by Frances E. Willard, a ladyequally committed to the principle of equality of the sexes.Temperance was to bridge the gap, she believed: Drink and tobacco are the great separatists [sic] betweenmen and women. Once they used these things together, but woman'sevolution has carried her beyond them; man will climb to the samelevel . . . but meanwhile ... the fact that he permits himselffleshly indulgence that he would deprecate in her, makes theirplanes different, giving her an instinct of revulsion (Furnas,1968: 281). Although the WCTU was organized initially around thetemperance issue, it was not long before Miss Willard'sleadership expanded its conscience. A statement of principles was adopted in its early years: We believe in a living wage; in an 8-hour day; in courts ofconciliation and arbitration, in justice as opposed to greed ingain; in "Peace on Earth and Good Will to Men"(Gusfield, 1963: 76). Within three years of its inception, the WCTU reported thatits concerns included "a better Indian policy" and"wiser civil service reform" (Gusfield, 1963: 77).There were those in the Union who felt that their interestsshould be limited to temperance. But, forecasting the mood ofProgressivism, Miss Willard steered the organization along thebroader lines to social reform. The WCTU was responsible for part of the early campaign toeducate the public about temperance. Children were recruited tosing praises of "the true and the brave" who signed theabstinence pledge. They were assisted in this effort byMcGuffey's Readers which denounced the licensing of liquor storesand saloons: Licensed-to do thy neighbor harm, Licensed-to kindle hire and strife, Licensed-to nerve the robber's arm, Licensed-to whet the murderer's knife, Licensed-like spider for a fly, To spread thy nets for man, thy prey, To mock his struggles, crush his soul, Then cast his worthless form away (Lee, 1963: 34-35). Whiskey makes "the happy miserable" and impoverishesthe rich, the, McGuffey books concluded. And the word spread. By1902, the temperance campaign had permeated the public schoolsystems: every state but Arizona had introduced compulsorytemperance education. Their texts teemed with both facts andmisinformation such as "Alcohol sometimes causes the coatsof the blood vessels to grow thin. They are then liable at anytime to cause death by bursting." (Sinclair, 1962: 43). The WCTU was not carrying the burden of reform alone, however.In 1869, the National Prohibition Party was born. Three yearslater, the first party ticket was put forth in the presidentialcampaign of 1872, headed by John Black, who received 5,607 votesfor President. Success at the polls ultimately peaked in 1892when John Dedwell, the Prohibition presidential candidate,received a total of 270,710 votes. Thereafter, its partisansdeclined in number, having failed to break voters away from theirtraditional affiliations (Cherrington, 1920: 165-169). As a rule, the WCTU eschewed partisanship. Their objectiveswere far broader and more practical than those contemplated bythe Prohibition Party. Only once it supported the ProhibitionParty in the notorious election of 1884. The election of 1884 carried a variety of implications forfuture candidates on the temperance issue. In New York Cityalone, 1,007 primaries and conventions reportedly were held bythe various parties. Of these, over 60% took place in saloons(Peterson, 1969: 123), recalling to mind the complaint of JohnAdams a century before (Cherrington, 1920: 37; Dobyns, 1940:215). The meeting places were indicative of the fact that at thistime neither party could afford to adopt a dry plank in itsplatform, for New York would be a pivotal state in the racebetween Republican James G. Blaine and Democrat Grover Cleveland. Blaine campaigned hard, trying to overcome the defection ofseveral thousand dry Republicans to the Prohibition Party.Speaking in behalf of Blaine at a New York City rally,Presbyterian minister Samuel Burchard denounced the Democrats asthe party of "Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion." Needlessto say, the Catholic vote, as well as the wet vote, quicklyswelled the Democratic totals. Blaine, having thus alienated bothwets and drys, lost the state--and the election-by a tiny margin(Furnas, 1968: 273; Lee, 1963: 29-30). In case the lesson that temperance was an issue to be reckonedwith in national politics was lost on the parties after 1884, theevents of the decade culminating in the birth of the Anti-SaloonLeague in 1895, dramatized the point. A second wave of stateprohibition laws was experienced between 1880 and 1890. Theresults of much of the legislation during those years were lessthan satisfying to temperance advocates, however; only six statesemerged with state-wide prohibition by statute or constitutionalamendment. Numerous other states had enacted local option, whichpermitted towns to go dry if they so chose by referendum. Withoutstate or federal insulation from wet communities, however, theso-called dry towns were scarcely temperance models. In the wake of these state legislative actions, South Carolinaintroduced a state dispensary system in order to eliminate themotive of private gain from the liquor business. Politicalscandals which quickly developed tended to discredit it, however,if indeed it had enjoyed much support from any corner(Cherrington, 1920: 250-251). With this discomfiting history behind it, the Anti-SaloonLeague arose to the challenge, while Carrie Nation independentlythrust her way into the public eye. The League was to develop theart of lobbying or "pressure political" to its mostdramatic heights. Scarcely more than 10 years after organization,it was described as "the most dangerous political movementthat this country has ever known" by the National ModelLicense League, a wet (and harassed) association. A more rationalviewpoint was expressed by the president of the New York StateBrewers Association in 1913: We are not dealing with a theory which is the delusion ofthe fanatic alone, but with a real condition which is in thehands of a well organized force, led by aggressive, experienced,and untiring leaders (Odegard, 1928: 23). The focus of the League's indictments included not simplyalcohol, but the saloon itself, as the purveyor of spirits. Themyriad League publications denounced the saloon for "annuallysending thousands of our youths to destruction, for corruptingpolitics, dissipating workmen's wages, leading astray 60,000girls each year into lives of immorality and banishing childrenfrom school" (Odegard, 1928: 40-59). "Liquor is responsible for 19% of the divorces, 25% ofthe poverty, 25% of the insanity, 37% of the pauperism, 45% ofchild desertion, and 50% of the crime in this country,"the League determined. "And this," it concluded, " is a very conservative estimate" (Odegard,1928: 60). League posters appeared everywhere depicting the saloon-keeperas a profiteer who feasted on death and enslavement. Othersscreamed out the dire consequences of alcohol. "Alcoholinflames the passions, thus making the temptation to sex-sinunusually strong," advertised one (Sinclair, 1962: 51). It was the League which geared up the campaign, but it was notalone. As the Progressive spirit caught the national interest inthe early 19th century, the movement for reform embraced thecause of temperance. The temperance movement assumed an aura ofevangelism, combining the concept of America's mission with thevision of Messianism. Through the combination of temperance andprogressivism, it was believed that the Kingdom of God couldactually come to the United States. In an article in Appleton's Magazine in 1908, the ReverendCharles F. Aked articulated the aspirations of the reformers: We are spending our lives, many of us, in the effort tomake the world a little better and brighter for those that shallcome after us.... we want to open out life and liberty to all thesons of men. We want to make possible for all of life in thewhole, the good and the beautiful ... and the common sale ofintoxicating liquor renders our work a thousand times moredifficult ... (Timberlake, 1063: 34-38). Others were more mundane. Scientists began accumulatingevidence of the effect of quantities of alcohol on the nervoussystem and general physical condition. The myth that alcoholconsumption improved muscular power was exploded. Therelationship between mental psychoses and alcohol was documented,and thus did the condemnation of alcohol as a poison assumescientific support. Finally, in 1915, whiskey and brandy werediscreetly removed from the list of authoritative medicinal drugscontained in the United States Pharmacopoeia (Timberlake, 1963:47). Who were the people fueling the movement? Largely middleclass, rural, Anglo-Saxon and Protestant comprised the temperancemovement and they confronted the urban and industrial communitieshead-on. "The Anglo-Saxon stock is the best improved,hardiest and fittest.... [I]f we are to preserve this nation andthe Anglo-Saxon type we must abolish [saloons]," proclaimedone temperance publication (Gusfield, 1963: 100). Calling itself"The Protestant church in action" (Sinclair, 1962:108), the Anti-Saloon League concentrated single-mindedly andevangelically on the cause of temperance and refrained fromdabbling in other reforms (Gusfield, 1963: 108). Nevertheless, the Episcopal and Lutheran churches neveraligned themselves with the AntiSaloon League, while Jewish andCatholic groups generally opposed their objective. The convictionshared by Anti-Saloon Leaguers expressed by Reverend FrancisAscott McBride was: "The League was born of God" (Lee,1963: 35). Thus one had to be for or against the movement; therewas no half-way commitment. When the sides were lined up initially, industrialists andunion leaders alike preferred to keep God on their side. From thecompany's point of view, the saloon was often responsible forindustrial injuries and absenteeism. Some believed that thedrinking man demanded higher wages than his sober counterparts.Furthermore, union locals tended to congregate in saloon meetinghalls maintained for that purpose and, it was sometimessuspected, for the plottings of anarchistic conspirators (Furnas,1968: 310). Accordingly, it was not long before industry moved from anacquiescent position to an active role in the temperancemovement. Various methods were adopted to encourage sobriety,including lectures, literature and job preferences forteetotalers. Businessmen opined that sobriety expandedproductivity, increased bank deposits, improved collections andstimulated the retail trade (Timberlake, 1963: 67-79). At the same time, the prospect of diverting patronage of theliquor industry to other products tantalized some industries.Thus the Welch Grape Juice Company advertised: Get the Welch Habit-It's one that won't get you!(Timberlake, 1963: 77). Opinion was not unanimous, of course. Businessmen, includingbankers, whose interests were tied to the liquor industry couldill afford to be beneficent toward temperance. Others, includingthe DuPonts, Rockefellers, Kresges, and Wanamakers spent freelyto cover the League's annual campaign costs of $2.5 million(Odegard, 1928: 126). As surely as liquor was the enemy of the home, it was alsoproclaimed the enemy of the working man. "The great sinkholefor the workers' wages is the saloon," wrote the editors ofone League publication, The California Liberator. "When thatabomination is destroyed, labor is freed from its greatestcurse" (Odegard, 1928: 53). The logic appealed to the unionleadership. According to one official of the American Federationof Labor: No force in our country has been as effective in thepromotion of temperance among working people as the organizedlabor movement. The labor movement has achieved more for thecause of temperance than all the temperance societies combined... (Timberlake, 1963: 83). Since similar credit has been claimed for the League, theProtestant church, and business interests, it is difficult toapportion the plaudits. Subsequent events suggest that the laborinterests failed to live up to this claim, however. Notwithstanding Terrence V. Powerderly's early speech against"the strong right hand of labor itself . . . that carrieswith it the rum which drowns reason," his own Knights ofLabor repealed their constitutional provision which deniedmembership to anyone connected with the liquor trade (Timberlake,1963: 85-86). As the reports of the National Commission on Enforcement ofthe Prohibition Laws (known as the "WickershamCommission") were later to record, it was particularly theworkers who resented the paternal legislation which they believedwas directed at them and their habits (National Commission on LawObservance, 1931: 345). In addition, there were. those whose livelihoods would bedirectly affected-indeed, effaced-by the success of the campaign:brewery workers, bartenders, glass workers, waiters, andmusicians among others. Thus, even though the Socialist Party resolved in 1908 that "anyexcessive indulgence in intoxicating liquors by members of theworking class is a serious obstacle to the triumph of our causesince it impairs the vigor of the fighters in political andeconomic struggle" (Timberlake, 1963: 98), theindustrial urban centers of the country continued to harbor andstimulate antagonism towards the temperance movement. The identification of the saloon and its offerings with theurban, immigrant working class further enraged Prohibitionists.As one sociologist observed, "The saloon appeared as thesymbol of a culture which was alien to the ascetic character ofAmerican values . . ." (Gusfield, 1963: 100). Thus,Americanism became a central issue in the temperance movement. One temperance spokesman, cited in Barker's "The SaloonProblem," vented these sentiments: The influx of foreigners into our urban centers, many ofwhom have liquor habits [sic], is a menace to good government. .. . [T] he foreign born population is largely under the socialand political control of the saloon. If the cities keep up theirrapid growth they will soon have the balance of political powerin the nation and become storm centers of political life (Timberlake,1963: 118). 1913-1933: NATIONAL PROHIBITION -- PROLOGUE AND FINISH The distrust of the immigrant population became morepronounced as the economic, political, and social power of thecities developed. It was given a strong impetus by theanti-German tremors which shook the country in a mood ofanticipation before World War 1. The United States Brewers Association misread the prevailingtemper and associated itself with the German-American Alliance tooppose the temperance advocates and defend German kultur in theUnited States. As the United States came closer to war, the antipathy whichdeveloped against the Central Powers was directed with equalforce against brewers and tipplers (Furnas, 1968: 334-35) : Pro-Germanism is the only froth from the German's beersaloon. Our German Socialist Party and the German AmericanAlliance are the spawn of the saloon. . . . Prohibition is theinfallible submarine chaser (Sinclair, 1962:122). The war gave the prohibition cause new ammunition. Literaturedepicted brewers and licensed retailers as treacherously stabbingAmerican soldiers in the back. Raw materials and labor were beingdiverted from the war effort to an industry which debilitated thenation's capacity to defend itself. It was urged that wartimeprohibition would stop the waste of grain and molasses and wouldremove a handicap on workers' efficiency. "Liquor is a menace to patriotism because it puts beerbefore country," preached Prohibitionist Wayne Wheeler(Odegard, 1928: 72). The fact that names Pabst, Schlitz, andBlatz broadcast their national origin only did further injury totheir interests. In this atmosphere the Wartime Prohibition Act was passed in1918. It followed a series of federal laws such as the WilsonOriginal Packages Act and the Webb-Kenyon Act, attempts toprotect dry states from their wet neighbors. The Wilson Original Packages Act was passed on August 8, 1890,and provided that all intoxicating beverages shipped interstatewould be subject to the laws of the destination state uponarrival. No mechanism for federal enforcement was provided. The Webb-Kenyon Act, enacted March 1, 1913, was intended toreinforce the 1890 Act by providing that it was a violation offederal law to ship an intoxicating beverage interstate with theintent that it be used or sold in any manner in violation of thelaws of the destination state. The lack of federal enforcementrendered the statute virtually meaningless. The Reed Amendment, enacted four years later, provided a fineof $1,000 for transporting liquor into a dry state with nogreater effect. None of the earlier acts met with substantial success incurbing the flow of liquor into purportedly dry regions, but theydid mark a change in federal policy. Formerly liquor laws weredesigned solely to produce federal revenue; Congress now tookcognizance of the role it could play in the regulation ofconsumption. The role was actually forced upon a reluctant Congress atfirst. Indeed, the government had passed up numerous prioropportunities to involve itself in the temperance movement assuch. The particular part it was to play was forecast by the Sonsof Temperance who, in 1856, declared themselves for nationalconstitutional prohibition. Twenty years later, Congressman Henry Blair of New Hampshireintroduced a prohibition amendment to the Constitution for thefirst time in Congress. As a senator, he introduced another suchresolution in 1885, along with Senator Preston Plum of Kansas.After consideration by the Senate Committee on Education, thebill was reported out favorably and placed on the Senate Calendarin 1886. Nevertheless, no action resulted (Cherrington, 1920: 317). In the meantime, states continued the struggle between thewets and the drys, with great success for the temperanceadvocates. By 1913, nine states were under stateside prohibition.In 31 other states, local option laws were in effect. By reasonof these and other variants of regulatory schemes, more than 50%of the United States population was then under prohibition. The national constitutional campaign was resumed as such in1913 when the Anti-Saloon League went on record at its 15thNational Convention in favor of immediate prosecution of theobjective of constitutional amendment. The National Temperance Council, founded at the same time,coordinated the activities of numerous temperance organizationswith the same object. In 1913, the demands of the League wereformally presented to Congress by the Committee of 1,000. The measure was then introduced in the House by CongressmanThompson and in the Senate by Senator Sheppard. The followingyear, the first joint resolution failed to secure the necessarytwo thirds majority for submitting a constitutional amendment tothe states. A second resolution was submitted in 1915 andfavorably considered by the Judiciary Committees of both houses,but neither ever came to a vote. Ultimately, in 1917, the resolution to prohibit themanufacture, sale, transportation or importation of alcoholicbeverages in the United States was approved by Congress and sentto the states for ratification (Cherrington, 1920: 317-330). It took only one year and eight days for the 18th Amendment tosecure the necessary ratification. On January 8, 1918,Mississippi proudly became the first state to ratify, and onJanuary 16, 1919, Nebraska completed the job as the 36th state(Lee, 1963: 42). By the end of February 1919, there remained onlythree hold-outs: New Jersey, Connecticut, and Rhode Island(Cherrington, 1920: 330). October 28, 1919, was the day that Congress enacted theNational Prohibition Act-more often known as the VolsteadAct-with the intent to give effect to the new constitutionalamendment. Officially, the liquor drought was to begin on January17, 1920. The celebrants of the occasion were concentrated in themembership of the Anti-Saloon League, which could rightly claimthat its consummate skill in pressure politics had maneuvered thecountry into its dry state. The early experience of the Prohibition era gave thegovernment a taste of what was to come. In the three monthsbefore the 18th Amendment became effective, liquor worth half amillion dollars was stolen from Government warehouses. Bymidsummer of 1920, federal courts in Chicago were overwhelmedwith some 600 pending liquor violation trials (Sinclair, 1962:176-177). Within three years, 30 prohibition agents were killedin service. Other statistics demonstrated the increasing volume of thebootleg trade. In 1921, 95,933 illicit distilleries, stills,still works and fermentors were seized. in 1925, the total jumpedto 172,537 and up to 282,122 in 1930. In connection with theseseizures, 34,175 persons were arrested in 1921; by 1925, thenumber had risen to 62,747 and to a high in 1928 of 75,307(Internal Revenue, Service, 1921, 1966, 1970: 95, 6, 73).Concurrently, convictions for liquor offenses in federal courtsrose from 35,000 in 1923 to 61,383 in 1932. The law could not quell the continuing demand for alcoholicproducts. Thus, where legal enterprises could no longer supplythe demand, an illicit traffic developed, from the point ofmanufacture to consumption. The institution of the speakeasyreplaced the institution of the saloon. Estimates of the numberof speakeasies throughout the United States ranged from 200,000to 500,000 (Lee, 1963: 68). Writers of this period point out that the law was circumventedby various means. Although there may have been legitimate,medicinal purposes for whiskey, the practice of obtaining amedical prescription for the illegal substance was abused. It isestimated that doctors earned $40 million in 1928 by writingprescriptions for whiskey. The legal system was equally evasive; the courts convictedabout seven percent of those charged with liquor violations(Sinclair, 1962: 193-195; Dobyns, 1940: 292). The exception forsacramental wine from protection under the Volstead Act alsoinvited abuse. In 1925, the Department of Research and Educationof the Federal Council of the Churches of Christ reported that: The withdrawal of wine on permit from bonded warehouses forsacramental purposes amounted in round figures to 2,139,000gallons in the fiscal year 1922; 2,503,500 gallons in 1923; and2,944,700 gallons in 1924. There is no way of knowing what thelegitimate consumption of fermented sacramental wine is but it isclear that the legitimate demand does not increase 800,000gallons in two years (Dobyns, 1940: 297). The smuggling trade was revived with new vigor and newincentives. Rum-runners, often under foreign flags, broughtliquor into the country from Belgium and Holland. In 1923, therewere 134 seizures of such vessels. The following year, 236 wereapprehended (History of the Alcohol . . . 928). With fewer risks,liquor was readily smuggled across the Canadian border. One wayor the other, the Department of Commerce estimated that, as of1924, liquor valued at approximately $40 million was entering theUnited States annually (Sinclair, 1962: 198). The manufacture of "near-beer" and industrialalcohol provided other opportunities for diversion from licitchannels, while the salvage of the California grape industry wassection 29 of the Volstead Act (27 U.S.C. � 46) which authorizedthe home production of fermented fruit juices. Although thesection was allegedly inserted to save the vinegar industry andthe hard cider of America's farmers, it was welcomed by homewinemakers as well. In the spirit of cooperation, the grapegrowers even produced a type of grape jelly suggestively called"Vine-go" which, with the addition of water, could makea strong wine within two months (Sinclair, 1962: 206). One of the great ironies of the prohibition era was the fact,noted by the Wickersham Commission, that women happily took todrink during the experimental decade, and, what is more, did soin public. As the counterpart of the WCTU, the Women'sOrganization for National Prohibition Reform was founded, statingin its declaration of principles that Prohibition was "wrongin principle" and "disastrous in consequences in thehypocrisy, the corruption, the tragic loss of life and theappalling increase of crime which has attended the abortiveattempt to enforce it" (Dobyns, 1940: 107). Drinking at an earlier age was also noted, particularly duringthe first few years of Prohibition. The superintendents of eightstate mental hospitals reported a larger percentage of youngpatients during Prohibition (1919-1926) than formerly. One of thehospitals noted: "During the past year (1926), an unusuallylarge group of patients who are of high school age were admittedfor alcoholic psychosis" (Brown, 1932:176). In determining the age at which an alcoholic forms hisdrinking habit, it was noted: "The 1920-1923 group wereyounger than the other groups when the drink habit wasformed" (Pollock, 1942: 113). AVERAGE AGE AT FORMATION OF DRINK HABIT Period Males Females 1914 21.4 27.9 1920-23 20.6 25.8 1936-37 23.9 31.7 To be sure, the Volstead Act was enforced in the United Stateswherever it had popular support. In the rural South and Westprohibition was effective and in some cases still is. Thefailures of prohibition enforcement were spotlighted in the bigcities where the law was flagrantly defied and in the smallertowns, populated by miners and industrial workers, where the lawwas simply ignored (National Commission on Law Observance, 1931:345). Notwithstanding the weak enforcement of the Volstead Act, somebelieve that it was only the coming of the Depression with itsdemand for increased employment and tax revenues which finallykilled the experiment (Gusfield, 1963: 127). Others observe thatProhibition was a by-product of the stress and excesses of warand could not have survived in peacetime even under optimaleconomic conditions (Sinclair, 1962: 23-24). Finally, there arethose who accuse the selfishly motivated businessmen of theUnited States for repeal which they allegedly brought aboutthrough the same high-pressure tactics so successfully employedby the partisans of temperance in the preceding decades (Dobyns,1940: 5-130 passim). Despite mixed motivations, the repeal movement was financedand driven by the Association Against the Prohibition Amendment(AAPA). The members declared that "the principal business andobjective of the Association shall be to educate its members asto the fundamental provisions, objects and purposes of theConstitution of the United States" (Dobyns, 1940: 5). Theyworked for the election of Congressmen who agreed to submit thequestion of repeal to a vote of the people in each state. Theywere successful fund-raisers and by January 1, 1931, had almost$3 million in cash in the bank (Dobyns, 1940: 9). The sources of the funds included a number of converts fromthe dry cause. In 1928, the DuPont family abandoned the drys,followed in 1932 by John D. Rockefeller and S. S. Kresge(Gusfield, 1963: 128). Their conversion was effected under thestrong influence of the income tax. Doggedly, Pierre S. DuPontcirculated a brochure concluding that "the British liquorpolicy applied in the United States would permit the totalabolition of the income tax both personal and corporate"(Dobyns, 1940: 22). Concern for the effects of the prohibition laws was notlimited to the private, wealthy sector. In 1928, a dry-wetconfrontation emerged in the presidential election between AlfredE. Smith, a Catholic New Yorker, and Herbert Hoover. Hooversolemnly praised the "great social and economicexperiment" and tightened his grip on the dry vote. Notwithstanding the popular image of Smith as a staunch wet,his platform tried to avoid any outright repeal sentiment. Heasked instead for an amendment of the Volstead Act which wouldprovide a "scientific definition of the alcoholic content ofan intoxicating beverage." This would enable each state tointerpret and apply the federal standard within its borders. Inaddition, he favored what was to be known as the "statestore" system of manufacturing and dispensing alcoholicbeverages (Lee, 1963: 212). In retrospect, it is difficult to ascertain whether it was thereligious campaign or the dry campaign which defeated Al Smith.H. L. Mencken may have written accurately that "if [AlSmith] loses, it will be because those who fear the Popeoutnumber those who are tired of the Anti-Saloon League"('Sinclair, 1962: 303). Nevertheless, Prohibition survived the1928 election, as did Hoover's campaign pledge to establish acommission to investigate the conditions under Prohibition. Headof the Commission was George W. Wickersham, former AttorneyGeneral under Taft. Although the Commission's purpose was setforth as an examination of the problems of enforcement, it soondecided to undertake much broader policy considerations. The Commission's report, published in 1931, included opinionsurveys, statistics on the number of deaths connected withenforcement efforts, testimony by consultants and experts, and ananalysis of the organization, personnel and methods ofprohibition enforcement. On the basis of the five volume report,the Wickersham Commission ironically concluded in its summarythat: There have been more sustained pressures to enforce thislaw than on the whole has been true of any other federal statute,although this pressure in the last four or five years has metwith increasing resistance as the sentiment against prohibitionhas developed . . . . That a main source of difficulty is in theattitude of at least a very large number of respectable citizensin most of our large cities and in several states, is made moreclear when the enforcement of the national prohibition act iscompared with the enforcement of the laws as to narcotics. Thereis an enormous margin of profit in breaking the latter. The meansof detecting transportation are more easily evaded than in thecase of liquor. Yet there are no difficulties in the case ofnarcotics beyond those involved in the nature of the trafficbecause the laws against them are supported everywhere by ageneral and determined public sentiment (Sinclair, 1962:367-368). Notwithstanding this dire analysis, 10 out of the 11commissioners signed a summary of conclusions of the report whichstated that the Commission as a whole opposed the repeal of the18th Amendment, the entry of the Federal or state governmentsinto liquor business, or even the modification of nationalprohibition to permit the sale of light wines and beer (Sinclair,1962: 364). Walter Lippmann commented, "What was done was to evade adirect and explicit official confession that Federal prohibitionis a hopeless failure" (Sinclair, 1962: 365). Whether or notLippmann correctly read the Commission's intentions, there wasclearly a gap between the input and the outcome of the report. It is difficult to assess the relative numbers of the wet anddry partisans during the last few years of national prohibition.In terms of strength, however, the wets surely had the edge whichless than two decades before had belonged to the drys. The newwet strength showed up at the National Convention of theDemocratic party held in Chicago in 1932, where Mayor Cermak ofthat city filled the galleries with his supporters. And, thoughFranklin D. Roosevelt had wooed the dry vote for some time, henow came forward on a platform which favored the outright repealof the 18th Amendment. Accepting his nomination, he stated: I congratulate this convention for having had the courage,fearlessly to write into its declaration of principles what anoverwhelming majority here assembled really thinks about the 18thAmendment. This convention wants repeal. Your candidate wantsrepeal. And I am confident that the United States of Americawants repeal (Dobyns, 1940: 160). While dry leaders looked on with disgust, Roosevelt waselected president and Congress turned a somersault. The repealamendment was introduced February 14, 1933, by Sen. Blaine ofWisconsin and approved two days later by the Senate 63 to 23. TheHouse followed four days later, voting 289 to 121 to send theamendment on to the States (Lee, 1963: 231). It required approvalby 36 states. Michigan was the first state to ratify it; 39states voted, on the amendment during 1933, with 37 approving itsratification and two-North and South Carolina-voting against itsratification. The final ratification was accomplished on November7,1933, when Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Utah gave theirapproval. Congress officially adopted the 21st Amendment to theConstitution on December 5, 1933. Within three weeks of taking office, President Rooseveltwitnessed the first sales of 3.2 beer, following a redefinitionby statute of the terms "intoxicating liquors." Themore popular, higher alcohol-content beer was relegalized byCongress under the Cullen-Harrison Act. Sale of beer became legalon April 7, 1933, in the District of Columbia and the 20 stateswhere state laws did not prohibit its sale. During the next fouryears the remaining states changed their laws to permit its sale,with Alabama and Kansas in 1937, as the last to join the legalsale ranks. The job of total repeal was accomplished with the help of thedetermined AAPA during the succeeding year. Their lawyersassisted the states in preparing bills for conventions andrelease of various forms of political propaganda, therebyenacting a serious satire on the 1919 campaign launched by theAnti-Saloon League. Notwithstanding their high and enduringconstitutional principles, on December 31, 1933, with repeal areality, the AAPA ceased to exist and sent its files to theLibrary of Congress. "Having attained its objective . . .the Association resisted the temptation to linger on as a'sentinel of American liberty' '', the New York Times observed inthe organization's obituary (Dobyns, 1940: 132). PROHIBITION IN PERSPECTIVE During 13 years, what did Prohibition accomplish? There is nosingle compilation of Prohibition statistics which would enableus to determine the degree of success which Prohibition enjoyedduring its lifetime. In discussing the relative successes and failures ofProhibition, most observers conclude that the undertaking failed."Prohibition destroyed the manufacturing and distributiveagencies through which the demand for liquor had been legallysupplied. But the demand remained" (Hu, 1950: 51). In its Report on the Enforcement of the Prohibition Laws ofthe United States, the Wickersham Commission concluded that thecountry had prohibition in law but not in fact. They reported: There was general prevalence of drinking in homes, clubsand hotels.... Throughout the country people of wealth,businessmen and professional men and their families, and thehigher paid workingmen and their families, are drinking in largenumbers in open flouting of the law. And neither Congress nor thestates set up adequate machinery or appropriated sufficient fundsfor the enforcement of the prohibitory legislation. Federal andstate legislation, as a matter of fact, strove to satisfy sothat, as it was aptly said, the drys had their prohibition lawand the wets had their liquor (Hu, 1950: 52). Although some view the theory of prohibition as reasonable, itis generally conceded that the realities of manufacture anddistribution make it unworkable, for in one form or another,alcohol can be easily produced by farmers, high school chemistrystudents, and ordinary citizens. Prohibition has been attempted many times in various parts ofthe world; except for some Moslem areas, attempted legislativecontrols have not proven adequate. In spite of many sincere anddetermined efforts, no country in Europe or the Americas has yetsucceeded in eliminating the use of alcohol by society bylegislative fiat (H.E.W., 1968: 41). Those who had been accustomed to using alcoholic beveragessought other sources of supply "in disregard of thelegislative mandate. In the presence of high pecuniary returnsthere [was] a strong tendency for supply to meet demand in spiteof prohibition" (Hu, 1950: 51). Consumption. Although it is impossible to make anaccurate determination of the consumption of alcoholic beveragesunder Prohibition-since there are no statistics compiledregarding the output and sale of the outlaw industry-estimateshave been made by those examining the economic results ofProhibition as well as by the Bureau of Prohibition of the U.S.Department of Justice. The Bureau placed the consumption ofalcoholic beverages at 73,831,172 gallons, or 0.6 gallon percapita in fiscal year 1930 as contrasted with 166,983,681 gallonsor 1.7 gallons per capita in 1914. In terms of pure alcohol, the Bureau concluded that per capitaconsumption in 1930 was 35% of the 1914 rate of legalconsumption. These estimates have been criticized as being fartoo low (Tillitt, 1932: 35). The figures published by the Department of Commerce in theStatistical Abstract of the United States reflect a differentpicture. The average annual per capita consumption of hard liquorfrom 1910-1914, inclusive, was 1.46 proof gallons. "This5-year period was before the rise of abnormal conditionscoincident to the World War and may be taken as fairly indicativeof the normal rate of drinking that - prevailed in thePre-Prohibition 'era" (Rosenbloom, 1935: 51). The per capita rate for the Prohibition years is computed tobe 1.63 proof gallons. This is 11.64% higher than thePre-Prohibition rate (Tillitt, 1932: 35). Based on these figuresone observer concluded: "And so the drinking which was, intheory, to have been decreased to the vanishing point byProhibition has, in fact, increased" (Tillitt, 1932: 36). Others disagree with the implications of these unverifiedstatistics noting that persons of limited means, formerly unableto patronize the expensive speakeasies, once again had cheapaccess to alcohol following repeal and thereby increasedconsumption (Harrison & Laine, 1936: 1). Popular opinion is equally inconclusive; a survey conducted bythe American Institute of Public Opinion in 1936 asked whetherconditions (drinking customs, consumption, etc.) were betterworse or without significant change since Repeal 36% indicated aworsening and 31% could see no appreciable change (Harrison &Laine, 1936: 2). Perhaps indicative of a gradual process ofadjustment, however, the results of later Gallup polls suggest agradual decline in the use of alcohol. Of a national sample, 67%indicated they used alcohol in 1945, in contrast to 60% in 1950and 55% in 1958 (Gusfield, 1963: 135). Alcoholic Psychoses. There was a notable decrease inalcoholic psychoses and in deaths due to alcoholism immediatelypreceding the enactment of Prohibition and a gradual increase inalcoholic psychosis and in deaths from alcoholism in the generalpopulation since 1920. "These facts appear to indicate that since 1920,Prohibition [was] increasingly impotent as a means of preventingexcessive use of alcohol to an extent productive of seriousmental disorders and untimely death. 1920 marks the end of thedecline and the beginning of the rise in the trends of alcoholicmental diseases and of deaths from alcoholism in the generalpopulation" (Brown, 1932: 88). The increase in mental disorders and deaths from alcoholismafter 1920, however, also coincides with the heavy consumptionperiod-early 1900's-which would have resulted in an increase inalcoholism some years later. The following table reflects the decrease prior to 1920 andthe subsequent gradual increase in percentage of alcoholicpsychosis among new admissions to 56 hospitals in 25 states aswell as among admissions to New York civil state hospitals(Brown, 1932: 76-77; Malzburg, 1949: 294) : 56 Hospitals Year All new admissions New admissions with alcoholic psychoses NY State - civil hospital percent admission with alcoholic psychoses. Number Percent 1910 17,439 1,486 8.5 ... 1911 17,299 1,366 7.9 … 1912 17,570 1,567 8.9 ... 1913 17,525 1,633 9.3 9.3 1914 19,134 1,573 8.2 7.4 1915 18,875 1,331 7.1 5.7 1916 17,929 1,370 7.6 6.1 1917 20,041 1,576 7.9 8.2 1918 19,741 1,021 5.2 5.2 1919 19,737 841 4.3 4.1 1920 19,579 485 2.5 2.0 1921 20,368 567 2.8 2.8 1922 20,741 798 3.8 3.2 1923 20,316 861 4.2 4.0 1924 19,818 896 4.9 5.4 1925 20,857 1,017 4. 9 5.8 1926 20,911 997 4.8 5.9 1927 21,982 1,268 5.8 7.0 1928 23,293 1,257 5.4 6.0 1929 23,242 1,380 5.9 6.2 1930 24,100 1,251 5.2 6.0 Deaths from Alcoholism. In New York City, from 1900through 1909, there was an average of 526 deaths annuallyattributable to alcoholism. From 1910 through 1917, the averagenumber was 619. It plummeted to 183 for the years 1918 through1922. Thereafter, the figure rose, averaging a new high of 639for the years 1923 through 1927 (Rice, ed., 1930: 122). Total deaths from alcoholism in the United States show acomparable trend, with the gradual increase resuming somewhatearlier, about 1922 (Brown, 1932: 61, 77; Feldman, 1927: 397;U.S. Department of Commerce, 1924: 55). Year Deaths from all causes rate per 100,000 Deaths from alcoholism rate per 100,000 1910 1,496.1 5.4 1911 1,418.1 4.9 1912 1,388.8 5.3 1913 1,409.6 5.9 1914 1,364.6 4.9 1915 1,355.0 4.4 1916 1,404.3 5.8 1917 1,425.5 5.2 1918 1,809.1 2.7 1919 1,287.4 1.6 1920 1,306.0 1.0 1921 1,163.9 1.8 1922 1,181.7 2.6 1923 1,230.1 3.2 1924 1,183.5 3.2 1925 1,182.3 3.6 1926 1,222.7 3.9 1927 1,141.9 4.0 1928 1,204.1 4.0 1929 1,192.3 3.7 The highest death rates from alcoholism occurred during thedecade prior to Prohibition as did the highest death rates fromcirrhosis of the liver. These statistics should be qualified bythe observations of Dr. Charles Morris, Chief Medical Examinerfor New York City: "In making out death certificates(which are basic to Census Reports) private or family physicianscommonly avoid entry of alcoholism as a cause of death wheneverpossible. This practice was more prevalent under the National DryLaw than it was in preprohibition time" (Tillitt, 1932:114-115). Even if reliable, per se, such statistics may be unrelated tothe consumption of alcoholic beverages in any given year. Anotherwriter of this period noted: "The relation of fatalalcoholic diseases to consumption of alcohol must be oneextending over a long period of years and the actual duration ofthe critical period can hardly be estimated" (Jellinek,1942: 48-1). According to one sociologist, rates of alcoholismand related mental and physical diseases reflect past drinkinghabits, developed ten to 15 years earlier (Gusfield, 1963: 119). A shorter "lead time" is suggested by a mentalhygiene statistician who attributes the temporary reduction inalcoholic psychoses "to the legal restriction of the saleand use of alcoholic beverages, made effective by the support ofpublic opinion which during the war period had discountenancedself-indulgence, of all sorts" (Brown, 1932: 88). He adds,however, that the notable increase in alcoholic psychoses anddeaths from alcoholism towards the end of the prohibition era(1927-1932) indicated that: ... since 1920, prohibition has become increasinglyimpotent as a means of preventing excessive use of alcohol to anextent productive of serious mental disorders and untimely deaths(Brown, 1932: 88). The highly limited statistical label of death from alcoholismhas been noted elsewhere: The trend of death from alcoholism reflects hardly anythingelse than progress in the treatment of the so-called diseases ofchronic alcoholism. Nevertheless, statistics of death fromalcoholism have been used by both Drys and Wets to prove thatProhibition or repeal has greatly improved the rate of death fromalcoholism. . . . Death from alcoholism is simply not an index ofthe prevalence of inebriety. Death from alcoholism could fall tozero in response to medical progress, while at the same time therate of inebriety might rise many fold (Jellinek, 1947: 39). Arrests Arrests for drunkenness also provide a sourceof information about the extent of drinking in the United States.It must be noted, however, that statistics of this sort vary withlocal police policies. For example, during a six-year period inthe 1930's, the arrests for drunkenness were from 14 to 31 timeshigher in Philadelphia than in New York (Kolb, 1941: 608). Nevertheless, gross statistics drawn from 383 cities indicatethat arrests for drunkenness per 10,000 population reached a highof 192 in 1916 and fell to 71 in 1920. From this level, they rosesteadily again to reach 157 in 1928 (Warburton, 1932: 102). Ofcourse, arrests prior to Prohibition may not bear the samerelation to the use of alcohol as they did subsequently,Warburton theorizes: . . . [U]nder Prohibition, especially during the earlyyears, police were more strict in making arrests, and . . . alarger proportion than formerly of persons appearing on thestreets under the influence of liquor are arrested. Also, sincethe sale of liquor is illegal and cannot be obtained in publicsaloons, and when the police are more strict in arrestingintoxicated persons, it is reasonable to suppose that drinking isless public and that fewer drunken persons appear on the streetsrelative to the quantity of liquor consumed (Warburton, 1932:103). Nevertheless, the cyclical trend suggested by these figurescoincides with statistics on alcoholism (Brown, 1932: 61, 71,77). Whatever their independent validity, however, they correlateearth the theory of one author that: [T] he l8th Amendment could not have been passed withoutthe support of the psychologically tolerant, made temporarilyintolerant by the stress of war. But when the moderates desertedthe drys in the time of peace, the hard core of the movement wasrevealed (Sinclair, 1962: 23--24). Without the support of the moderates, the author theorizes,Prohibition was to become itself a symbol of excess, unsupportedby the vast majority of the population. Outcome. What, then, did Prohibition accomplish? To a greatextent it eliminated the saloon from American life. While barsand taverns reopened joyfully following repeal, they ceased to bethe centers of systematic political corruption and debaucherywhich they had once been. Part of this may be attributable to thegreater sophistication of the electorate and politics generally.Part, no doubt, is owing to the fact that women were welcome ascustomers in the new cocktail lounges, having shown themselves tobe eager patrons of the speakeasies. And finally, the change in the character of the saloon waseffected by public determination that it should be changed. Thisattitude was expressed in the post-repeal statutes concerned withthe physical appearance of the saloon and the character ofpersons authorized to operate them. Prohibition did make the nation conscious that corruption ofthe law and of the populace may be the consequence of a law whichis not reflective of the morals and mores of the time. It playedout some of the deepest social class resentments, culminating inthe realization that the behavioral standards of some could notbe impressed -upon others. It demonstrated that the fervor of warand the cult of patriotism may be abused-and abuse the country inreturn. Repeal reimposed the burden of regulation upon the states.They were required to develop a system of control directed at theparticular objectives they wished to achieve. The post-repeal erawas to prove an exercise not only in states' rights but instates' responsibilities. 1933-1971: AFTER THE DELUGE On December 4, 1933, the day before final ratification of therepeal amendment, the President established the Federal AlcoholControl Administration, pursuant to Executive Order No. 6474.FACA was to have the power to grant or revoke permits to engagein the alcoholic beverage industry-not the brewing industry-aswell as the power to control plant capacity and production; itwas also to engage in consumer protection through regulationsdesigned to prevent misbranding and false advertising ofalcoholic beverages. In addition, FACA prohibited the ownershipof retail outlets by manufacturers and wholesalers (Harrison& Laine, 1936: 24-29). This scheme fell under the Schecter Poultry decision by theSupreme Court. The Treasury, Federal Trade, Commission and Foodand Drug Administration then moved in. A new alcohol controlagency was proposed, leading to a dispute as to whether it shouldbe independent or part of the Treasury. Joseph H. Choate, Jr., first head of the FACA, testified that: The Treasury has not been an organization whose duty it wasto study and understand the liquor business, the interest of thepublic in that business, or the method by which that businessought to be carried on in order to subserve the interests of boththe public and state governments. It has been a creature of oneidea, that one idea being, quite properly, to get revenue and getit as fast and as copiously as it could (Harrison &Laine, 1936: 33). The Department of the Treasury agreed with Choate's analysis. Nevertheless, this testimony was disregarded and the FederalAlcohol Administration was created as a division of Treasury in1935. This arrangement was superseded in 1936 when the Liquor TaxAdministration Act established FACA as an independent agency ofthe government. Soon thereafter it was reorganized, once again asan arm of the Department of Treasury, and even its separateidentity was abolished as of June 30, 1940. Today, the Treasuryretains full authority to administer all federal liquor laws. The current federal laws regulating trade in intoxicatingbeverages may be classified in the following categories: (1) Revenue: Taxes are imposed on rectifiers, brewers,manufacturers of stills, dealers; wholesale and retail stamps arerequired on distilled spirits (26 USC, 1971a). (2) Criminal Penalties: Criminal penalties are provided forunauthorized production, sale or possession, transportation intostates prohibiting sale, C.O.D. shipments and unlabeled shipments(26 USC, 1971b; 18 USC, 1971). (3) Interstate Transportation: Interstate shipments ofalcoholic beverages are subject to the laws of the receivingstate (27 USC, 1971a). (4) Permits: Importers, manufacturers and sellers ofintoxicating beverages must have permits (27 USC, 1971b). (5) Unfair Practices: Exclusive sales arrangements, tying,bribery and false advertising or labeling are prohibited (27 USC,1971b). The intent of the Federal Government to reserve all decisionsregarding regulation of consumption is quite clear from federalstatutes presently in force. The states have reacted with avariety of regulatory schemes controlling to varying degrees theseller, the buyer, the place, time and opportunity for sale and,through revenue measures, the cost. In 18 states, the state store or state monopoly system hasentirely displaced the private wholesale or retail sale ofintoxicating beverages. Other states permit the sale of liquor,wine and beer through private, licensed outlets. The license system may be implemented by different, means.Administration may be solely by the state, or control may beshared by the counties or municipalities. Local control may be exercised to a greater or lesser degree.For example, in the 1930's, immediately after repeal,Massachusetts and New Mexico permitted local boards to grantretail licenses only after investigation and approval ofapplicants by the state board. During the same period, otherstates, predominantly in the South, gave local authoritiessupplemental powers to issue licenses while requiring concurrentstate licenses as well. In some jurisdictions, the local license had to be obtainedfirst, and the state license could be granted thereafter. InIllinois, however, the state commission's power was curtailed byrequiring that a state license be granted once the local licensewas secured. And although the state was given the power to revokeits license, it was given no power to inspect places of sale todetermine grounds for revocation (Harrison & Laine, 1936:50-53). The license system has been suspect by many wets as well asdrys because of the opportunities it may afford for politicalabuse. On the other hand, there is substantial opinion whichholds direct participation in the sale of liquor in contempt. Asto the relative efficacy of each, there are no reliable means ofmaking a judgment. Each apparently depends on the integrity andcapacity of the individuals charged with the job of enforcementand oversight. Superimposed on the basic system of regulating the sale ofliquor are other sumptuary laws which are directed at thepurchaser. Sales are not permitted to minors or intoxicatedpersons. Credit is often prohibited on liquor sales as well.Criminal penalties may be imposed for driving under the influenceof alcohol as well as for drunken behavior. The sale of liquor by the drink is permitted in most states,but some still require that it be sold in packaged form only,reflecting the continuing fear of the resurrection of the saloon.In many states Sunday closing laws are enforced, and mandatoryclosing times are imposed upon bars and package stores alike.Sales are prohibited almost uniformly on Election Day, at leastduring polling hours, and, in many places, on Thanksgiving,Memorial Day, Christmas and other holidays. Local option is still granted in most states, in voting unitsranging from the plantation to the city or county. Of themonopoly or control states, only Utah and Wyoming fail to makeprovision for local option at all. Wyoming maintains a statemonopoly at the wholesale level only. Private retailer sellersare licensed. In the remaining monopoly states, it is often possible fortowns within a wet county to go dry, and sometimes vice versa. Ofthe 33 license states, only 10 (including the District ofColumbia) do not permit local option at any level. Notwithstanding the various patterns of regulation, SenatorArthur Capper's words of the 1930's still seem to be correct: We can repeal prohibition, but we cannot repeal the liquorproblem (Peterson, 1969: 126). Neither the states nor the population have yet come to gripswith the problems of alcoholism and alcohol abuse. Both themonopoly system and the license system are directed at otherconcerns. They, no more than Prohibition, have been able tocontrol or even alleviate the very real and dire consequences ofalcohol use by society. References Brown, F. W.: "Prohibition and mental Hygiene"Annals, 163: 61, 71, 76-77, 88, 1176 (September, 1932). Cherrington, E. H.: The Evolution of Prohibition In The UnitedStates of America, Westerville, Ohio: American Issue Press(1920), pp. 16, 18, 37-38, 49-51, 58, 92-93, 134, 156-162,165-169, 250-251, 317-330. Dobyns, F.: The Amazing Story of Repeal, Chicago: Willett,Clark & Co. (1940), pp. 5, 5-130 passim, 9, 22, 107, 132,160, 215, 292, 297. Feldman, H.: "Prohibition: Its Economic and IndustrialAspects," New York City: Appleton and Co. (1927), p. 397. Furnas, J. C.: The Life and Times of the Late Demon Rum, NewYork City: Putnam (1965), pp. 15, 80, 167, 183, 273, 281, 310,334-335. Grant: "The Liquor Traffic Before the 18thAmendment," Annals, 163: 1, 5 (September, 1932). Gustield, J. R.: The Symbolic Crusade, Urbana: University ofIllinois Press (1963), pp. 69-70, 76-77, 100, 108, 119, 127-128,135. Harrison, L. V. and Laine, E.: After Repeal, New York City: Harper & Bros. (1936), pp. 1-2, 24-29, 33, 50-53,63. Health, Education and Welfare: "Alcohol andAlcoholism," p. 41 (1968). Prepared for NationalClearinghouse for Mental Health Information. History of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division, pp. 1420, 28(undated, unsigned monograph in the library of the DistilledSpirits Institute). Hu, T.: The Liquor Tax in the U.S.: 1791-1947, New York City:Columbia University Press (1950), pp. 48, 51-52. Internal RevenueService: "Alcohol and Tobacco Summary Statistics," pp.6, 73, 95 (1966, 1970, 1921). Jellinek, E. M.: "Death From Alcoholism in the U.S. in1940," Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 3 (3): 484(December, 1942). : "Recent Trends in Alcoholism," Quartely Journal ofStudies on Alcohol, 8 (1) : 39 (September, 1947). Kolb., L.: "Alcoholism and Public Health," QuarterlyJournal of Studies on Alcohol, 1: 608, 610, 613 (March, 1941). Krout, J. A.: The Origins of Prohibition, New York City:Russell & Russell (1967), pp. 29-30. Lee, H.: How Dry We Were: Prohibition Revisited, EngleWoodCliffs: Prentice Hall Inc. (1963), pi). 15-16, 1819, 22-23,29-30, 34-35, 42, 68, 212, 231. Malzburg, B.: "A Study of First Admissions with AlcoholPsychoses in New York State 1943-44," Quarterly Journal ofStudies on Alcohol, 10: 294 (December, 1949). Miller, P. andJohnson, T. H. (eds.) : 11 The Puritans, New York City: AmericanBook Co. (1963), pp. 430-431. National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement:"Report On The Enforcement of the, Prohibition Laws of theU.S.," H.R. Doe. No. 722, 71st Cong., 3d Sess., 8, 345(1931). Odegard, P. H.: Pressure Politics-The Story of The AntiSaloonLeague, New York City: Columbia University Press (1928), pp. 23,40-60, 53, 70-72, 126. Peterson, W.: "Vitalizing Liquor Control," Journalof Criminal Law and Crime, 40: 119-120, 122-123, 126 (July,1939). Pollock, H. M.: Mental Disease and Social Welfare, Utica,N.Y.: State Hospital Press (1942), 1). 113. Rice, S. A. (ed.) : Statistics In Social Studies,Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press (1930), 1). 122. Rosenbloom, M. V.: The Liquor Industry: A Surrey of ItsHistory, Manufacture, Problems of Control and IMportance,Braddock: Ruffsdale Distilling Co. (1937 ed.), pp. 27, 51-52(1935)). Rush, B.: "Inquiry Into the Effects of Ardent SpiritsUpon The Human Body and Mind," Quarterly Journal of Studieson Alcohol, 4: 323,325-326 (September, 1943). Rutgers Center ofAlcohol Studies: "Selected Statistics on Consumption ofAlcohol (1850-1968) And On Alcoholism (1930-1968)," 1). 4(1970). Sinclair, A. : The Era of Excess, Boston: Little, Brown(1962), pp. 23-24, 43, 51, 108, 122, 176-177, 190, 193-195, 198,206, 303, 364-365, 367-368. Tillitt, M. H. : The Price of Prohibition, -New York City:Harcourt, Brace & Co. (1932), pp. 35-36, 114-115. Timberlake, J. H.: Prohibition and the Progressive Morement,Cambridge: Harvard University Press (1963), pp. 34-38, 42-55,67-79, 83, 85-86, 98, 118. Towne, C. IL: The Rise and Fall of Prohibition, New York City:The MacMillan Co. (1923), pp. 211-212. U.S. Department of Commerce: "U.S. Census MortalityStatistics," 55 (1924). Warburton, C.: The Economic Results of Prohibition, New YorkCity: Columbia University Press (1932), pp. 102104, 216. 26 U SC � � 5081-5416 (1971a). 26 USC �� 5061-5691 (1971b). 18 U SC � � 1261-1265 (1971). 27 USC �� 121, 122 (1971a). 27 USC � 205 (1971b). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B22-18IA086-000619-B005-263http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc2b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033527 text/html 92457HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:35:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:27 GMTContent-length: 92239 History of Tobacco Regulation* Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse History of Tobacco Regulation* *This section is based in part on a paper prepared for theCommission by Jane Lang McGrew, an attorney from Washington, D.C. Since 1613, when John Rolfe introduced a successful experimentin tobacco cultivation in Virginia (Morison, 1965 : 52) the leafhas assumed major social, industrial, economic and medicalimplications. Consequently, persons concerned with tobacco on acommercial or personal basis have been subject to a variety ofdifferent regulations over the past 360 years. Tobacco has been attacked by social observers and medicalauthorities for the damage it has allegedly done, to the socialand physical condition of man. Yet it has also provided asubstantial source of revenue to the state and Federalgovernments of the United States. As is now the case with alcohol, tobacco has long been subjectto regulatory controls over the quantity and quality ofproduction. On the other hand, sumptuary laws affecting tobaccohave been far fewer-and weaker-than those aimed at alcohol. Infact, there has never been a time when tobacco was prohibitedthroughout the United States although consumption under certaincircumstances has been forbidden at various times in differentjurisdictions. Tobacco-associated today with smoking of cigarettes, and to alesser extent, of pipes and cigars-has been popular at times forboth snuffing and chewing. Indeed, until about 1870 cigaretteswere relatively rare in the United States, and almost all tobaccoconsumed domestically was chewed during the mid-19th century(Gottsegen, 1940: 9-10). What ever the preferred mode of consumption, however, the,commodity has always been the subject of debate respecting theappropriate governmental attitude. On the one hand, proponents ofthe leaf stress its social benefits and its economic andindustrial significance. Some enthusiasts even endorse itsalleged medical and psychological benefits. Opposed are those whocite the health hazards of smoking and others who are convincedof its immorality. The motivation for regulation has come from both sides of thecontroversy. Most sumptuary restrictions were fostered by thelatter group in an effort to suppress the habit. Those who seekto institutionalize and foster use of the drug focus on theregulation of the quantity and quality of production. This section does not attempt to weigh the merits of thevarious regulatory schemes. Rather, it will trace from JohnRolfe's day the three threads of regulation which havecircumscribed both the producer and consumer of tobacco in theUnited States. REGULATION OF PRODUCTION In the opinion of King James I of England, tobacco was"loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to thebrain" and "dangerous to the lungs" (Middleton,1953: 93). Whether the King was prescient, or simply sensitive,was irrelevant in the 17th and 18th centuries, however, fortobacco rapidly became the mainstay of the Maryland and Virginiaeconomics. Within seven years of John Rolfe's first imaginativeexperiment,, Virginia exported nothing but tobacco and a littlesassafrass to England (Middleton, 1953: 93-94). Almost asquickly, the leaf became the staple of the colony of Maryland andcompetition developed in Carolina as well. In Massachusetts Bay, the product fared less well. The firstgeneral letter (April 17,1629) from an official of the NewEngland Company to the Massachusetts Bay settlers prohibited theplanting of tobacco except in small quantities for medicinalpurposes (Werner, 1922: 100). Next door in Connecticut, however,the colonists attempted to rival the southern planters with alocal leaf. Indeed, the infant industry was coddled by theprotectionist General Court at New Haven, which promulgated arule in 1641 that: No persons within this jurisdiction shall [smoke] any otherTobacco but such as is or shall be planted within these[districts], except they have license from the Courte (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut, undated: 20). Notwithstanding the royal attitude and the fear of certainpatent holders of the London Company that Virginia had become a"colony founded on smoke" (Tobacco Institute,,Virginia, 1971 : 19; Middleton, 1953: 94), England encouraged thegrowth of the tobacco industry. Monopolies to import tobacco fromthe colonies were granted by the Crown to court favorites whosoon prospered as a result of this trade. In 1621, a bill was introduced which, according to onecontemporary commentator, was "extremely remarkable":No tobacco was to be imported after the 1st of October, 1621,except from Virginia and Bermuda; and, after that day, none wasto be planted in England. Although the act was initially defeatedby the House of Lords, James I in 1922 himself granted the importmonopoly to the Virginia and Bermuda, companies and prohibitedthe domestic cultivation of tobacco (Brooks, 1952: 88). The system worked well for the British importers, but themethods of financing they employed became onerous to the colonialplanters. The tobacco was marketed by consignment to an Englishmerchant who deposited the proceeds of the sale to the planters'accounts. Often, however, the high commissions charged and thecost, of goods ordered by the Virginians in payment for theircrop contributed to the growth of colonial indebtedness. Theextension of credit to cover the deficiencies caused the debts togrow constantly, but the only alternative to the consignmentsystem was to sell the product in the colony at a lower price(Middleton, 1953: 104-107). Industrial competition in this market provided the impulse forcertain regulatory relief. Importation of the Carolinian productinto Virginia was forbidden by an act of 1679, amended in 1726 toprohibit importation by land as well as by sea. Nor was NorthCarolina permitted to export its tobacco from Virginia ports. InGreat Britain, the Privy Council looked with disfavor upon suchcolonial legislation which threatened the financial well-being ofthe merchants and so disallowed the Virginia Act in 1731(Middleton, 1953: 114-115). Competition similarly induced both Virginia and Maryland toenact laws prescribing the dimensions of the hogshead in whichtobacco was packaged in 1658. Vying for purchasers, the twocolonies gradually enlarged the statutory size of the hogsheaduntil, under edict from the Privy Council in Britain, Marylandwas ordered to pass a gauge act establishing the size of thehogshead in the same dimensions as those fixed in Virginia. Notwithstanding such legislation, however, the manufacture ofhogsheads was still characterized by carelessness andirregularity until the warehouse inspection system went intoeffect in the 18th century (Middleton, 1953: 116-117). It was not long before the colonial planters were faced with amore serious problem-overproduction-which was causing a declinein prices as well as quality of the leaf. In 1619, the firsttobacco inspection law was passed by the Virginia House ofBurgesses, ordering the lowest grade of tobacco to be destroyedand prohibiting "second growth" tobacco and themarketing of trash leaves. This act was followed in 1621 by a more direct attempt torestrict production. Each cultivator was required to limit hisgrowth to 1000 plants of nine leaves each. Although this orderwas soon rescinded as a patent failure, an act of 1629 permittedeach planter to tend only 3000 plants with an additionalallowance of 1000 for non-laboring 'women and each child (Brooks,1952: 96). Notwithstanding the statutory effort, the problem intensified.Virginia attempted to encourage the other tobacco colonies toreach agreements restricting plantings, but in Maryland, LordBaltimore resisted. If planters were poor, he asserted: It is not from the low price of Tobacco, but from theirowne sloth, ill husbandry and profusely spending their croppe inBrandewine, and other liquors (Robert, 1949: 11). Carolina, Maryland and Virginia actually reached a decision toprohibit the planting of the staple from. February 1667 toFebruary 1668. This "stint" proved a less effectivemeans of control than the winds of 1667, which almost destroyedthe, crop ready for harvest that year (Tobacco Institute,Virginia, 1971: 19). Acts of God failed to provide an ultimate solution, however,and severe economic dislocation in Maryland and Virginiaintensified. By 1681, the Virginia governor, Lord Culpeper,complained: ... [T]hat which is more to us than all other things puttogether, and will be the speedy and certain ruin of the colony,is the low price of tobacco. The thing is so fatal and desperatethat there is no remedy; the market is overstocked and every cropoverstocks it more. It is commonly said that there is tobaccoenough now in London to last all England for five years.... Ourthriving is our undoing, and our purchase of negroes, byincreasing the supply of tobacco, has greatly contributed thereto(Brooks, 1952: 112-113). The failure of the Virginia Assembly to pass another actrequiring a "stint"' led the so-called "cuttersand pluckers" to take the matter into their own hands in1682 by burning both their own crops and the plants of theirneighbors (Roberts, 1949: 11). The riot stimulated legislativeaction in 1684 of a less helpful sort: the destruction of tobaccowas made a criminal offense,, subject to the death penalty(Brooks, 1952: 12). Seventeenth century quality control laws proved no moresuccessful in the effort to relieve the depression of theindustry. Renewed efforts were made in early years of the nextcentury, however. In 1713, the Virginia House of Burgesses established awarehouse system to enforce tobacco inspection. Forty publicwarehouses were created. Strong opposition to the system led thePrivy Council to disallow the act In 1717, but the ensuingdepression of the 1720's was convincing evidence of the need forrelief. Accordingly, the system was reinstated with Britishapproval in 1730, cornplete with public warehouses and officialinspectors (Middleton, 1953: 120-121). The apparent success of the system appealed to Maryland,suffering also from a surfeit of tobacco. "Tobacco, ourmoney, is worth nothing wrote one Marylander in 1724, "'and[there is] not a Shirt to be had for Tobacco this year in all ourcountry" (Tobacco Institute, Maryland, 1971: 21). Tobacco riots ensued when the Mary] and Assembly initiallyrefused to follow Virginia's example. One individual was moved toinform Lord Baltimore that no improvement in the economic stateof the colony was possible until inspection laws were passed that"will prevent the sending to Market Such trash as is unfitfor any other use but Manure" (Tobacco Institute,,,Maryland, 1971: 23). Accordingly, Maryland followed Virginia inthe creation of an inspection system in 1747,and Carolina didlikewise in 1754 (Brooks, 1952: 165). Tobacco entirely dominated the economic and social structureof Virginia and Maryland. "Tobacco requires us to abhorcommunities or townships," wrote a 17th century governor ofMaryland, "since a planter cannot carry on his affairswithout considerable elbow room within his plantation"(Brooks, 1952: 98). In Virginia, tobacco had gained such ascendancy that it wasused as money. For example, when, in 1621, a cargo of twelveyoung women made its way to the colony, each one was valued at120 pounds of the best leaf (Brooks, 1952: 93). By law,Virginia's ministers were paid in tobacco at 16,000 poundsannually in 1696. The law provided that: A competent and sufficient provision for the clergy will bethe only means to supply this dominion with able and faithfulMinisters whereby the glory of God may be advanced,the churchpropagated, and the people edified (Werner, 1922: 102). Not until the Option Act was passed by the Virginia Assemblyin 1755 could the clergy's fees be paid in either money ortobacco (Brooks, 1952: 167). The regulation of tobacco in the colonies was devised inresponse to the industry with the intent to further theprosperity of the planters who dominated the economy. This themecontinued to pervade all related regulatory efforts in thetobacco-producing states thereafter, as new practices developedin the marketing of the leaf. The initial hogshead inspection system gradually gave way tothe sale of loose-leaf tobacco by auction. In 1849 the VirginiaCode recognized these methods in lieu of the sale of hogsheads ofthe leaf as provided in the 1730 Act. By 1865, the tobaccoauction had completely replaced the earlier marketing techniquesin Virginia (Tobacco Institute, Virginia, 1971: 28-29). More than a half century later Maryland followed suit. In1939, the loose-leaf auction warehouse system was introduced toreplace the hogshead system, and the conversion occurred almostovernight. The practices engaged in are regulated by the MarylandState Tobacco Authority, established in 1947 by law. TheAuthority itself is supervised by eight representatives selectedby the Governor from the producing counties, the University ofMaryland, the buyers and the sellers (Tobacco Institute,Maryland, 1971: 9-10). The Federal Government came to recognize the significance ofthe tobacco industry in response to state pressures. Accordingly,since 1930, several bills have been enacted to aid the growers. Enacted in 1935, the Tobacco Inspection Act directs theSecretary of Agriculture to establish quality standards and todesignate auction markets (7 U.S.C. 511 (b) and (d)). Thefollowing year, the Tobacco Control Act was passed, bestowingCongressional approval upon state compacts which regulate theproduction of tobacco, and subsidizing the expenses of the statecommissions involved (7 U.S.C. 515). Thus, the two elements ofinitial colonial regulation were preserved: the encouragement ofquality and the discouragement of quantity. The latter objective was further implemented by theAgricultural Adjustment Act of 1938. Since that time, paritypayments have been made to tobacco producers: In amounts which, together with the proceeds thereof, willprovide a return to such producers which is as nearly equal toparity price as the funds so made available will permit (7U.S.C. 1303). In addition, the Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to setnational marketing quotas respecting each kind of tobacco (7U.S.C. 1312), to apportion the quotas among the states, and toallot the portions among the farms (7 U.S.C. 1314). Penalties areimposed for overproduction (7 U.S.C. 1314). There is nothing subtle about these measures, of course. Theirintent is obvious: to assure the economic stability of anindustry which, as of 1960, provided the United States populationwith more than 150,000,000 pounds of manufactured tobacco forconsumption annually (Heimann, 1960: 93), and which provided morethan $4.8 billion in taxes in 1971 (USDA, Tobacco Situation,1971b: 44). During the same year, growers' gross receipts reached about$900 million (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 2), while cigarettesales alone grossed for the manufacturer and seller approximately$5 billion (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 53). The commercialmotivation is sound enough if considered abstractly. Whencombined with the revenue incentive, however, it has largelyobscured sumptuary controls. REGULATION FOR REVENUE Alexander Hamilton's tax package of 1794 proposed the firstfederal excise taxes upon tobacco products. To the distress ofPhiladelphia snuff manufacturers (Brooks, 1952: 146), however,the tax was restricted after serious Congressional debate totheir product only. James Madison led the opposition to a general tobacco tax; hisviews were summarized in the Annals of Congress on May 2, 1794: As to the subject before the House, it was proper to choosetaxes the least unequal. Tobacco excise was a burden the mostunequal. It fell upon the poor, upon the sailors, day-laborers,and other people of these classes, while the rich will oftenescape it (Robert, 1949: 100). The legislative decision was probably tempered as well byconsiderations of the enforceability of the measure: snuff had tobe manufactured, while quid and pipe tobacco were often homegrownleaf at the time (Heimann, 1960: 155). In any case, the snuffbill was ultimately enacted, modified, suspended and repealed,with small, if any, effect upon federal revenues. The opportunity to distill tax money from tobacco was seizedupon more vigorously at the time of the Civil War. On July 1,1862, an ad valorem tax was imposed upon cigars for the firsttime. This tax was raised two years later when a separate taxupon cigarettes was also imposed (Werner, 1922: 358). (Even theConfederacy sought to levy a tax-in-kind upon tobacco crops, butwas precluded from doing so by the inspection system whichrequired the inspector to deliver the full amount of tobaccospecified in the warehouse receipt (Robert, 1949: 117).) Thereafter, the taxes were raised in 1865, 1866 and 1875. Atemporary reduction followed, until the Spanish-American Warnecessitated further increases. Concurrently, taxes were leviedupon smoking and manufactured tobacco and snuff, lest the burdenfall unequally upon smokers (Werner, 1922: 559). By 1880, the tobacco taxes bad largely stabilized. At thattime, they accounted for 31% of total federal tax receipts, or$38.9 million. Of this, 50% of the collections was derived fromsmoking and chewing tobacco, 40% from cigars and cheroots, andless than 2% from cigarettes (Heimann, 1960: 156). Since that time, federal tax collections on tobacco productshave risen almost annually. Between 1910 and 1920, they increasedmore than 500%, the greatest increase in any single decade. By1970, they accounted for almost $2.1 billion, down slightly fromthe two preceding years (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5). Indicative of changing patterns of consumption, the taxes oncigarettes, as a percentage of the total federal tobacco revenuejumped from 13.6% in 1910 to 51.1% in 1920. By 1970, thepercentage at 97.2% far outdistanced those revenues derived fromother forms of the product (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5). Excise taxes have proved profitable and easy to collect. Therevenue schemes are simple on both the federal (26 U.S.C. 5701 etseq.) and state levels. In the past, no justification for themhas been deemed necessary since Madison's protest. No elaboratelicensing or state monopoly system, such as those designed tocontrol commerce in alcohol, has ever been imposed. In 1921, Iowa became the first state to cash in on the cropdirectly by taxing cigarettes. By 1930, 11 other states hadadopted the revenue measure (Robert, 1949: 256). In 1950, 40 states and the District of Columbia taxedcigarettes. The rates ranged from one cent to five cents for apack of 20 except in Louisiana which levied an eight cent tax oncigarettes. In 1958, Montana imposed an equivalent rate. Between 1950 and 1962, 43 of the 47 taxing states raised theirrates at least once. The frequent increase in cigarette taxesnarrowed the gap between the rates in low tax states and highertax states. In the 12-year period, the median tax rate rose fromthree cents to six cents per pack (Federal Trade Commission,1970: 3) ; the maximum rate remained at eight cents in Texas,Louisiana, Montana and New Mexico, in contrast to the two centrate in the District of Columbia and Kentucky. The four leading states in terms of both production andrelative dependence on the crop have been North Carolina, SouthCarolina, Kentucky and Virginia, the latter two being the onlystates in the history of cigarette taxation to decrease theirtaxes; the reduction was only .5 cent (from three cents to twoand a half cents) in 1960 and 1961, respectively. By 1966, Oregon became the 49th state to impose a tax oncigarettes; the rate was four cents per pack. Finally, in 1969North Carolina imposed a cigarette tax-two cents. The cigarette excise taxes continued to increase during thesixties. By 1970, the taxes ranged from North Carolina's twocents to Pennsylvania's 18 cents for a weighted average of 10.7cents. Twenty nine states levied taxes of 10 cents or more perpack (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 40). Local governmentssuperimposed further excise taxes on the state taxes, rangingfrom one cent to 10 cents per package (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970:iv). By mid-1971, the range had widened further Connecticut at 21cents and North Carolina at two cents, the weighted average statetax being 11.1 cents (USDA, Tobacco Situation , 1971a: 7). TOBACCO REVENUES A peculiar relationship exists between production and revenue.In 1970, cash receipts from tobacco brought in $11 million forPennsylvania; tobacco farmers and cigarette taxes amassed $194.6million for the state. By comparison growers in North Carolinacollected $576 million while the state collected only $13.4million in cigarette revenues (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b:43). The federal excise tax on a package of cigarettes is currentlyeight cents and has remained so since 1951. The combined stateand federal tax was highest in Pennsylvania; 26 cents for 20cigarettes, which was 58.2% of the retail price. Connecticut's 24cents and Texas's 23.5 cents were close behind; the average forthe United States was 46.8%. To the Federal and state governments today, tobacco is afinancial asset. The total federal and state revenue collected from all tobacco products in 1971 amounted to over $4.7 billion.Local governments excised the product further bringing the sumtotal to $4.8 million (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 44). From the years 1890 to 1930 cigarette tax collections fromtobacco soared from approximately $1 million to over $339million. By 1950, they exceeded $1.2 billion. Totals for the years 1890 to 1970 are recorded in thefollowing chart (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5) Cigarette tax Years Collections 1890 $1,100,000 1900 4,000,000 1910 7,900,000 1920 151,300,000 1930 359,800,000 1940 533,000,000 1950 1,242,800,000 1960 1,863,600.000 1970 2,036,100,000 REGULATION OF CONSUMPTION Even as far back as the 16th century, smoking was consideredto have medicinal value. Juan de Cardenas, a Spanish physicianwho lived in Mexico in the late 1500's, wrote that "Soldierssubject to privations, kept off cold, hunger, thirst by smokingand all the inhabitants of the hot countries of the Indiesalleviate their discomforts by the smoke of this blessed andmedicinal weed" (Wagner, 1971: 63-64). During, the recurrent epidemics of plague in the 17th century,it was widely believed that smokers were spared; it has beenreported that men who attended the sick and accompanied the deadkept their pipes lit (Wagner, 1971: 63-64). In 1614, one Scottish doctor praised the tobacco plant which: Prepareth the stomach for meat; it maketh a clear voice: itmaketh a sweet breath . . . in a few words it is the princess ofphysical plants (Gottsegen, 1940: 87). King James disagreed strenuously, and in 1604 ordered asubstantial increase in the import duty on the leaf. Smoking, hewrote in "A Counterblaste to Tobacco", is: A custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmfulto the brain, dangerous to the lungs, and in the black stinkingfume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible Stygian smoke ofthe pit that is bottomless (Brooks, 1952:56, 71). Another more passionate moralist wrote: . . . imagine thou beheldest here a firme-sucker's wifemost fearfully fuming forth very fountains of blood, howling foranguish of heart, weeping, wailing, and wringing her handstogether . . . while she _pitifully pleads with her husband thus:Oh husband, my husband . . . ! Why dost thou so vainly prefer avanishing filthy fume before my permanent virtues? (Brooks,1952: 72). Notwithstanding such alliterative literature, the habit ofsmoking increased in popularity, particularly in the colonies. AFrench visitor observed in 1686 that: Large quantities of it [tobacco] are used in this country,besides what they sell. Everyone smokes while working and idling.I sometimes went to hear the sermon; their churches are in thewoods, and when everyone has arrived the minister and all theothers smoke before going in. The preaching over, they do thesame thing before parting. They have seats for that purpose. Itwas here I saw that everybody smokes, men, women, girls and boysfrom the age of seven years (Robert, 1949: 99). It was said that even in New England, women of the colony"smoke in bed, smoke as they knead their bread, smoke whilstthey're cooking" (Gottsegen, 1940: 147). In the tobacco colonies, of course, there was no attempt torestrict Consumption of tobacco. It was, after all, theireconomic mainstay. Officials in the northern colonies were less enthusiasticabout the habit, however. In 1632, the General Court ofMassachusetts Bay took the initiative and forbade smoking inpublic tinder penalty of a fine (Tobacco Institute,Massachusetts, 1971 : 17). In 1638, the proscription was expandedto prohibit anyone from smoking in any inn or public house exceptin his own room "so as neither the master of the house norany of the guests there shall take offense thereat which if theydo, then such person is forthwith to forebear upon paying of twoshillings sixpence fine for every offense" (Werner, 1922:100). This law was followed by another in 1646 which prohibitedsmoking except on a journey of five miles or more from any town.Nor could a citizen of the colony bring a pipe or tobacco intothe precincts of the court (Werner, 1922: 100), although he mightsmoke at "the ordinary tyme of repast comonly calleddynner" (Heimann, 1960: 83). Plymouth colony was similarly strict. In 1638, a law waspassed forbidding anyone from smoking on the streets. Thefollowing year, it was decreed that jurymen might not smoke, onpain of a five shilling penalty. In 1641, even the importation of tobacco was forbidden,although the law was repealed a year later. A law passed in 1646prohibited all from smoking, but exempted "soldiers in timeof their training." And, finally, in 1669, it was orderedthat anyone found smoking on the Sabbath within two miles of ameeting house, would be fined 12 pence (Werner, 1922: 101). The colony at New Haven, Connecticut, essayed a like series ofstatutes to regulate tobacco consumption. In 1646, the GeneralCourt decreed that: No person under the age of twenty years nor any other thathath not already accustomed himself to the use thereof, shalltake any tobacko, until he hath brough a certificate under thehands of [a physician] that it is usefull for him, and also, thathe hath received a license from the court for the same.... Noneshall take any tobacko, publickly in the street or any openplaces unless on a journey of at least ten miles. (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut: 20-21). Within three years those laws were repealed (Werner, 1922:102). However, it was further ordered in 1655 that: No tobacco shall be taken in the streets, yards or aboutethe howses in any plantation or farme in this jurisdictionwithout dores, neere or aboute the towne, or in the meetinghowse, or body of the trayne Souldiors, or any other place wherethey may doe mischief thereby, under the penalty of 84 pence apipe for a time, wch is to goe to him that informs and prosecuts (Heimann,1960: 83). As a result of the regulation, snooping became a profitableundertaking. In the end, however, the laws were of no avail insuppressing tobacco. By 1680, the governor of Connecticut recognized thesignificance of the leaf and reported that, "We have no needof Virginia's trade, most people planting so much Tobacco as theyspend," (Heimann, 1960: 84). Indeed, by the early 18thcentury, New England-grown tobacco was being produced in greatenough quantity for both domestic consumption and export (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut: 22-23). Tobacco was not one of the major concerns of the 18th centuryeither before or after the Revolution. Social reform wasgenerally secondary to political issues. By the end of thecentury, however, Dr. Benjamin Rush had published his"Observations upon the influence of the Habitual use ofTobacco upon Health, Morals, and Property" in his collectionof Essays, Literary, Moral and Philosophical. It appeared in1798, and stressed the Doctor's thesis that smoking and chewingprovoked drunkenness: One of the usual effects of smoking and chewing is thirst.This thirst cannot be allayed by water, for no sedative or eveninsipid liquor will be relished after the mouth and throat havebeen exposed to the stimulus of the smoke, or juice of Tobacco. Adesire of course is excited for strong drinks, and these whentaken between meals soon lead to intemperance and drunkenness.One of the greatest sots I ever knew, acquired a love for ardentspirits by swallowing ends of Tobacco, which he, (lid, to escapedetection in the use of it. . . (Robert, 1949: 106). There was little immediate response to Rush's dire warnings,although in the year his tract was published, Boston enacted astatute to prohibit the carrying of a lighted pipe or cigar inpublic streets-apparently with the intent to reduce the hazard offire (Brooks, 1952: 245). An anti-tobacco crusade was launched in the 19th century,although with considerably less fervor that its sister movementagainst alcohol. Among the leaders were Rev. George Trask whosaid tobacco and alcohol were Satan's twins; and the Rev. OrinFowler, who declared in 1833: "Rum-drinking will not cease,,till tobacco-chewing and tobacco smoking and snuff -taking shallcease" (Robert, 1949: 107). Another, Dr. Joel Shew,attributed delirium tremens, perverted sexuality, impotency,insanity and cancer to the effects of smoking and chewing(Brooks, 1952: 219). The crusade warned as the pipe continued to attract adherents.From the 18th century on, the cigar too began to grow in favor,particularly after 1840. It is estimated that by 1850, theaverage number of cigars smoked was approximately 19 per capita.Within 10 years, the number had increased to about 26 (Gottsegen,1940: 8-10). Women smoked and chewed as well as the men. Indeed, Mrs.Andrew Jackson and Mrs. Zachary Taylor both smoked their pipes inthe White House (Heimann, 1960: 90). And, of course, the otherresidents of the Capital engaged heavily in the practices of bothchewing and spitting, to the extent that Charles Dickens, duringhis tour of the States, felt called upon to report that: Washington may be called the headquarters oftobaccotinctured saliva.... In all the public places of America,this filthy custom is recognized. In the courts of law, the judgehas his spittoon, the crier his, the witness his, and theprisoner his; while the jurymen and spectators are provided for.. . . The stranger will find [the custom] in its full bloom ofglory, luxuriant in all its alarming recklessness, at Washington (Brooks,1952: 215-216). Chewing and snuffing remained popular until the time of theCivil War. Thereafter, cigarette smoking was gradually adopted inNorth America, a habit indirectly acquired through the Britishfrom their Turkish and French allies during the Crimean War(Werner, 1922: 105). By 1870, approximately 13.9 million cigarettes were smokedannually in the United States, or .36 per capita. Over the next60 years, the number was to reach 976.91 per capita (Gottsegen,1940: 28). As more persons took to cigarettes, the zeal of reformers,which had ebbed during the Civil War, was renewed. Pamphlets,like those of the Temperance Movement, were published, urgingabstinence from smoking: "I'll never use tobacco, no; It is a filthy weed; I'll never put it in my mouth." Said Little Robert Reed. "It hurts the health ; it makes bad breath; 'Til very bad indeed. I'll never, never use it, no!" Said Little Robert Reed (Brooks, 1952: 242-243). During the period following the Civil War and prior to theformation of the American Tobacco Company in 1890, theanti-liquor forces continued to snipe at tobacco in all forms. Areformed drinker and temperance lecturer, John B. Gough, wouldpull from his pocket a square of tobacco, smell it as if it werea rose, cry out "Ali you black devil, I love-you" andthrow it away. The anti-tobacconists were led by Lucy Gaston, the greatest,warrior in the anti -cigarette campaign who was trained in theoffice of the Women's Christian Temperance Union and then movedover into the anti-tobacco Movement in the 1890's. Miss Gastonencouraged children to wear anti-tobacco pins or buttons andorganized armies of children to sing and preach to and againsttheir smoking elders (Wagner, 1971: 40). "All hostility to tobacco seems nowadays to beconcentrated on cigarettes," noted Harper's Weekly,observing the scene in 1905 (Robert, 1949: 169). It was scarcelya startling revelation. Twenty years earlier, the New York Timeseditorialized that: A grown man has no possible excuse for thus imitating thesmall boy.... The decadence of Spain began when the Spaniardsadopted cigarettes and if this pernicious habit obtains amongadult Americans the ruin of the Republic is close at hand . . . (Brooks,1952: 253). Miss Gaston witnessed some legislation victories. Between 1895and 1921, 14 states banned the sale of cigarettes (Neuberger,1963: 52). Even in the city of New York it was declared unlawfulfor women to smoke in public (Brooks, 1952: 271). Curiously,However, the city of Boston repealed its law which prohibitedsmoking in public in 1880 (Gottsegen, 1940: 153). The apparent success of the prohibitionists revived theanti-tobacconists' enthusiasm. "Prohibition is won; now fortobacco!" pledged Billy Sunday. Miss Gaston also renewed herdedication and actually announced her candidacy for thepresidency of the United States in 1920 on an antitobaccoplatform. For many anti-tobacconists, when it became apparent that theelder generation may be lost, the war against tobacco was focusedon the youth of the country. The National Education Associationpledged its membership to cooperate in efforts made in the city,state and nation to safeguard the health and morals of youth fromcigarette smoking to the end that high ideals for Americanmanhood may be, preserved for the coming generation (Hamilton,1927: 168). The National Congress of PTA, in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1926resolved "to lend its force to the cause of eliminatingthroughout the United State-, the use of cigarettes by minors andmake this a special work for the ensuing year for the good of ouryouth" (Hamilton, 1927: 168). It is for these reasons that the WCTU declared an educationalwar against tobacco, but declined to seek prohibitory legislation(Robert, 1949: 247). The disenchanting experience of Prohibition, the omnipresenceof the tobacco industry, the need for new sources of staterevenues and the prevalence and popularity of cigarette smokingcombined to frustrate the anti-tobacco campaign. Cigarettes didprovide a new source of revenue. Federal income from tobaccotaxes soared to new heights because of increased cigaretteconsumption and advanced rates. In any event, by 1927, each of the 14 states which had enactedprohibitory laws against cigarettes had repeated them (Neuberger,1963: 52). Immediately thereafter these, states imposed taxesupon the once forbidden product (Robert, 1949: 256; Federal TradeCommission, 1970: 3). STATE REGULATION Only those laws which forbade the sale of tobacco products tominors remain on the books, a trend set by New Jersey andWashington in 1883 (Gottsegen, 1940: 155). All but a few statutes restricting tobacco products to minorswere enacted between 1916-1920, simultaneous to the developmentand popularity of the domestic-blend cigarette. All 50 states bad laws banning sales to minors by 1950. Sincethen, Georgia,. Louisiana, and Wisconsin have repealed theirs leo 47 states plus the District of Columbia, WIL Vs prohibitingsales to minors. The most common age of restriction for cigarettes and tobaccoproducts today applies to persons under the age of 18. In aneffort to ensure stricter enforcement 11 states have lowered theage of restriction from 21 to 15 (Tobacco Merchants Association,1971: 1-2). In contrast to this trend, however, the, CaliforniaLegislature, 1971 defeated a bill to allow school smoking areasand lowering the sale to minor restrictions to 15 years old (NICSmoking and Health, 1971: 1). According to a Special Report released by the TobaccoMerchants Association of the United States, the liability forinfractions in all states is on the vendor and donor ofcigarettes. In a few states, manufacturer and persons advising orcompelling the minors to smoke, or owning the premise where suchbehavior occurs are also liable. However, in some states theinfraction does not extend to the parent or guardian. Some statespenalize the minor himself and others require that he divulge hissource. Most of the statutes that prohibit the furnishing ofcigarettes to minors extend the ban also to one or more othertobacco products. Only I 1 states restrict the sale"only" to cigarettes. The efficacy of such statutes, inthe day of the cigarette machine, is subject to substantialskepticism. A complete listing of existing state statutes concerningpossession by and sales to minors follows (Tobacco MerchantsAssociation, 1971: 3-4) : State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia ,see footnotes at end of table. Sale to minors Prohi I bited Age Yes Minor Yes Under 18 Yes Minor YeS Under 18 Yes Under 18 Yes Under 16 Yes Under 16 Yes Under 17 .. Yes Under 16 Yes Minor No provision Use or possession Prohibited Age No provision No provision Yes I Minor. No provision Yes (4). No provision No provision No provision No provision No provision No provision Sale to minors Use or possession State Prohibited Age Prohibited Age Hawaii Yes Under 15 No provision Idaho Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Illinois Yes 5 Under 18 Yes Under 18. Indiana Yes Under 16 Yes Under 21. Iowa Yes Under 18 (57) Under 18. Kansas Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Kentucky Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Louisiana No provision No provision Maine Yes Under 16 No provision Maryland Yes Under 15 No provision Massachusetts Yes' Under 18 No provision Michigan Yes Under 21 Yes Under 21. Minnesota Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Mississippi Yes5 Under 18 No provision Missouri Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Montana Yes Under 18 No provision Nebraska Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Nevada Yes 5 Under 18 No provision New Hampshire Yes Minor No provision New Jersey Yes Under 16 No provision New Mexico Yes5 Under 18 8 No provision New York Yes Under 18 No provision North Carolina Yes Under 17 No provision North Dakota Yes Under 21 Yes Under 18.9 Ohio Yes Under 18 No provision Oklahoma Yes Minor (6) Minor. Oregon Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Pennsylvania Yes Minor (6) Minor. Rhode Island Yes Under 16 Yes Under 16. South Carolina Yes Under 18 (6) Under 18. South Dakota Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Tennessee Yes Under 18 No provision Texas Yes,' Under 16 No provision Utah Yes Under 19 Yes' Under 19. Vermont Yes5 Under 17 No provision Virginia Yes Under 18 No provision Washington Yes Under 21 Yes Between 18 and 21.1 West Virginia Yes Under2l Yes Under 21. 'Wisconsin No provision No provision Wyoming Yes Under 18 No provision 1 Includes a prohibition against the purchase of cigarettes byminors (in Illinois without written order of parent or guardian),as well as use or possession by 2 if other than parent or guardian. 3 However, inmates in State correction institutions 16 orover, with consent of parent or guardian, may be furnishedtobacco and tobacco products. Eighteen and over. in junior college if not permitted bygoverning board. Without consent of parent or guardian. Minors smoking or in possession of cigarettes are required togive source of cigarettes; use or possession not otherwiseregulated. in addition, high school students may not smoke. And any pupil of any school in State. Or a minor pupil in any school. Purchase or possession by misrepresentation of age amisdemeanor. THE IMPETUS FOR FEDERAL SUMPTUARY REGULATION The effect of smoking on health has been the subject ofdiscussion for hundreds of years. Early participants in thetobacco controversy, beginning in the late 16th century, did notassociate the use of tobacco with the production of cancersalthough they credited it with causing or curing nearly everyother known disease. Dr. John Hill, of London, a physician, botanist and prolificwriter, first suggested the relation in 1761. In Cautions Againstthe Immoderate Use ol Snuff, he reported six cases of"polypusses" related to excessive indulgence in tobaccoin the form of snuff. One such "polypus" was describedas a swelling in one nostril that was hard, black and adherent ona broad base. Painless at first, it later developed "all thefrightful symptoms of an open cancer." Dr. Hill believedthat this lesion could be fatal and placed the blame for itsorigin on tobacco. Dr. Hill has been noted as the first to reportan association of tobacco with cancer (Redmond, 1970: 21). In 1939, the first scientific study linking lung cancer withsmoking was published. Between 1950 and 1954, 14 studiesassociating cigarettes and serious diseases were completed(Fritschler, 1969: 145). At the present time, there is no government agency with clearjurisdiction over the health aspects of cigarettes. The FederalTrade Commission can act on matters of advertising and packageinformation. The Food and Drug Administration concerns itselfonly with foods, drugs, solids, or liquids that are eaten ordrunk. Tobacco is neither a food nor a drug under current legaldefinitions. Nor are cigarettes eaten or drunk; they are inhaled. The 1890 edition of the U.S. Pharmacopoeia, an officiallisting of drugs published by the government, included tobacco.In later editions, tobacco was dropped. Former Senator MaurineNeuberger has claimed that the removal of tobacco from thePharmacopoeia was the price paid to get support of tobacco-statelegislators for the Food and Drug Act of 1906. The leaf wasthereby removed from the jurisdiction of the FDA (Wagner, 1971:74). The first statement from the Public Health Service on thesubject was made by its Surgeon General, Leroy F. Burney, M.D.,in the Journal of the American Medical Association in November,1959. The heart of this statement was that "the weight ofevidence at present implicates smoking as the principaletiological factor in the increased incidence of lungcancer" (Diehl, 1969: 154). In June, 1961 the American Cancer Society, the American HeartAssociation and the National Tuberculosis and Respiratory DiseaseAssociation jointly requested that a commission be appointed"to consider the responsibilities of government, of businessand of voluntary agencies relative to the health hazards ofcigarette smoking and to recommend a solution of this healthproblem that would protect the public and would interfere leastwith the freedom of industry and the happiness ofindividuals" (Diehl, 1969: 155). On June 7, 1962, the then Surgeon General, Dr. Luther Terry,announced, with the approval of the President, that he wasestablishing an "expert committee to undertake acomprehensive review of all data on smoking and health." The members of this committee were respected scientists whohad previously expressed no opinion about the relationship oftobacco to health. All members were approved for appointment bythe tobacco industry as well as by the American MedicalAssociation and several national health agencies. Half of thecommittee members were cigarette smokers. On January 11, 1964, after some 15 months of intensive study,this Advisory Committee- to the Surgeon General issued itsmonumental unanimous report stating that "cigarette smokingis a health hazard of sufficient importance in the United Statesto warrant, appropriate remedial action." The committee stated unequivocally that "cigarettesmoking is causally related to lung cancer in men; the magnitudeof the effect of cigarette smoking far outweighs other factors.The data for women, though less extensive, point in the samedirection." Air pollution was found to be a very minorfactor in the cause of the disease, far outweighed by cigarettesmoking. The death rate from heart disease, the report noted, was 70percent higher in cigarette smokers than in nonsmokers, andalthough there was not enough evidence to say positively thatsmoking causes heart disease, there was enough to assume that itis a cause and to take action against it. Another conclusion of great importance was that"cigarette smoking is the most important of the causes ofchronic bronchitis in the United States and increases the risk ofdying from chronic bronchitis and emphysema." The report analyzed the statistical, pathological, clinical,and experimental evidence in relation to smoking and otherdiseases. A total of more than 4,000 published reports werestudied and more than 150 investigators were personallyinterviewed. "The result was the most comprehensive andauthoritative report on this subject ever made" (Diehl,1969: 156). THE HEALTH WARNING REQUIREMENT At the time the Surgeon General's Report was published, nostatute, administrative ruling or court decision required thatcigarette packaging or advertising contain any statement aboutthe dangers to health attributable to cigarette smoking. After Trade Regulation Rule Proceedings in March and June1964, the Federal Trade Commission concluded that cigaretteadvertising was deceptive (misleading) and that advertisers had aresponsibility to warn the public of the health hazards ofcigarette smoking. To accomplish this, the Commission proposed that cigarettepackages state the amount of tar and nicotine in the smoke of thecigarette which the package contains and that cigarette packagesand cigarette advertising carry a statement such as:"Caution: Cigarette 'Smoking is Dangerous to Health. It MayCause Death from Cancer and Other Diseases." This warning was to be required on cigarette packagesbeginning January 1, 1965, and in cigarette advertising beginningJuly 1, 1965. The tobacco industry first obtained a postponementof the effective dates of this ruling and then prevailed uponCongress to vitiate the ruling by passing the Cigarette Labelingand Advertising Act, requiring all packages of cigarettes sold inthis country to carry the label "Cigarette Smoking May beHazardous to Your Health," but prohibiting the Federal TradeCommission and state and local governments from requiring anyother label on cigarette packages and any warnings in cigaretteadvertising at least until 1969. A New York Times editorial called the Cigarette Labeling andAdvertising Act of 1965 "a shocking piece ofspecial-interest legislation-a bill to protect the economichealth of the tobacco industry by freeing it of properregulation" (Cigarette Labeling and Advertising, 1965). Anarticle in the Atlantic Monthly described the politicalmaneuvering behind this legislation under the title "TheQuiet Victory of the Cigarette Lobby: How It Found the BestFilter Yet-Congress" (Diehl, 1969:162). Public concern attending publication of the Surgeon General'sreport, Smoking and Health, and the pending FTC regulations forwarnings on cigarette packages and in cigarette advertisingapparently convinced the tobacco industry that some action byCongress was inevitable. Reportedly the industry decided to accept a weak label oncigarette packages provided that the legislation would preventany regulation of cigarette advertising. This was accomplished byinserting into the proposed law the provision precluding the FTCand all state or local governments from requiring any warning oncigarette packages other than the one approved by Congress andalso preventing any warnings in cigarette advertising. At House and Senate committee hearings, committee membersfriendly to the industry attempted to discredit both the SurgeonGeneral's Report and the testimony given by the Surgeon General,the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, and therepresentatives of various medical and health organizations. Thetobacco industry then presented a number of physicians whotestified that they disagreed with the conclusions of the SurgeonGeneral's Advisory Committee and that in their opinion there wasno real evidence that cigarette smoking is harmful (Diehl, 1969:162). Although this act temporarily prevented any requirement thattar and nicotine content be indicated on cigarette packages, theFederal Trade Commission did establish a laboratory to determinethe, tar and nicotine content of the smoke of cigarettes on theAmerican market, making the results of these tests availableperiodically to the public. The Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act also required thatabout July 1, 1967, and annually thereafter the Federal TradeCommission report to Congress concerning the effectiveness of thewarning label, and upon current practices of cigaretteadvertising and promotion, with "recommendations forlegislation that are deemed appropriate." After an intensive study the Federal Trade Commission made adetailed report to Congress with the following summary andrecommendations: "There is virtually no evidence that thewarning statement on cigarette packages has had any significanteffect." Sales remained constant and the industry continued to investhundreds of millions of dollars in advertising; $200 million ayear was being spent on radio and television alone in 1967;cigarette advertisers had become the single largest productadvertisers on television accounting for about eight per cent oftelevision advertising time (Wagner, 1971: 166). THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE Another government agency had become concerned with cigaretteadvertising. The Federal Communications Commission is mandated toassure that the airways, which belong to the public, are used inthe public interest. John P. Banzhaf, III, who has been called the "RalphNader of the tobacco industry" was responsible for the FCC'sinvolvement in the cigarette advertising controversy. Afterviewing several cigarette commercials on television, Banzhafconcluded that "what he was seeing might be consideredlegally 'controversial"' (Wagner, 1971: 168). He then wroteto WCBS-TV in New York on December 1, 1966, requesting that he orsome other responsible spokesman be given an opportunity topresent contrasting views on the issue of the benefits andadvisability of smoking. Banzhaf's letter cited three commercials that presented theview that smoking is "socially acceptable and desirable,manly, and a necessary part of a rich full life. "Heasked-free time roughly approximate to that spent on thepromotion of the "virtues and values of smoking." CBSroutinely turned down the request. He sent a second letter to CBSand submitted a formal complaint against WCBS-TV to the FCC inWashington. The FCC, in a letter to the television station dated June 2,1967, said programs it had broadcast dealing with the effect ofsmoking on health were insufficient to offset the effects of paidadvertisements broadcast for a total of five to 10 minutes eachbroadcast day. "We hold that the fairness doctrine isapplicable to such advertisements" the Commission said. Theyrejected Banzhaf's claim for equal time, however. The FCC called on the station to provide free each week"a significant amount of time for the other viewpoint,"thereby implementing the smoking education campaigns launched bythe government under the cigarette labeling law. "Thisrequirement will not preclude or curtail presentation by stationsof cigarette advertising which they choose to carry." TheFCC basically decided that it was not in the public interest forthe airways to be used by radio and television to advertisecigarettes without some warning of the health hazards involvedwith smoking (Wagner, 1971: 169). The FCC was deluged with requests to reconsider its action.The agency stood firm in its unanimous decision. As a result ofthe ruling many of the voluntary health agencies and the PublicHealth Service made available to the television and radioindustries spot announcements and other program materials on theserious consequences to health caused by cigarette smoking. The FCCs decision was upheld by the U.S. Court of Appeals onNovember 21, 1968; the court said the agency could indeed use itsfairness doctrine to require free time for anti-smokingcommercials. "The danger cigarettes may pose to health is,among others, a danger to life itself," the Court said. As the Commission emphasized, it is a danger inherent in thenormal use of the product, not one merely associated with itsabuse or dependent on intervening fortuitous events. It threatensa substantial body of the population, not merely a peculiarlysusceptible fringe group. Moreover, the danger, though notestablished beyond all doubt, is documented by a compellingcumulation of statistical evidence (Wagner, 1971: l66-173). (The cigarette manufacturers then asked the Supreme Court toreview their case, but the high court turned down the request,leaving the appeals court decision standing.) "Most observers agree that the dramatic entrance ofthe FCC into the smoking controversy was probably the mostimportant single event during the three-year moratorium onrequiring health warnings in cigarette advertisements imposed byCongress on the FTC" (Wagner, 1971 : 175). THE BAN ON ADVERTISING Both the U.S. Public Health Service and Federal TradeCommission have annually reported findings to Congress sincepassage of the cigarette labeling law. The FTC recommended thatthe Act should be amended to: "Warning: Cigarette Smoking IsDangerous to Health and May Cause Death From Cancer and OtherDiseases." Additionally, the FTC recommended legislation to require thesame warning to appear in all cigarette advertisements and torequire statements of tar and nicotine content on all cigarettepackages and in all advertising. Legislation to accomplish these objectives as well as thefollowing were recommended by the FTC: Cigarette advertising on television and radio should bebarred entirely. Alternately, cigarette advertising on televisionand radio should be limited as to hours in which it may appear;the extent to which it may appear; and the types of programs onwhich it may appear; Increased appropriations, should be made to the Departmentof Health, Education, and Welfare for education of the public(especially young people) as to the health hazards of smoking; Appropriations should be made for research under thedirection of the National Institutes of Health on the developmentof less hazardous cigarettes. "By 1969, the stage had been set for a showdown overcigarette advertising and promotion" (Wagner, 1971: 190).The U.S. Government was increasing its efforts to discourage thesale of cigarettes. Post office trucks carried posters:"100,000 Doctors Have Quit Smoking." The Surgeon General continued to release reports about theadverse health effects of smoking. Dr. Daniel Horn, director of the National Clearinghouse forSmoking and Health, was urging doctors to deliver antismokingappeals to patients in their offices. Movie personalities had become involved in the American CancerSociety's campaign called I.Q. (for "I Quit") thatpassed out lapel buttons and dispatched public speakers aroundthe country to discourage the habit. Doris Day, Debbie Reynoldsand Lawrence Welk refused to allow tobacco companies to sponsortheir TV shows. Two ad agencies--Ogilivy and Mather and Doyle DaneBernbach-and a few radio and television stations would not acceptcigarette business. Several magazines did not accept cigaretteadvertising as a matter of principle: Reader's Digest, the NewYorker, and the Saturday Review. The Christian Science Monitorhad never carried cigarette ads; the Boston Globe announced inMay, 1969 that it would no longer accept such advertising"because accumulated medical evidence has indicated thatcigarette smoking is hazardous to health" (Wagner, 1971:220). In April 1969, a few weeks before the House Interstate andForeign Commerce Committee was scheduled to open hearings on theFTC proposals, a series of bills were introduced in the House byrepresentatives of tobacco producing states. One such bill, H.R.7177, co-sponsored by all eleven of North Carolina's HouseDelegation, proposed "to establish a comprehensive Federalprogram to deal with cigarette labeling and advertising withrespect to any relationship between smoking and health." Identical measures were introduced under the sponsorship ofcongressmen from Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, and Florida. Someaccounts of the activity on Capitol Hill during this periodattribute these bills to the tobacco interests' intention"to prevent strengthening of the warning label and makepermanent the ban on state and Federal regulation of cigaretteadvertising, which was due to expire on June 30. Passage of thislegislation was the best tobacco interests could have hoped forunder the circumstances" (Wagner, 1971: 205). After testimony from both sides, the House Committee approveda stiffer health warning but prohibited regulatory action oncigarette advertising for six years and in other ways generallyupheld the status quo. The Senate, Commerce Committee, on December 5, 1970, voted outa bill banning cigarette commercials from the air as of January1, 1971. The FTC was prohibited from acting on cigarette ads innewspapers and magazines until the middle of 1972. The labelingprovision in the Senate bill was weaker than that established inthe House-voted measure, and the bill also precluded cigaretteregulatory action by the fifty states and local governments. In a session on December 12, a floor amendment was introducedwhich loosened the Committee's proposed restriction on the FTC byallowing the agency to require health warnings in advertising asof July 1, 1971. The bill also authorized the FTC to move soonerif it found that tobacco companies were switching from broadcastto print advertising so massively that it could be considered a" gross abuse." This bill also approved a new requiredhealth warning for cigarette packages"Warning: CigaretteSmoking Is Dangerous to Your Health." After Senate passage, the measure still had to -pass a jointSenate-House Conference Committee where important differencesbetween the two bills had to be reconciled. The bill that emerged from conference differed only slightlyfrom the Senate measure. The cautionary label to which theconferees agreed provides: "Warning: The Surgeon General HasDetermined That Cigarette Smoking is Dangerous to YourHealth." "In a final concession to the broadcasters,the conferees agreed to delay for one day the blackout ofcigarette commercials from December 31, 1970, to midnight January1, 1971. That would give them a last shower of cash from the NewYear's Day football bowl games" (Wagner, 1971: 216). It wasestimated that the loss to television and radio stations wouldamount to about $220 million a year, or about 7.5% of their totaladvertising revenues. President Nixon signed the Act on April 1, 1970. Some observers marvel that the bill was passed "in spiteof massive pressure that had been brought to bear against it andagainst the regulation of cigarette advertising generally, by thetobacco industry, the broadcasting industry, and the lobbyistsand their political allies. This was a combination that for yearshad proved invincible against a counterforce of scientists andpublic health and public interest advocates who, armed withformidable statistics on the damage to health and life caused bycigarette smoking, had sought to protect consumers by requiringall cigarette advertising to provide adequate warnings of thesedangers" (Whiteside, 1970: 58). There are those observers , on the other hand, who do not viewthe ban of cigarette advertising on television and radio as sucha success for the consumer. Rather, they cite the statistics onconsumption in other countries to point up the fact that bans onadvertising do not reduce sales. In Czechoslovakia, for example, no direct advertising oftobacco is permitted; yet consumption increased 14% between 1953and 1958. Advertising of foreign cigarettes was banned in 1962 inItaly; the following year sales increased 39.4% and in 1964, 11.7%. Sales increased in England after television cigaretteadvertisements were banned in 1965. Consumption figures for thefollowing three years in Britain reveal increases: 112 billioncigarettes in 1965, 118 billion in 1966; and 119.1 billion in1967 (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 113-114). Robert Miller, an agricultural economist in the Department ofAgriculture's Economic Research Service, reports that cigaretteconsumption is up in every part of the world although advertisingwas banned in several European countries some years ago. Hepredicts an eventual decrease in sales during the next five yearsand perhaps a 12-13% decrease in tobacco consumption (TobaccoAdvertising Could End, 1970: 7). Other observers can see a gradual reduction in cigaretteconsumption as a result of a prohibition on advertising; somefeel a ban on advertising merely makes it difficult to launch anew brand. Others predict that the ban will eliminate the socialacceptability of the habit although consumption will not go down. The "live dangerously novelty" has also beenidentified as a possible cause for gains in consumption;"such a philosophy might well be prevalent among the young,the very ones that antismoking advocates are most anxious toprotect" (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 112-113). Another consequence of the ban on cigarette commercials wasthe FCC ruling that the broadcasters' obligation to airantismoking messages had ended. The stations continue to run themas public service spots; however, the volume was decreasedconsiderably from the former 1 to 3 ratio established by the FCC.The antismoking forces are fearful that a decrease in these spotsis harmful to their cause and may retard their efforts to reducecigarette consumption. On October 20,1971, a U.S. District Court ruled that theCongressional ban on cigarette advertising is constitutional. Theruling stated that such advertising does not qualify under theFirst Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech; a sharpdistinction was drawn between guarantees of freedom. of speechfor individuals and the "limited extent" to whichbroadcast advertising qualifies for such protection. The court also ruled that Congress had more than one"rational basis" for excluding cigarette ads fromtelevision and not the printed media one being that broadcastsare the "most persuasive" types of advertising(Cigarette Ad Ban, 1971). Ultimately, the constitutional questionwill have to be decided by the United States Supreme Court. CONSUMPTION TRENDS Cigarette smoking is widespread in America today; 45.9% of themale population 17 years of age and over and 30.5% of females 17and over are smokers. In 1970, about $10.6 billion ofindividuals' expenditures was for cigarettes. Data on cigarette sales and advertising has been obtained bythe FTC from domestic cigarette manufacturers; the table belowprovides cigarette sales for the years 1963 to the present(Federal Trade Commission, 1970: 3) : TOTAL CIGARETTES SOLD Year Billions 1963 516.5 1964 505.0 1965 521.1 1966 529.9 1967 535.8 1968 540.3 1969 527.9 1970 534.2 The reduction in sales in 1964 coincides with the publicattention given the Report of the Surgeon General issued onJanuary 11, 1964. Public awareness of the dangers cited in theReport was high. It was soon forgotten, for in 1965 the totalnumber of cigarettes sold was almost 5 billion higher than theyear prior to the Surgeon General's Report. In 1969 there was another significant decline; it has beensuggested that this decline is attributable to severalhigh-visibility events and also by sales tax increases. Forexample, the FCC ruling was upheld in November 1968 givingimpetus to the antismoking TV campaign; the federal government'santi-smoking campaign was in full swing during 1968-69; thepublic outcry was being felt by economic interests-magazines,newspapers, personalities and advertising agencies which refusedsponsorship for business from tobacco companies. There were significant state tax increases immediately priorto 1969 which probably contributed to the reduction in salesduring that year. During fiscal year 1967, 15 states increasedtheir cigarette tax rates; the average increase was 3.5 cents.The rate increase ranged from New York's, Ohio's, and Illinois'two cents to California's and Florida's seven cents. The nextyear, seven more states increased their cigarette taxes. Therates ranged from Massachusetts' and Vermont's two cents toMinnesota's, Rhode Island's, and Tennessee's five cents theaverage increase approximately four cents (Council of StateGovernments, 1968: 196-197). The ban on cigarette advertising on television and radio beganon January 2, 1971, yet several calculations reflect a rise incigarette sales during the past year. Business Week projectionsof industry sales and brand rankings show that a record 529billion cigarettes were consumed in 1971, 1.5% more than 1970'ssales (Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 56). Tobacco industrysources estimate that consumption has risen in 1971 by 1.5% to535 billion cigarettes (Cigarette Sales Up, 1972: 3). John C. Maxwell, tobacco analyst for Oppenheimer &Company, a brokerage firm, also reported a rise-2.3% in domesticunit sales in 1971. He relates part of the growth in cigaretteconsumption to the population mix the increase hit the 20-40 yearage group, where smoking is heaviest. The Maxwell report suggeststhat the rest of this growth must be related to "governmentoverkill, wherein many voices in Washington suggest thateverything we eat or drink is harmful" (Maxwell, 1971: 1). An industry specialist with Manufacturers Hlanover TrustCompany, on the other hand, attributes both the lag in sales in1969 and the new increase to the "very effective antismokingads on television. Since the ban, these commercials rarelyappear" (Cigarette Sales Up, 1972: 3). Another industry executive notes, "For years we havebelieved that the role of cigarette advertising is to attractsmokers from competitive brands rather than induce nonsmokers tostart smoking. We failed to convince the Federal CommunicationsCommission of this, but it is borne out by our industry'sexperience since the TV ban. Within a relatively stable market,some companies have continued to gain while others lost. Somebrands have increased their share of market while others havedeclined" (Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 56). Skepticscontinue to argue that tobacco companies have also been trying torecruit new young smokers. TOBACCO: ECONOMICS AND POLITICS It is generally accepted that tobacco has been an extremelypowerful force in American politics. Approximately 50 millionsmokers smoked 535 billion cigarettes in the past year. More than100,000 employees receive $500 million in wages annually fromtobacco manufacturing companies; over 4,500 wholesalers handlethe distribution of tobacco products and hundreds of thousands ofmerchants depend on tire sale of cigarettes as a source of theirincome. Cigarette companies had been spending over $200 million peryear on radio and television advertising, and since the ban,almost all of this money has been diverted to other mediaadvertising providing many thousands of jobs in ad agencies andin the various media. Three million people from about 750,000families receive $1.4 billion annually for the cultivation oftobacco used in cigarettes. Peripherally affected are those involved in producing the 40million pounds of moisture-proof cellophane, the 70 millionpounds of aluminum foil, the 27 billion printed packs, and the2.7 billion cartons (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 110-111;Wagner, 1971: 120; USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971a: 29-31). One writer, reporting on the present public policy trend,notes that "attempts to discourage smoking would affect thelives of millions of people and would have profound economic andpolitical consequences" (Wagner, 1971: 121). Advocates of cigarette smoking today are organized intoextremely powerful groups, each having its own specific functionand plentiful resources. The Tobacco Tax Council, established in 1949, compiles data onthe taxation of tobacco products by the Federal, state and localgovernments. The Council's annual booklet, "Cigaret Taxes inthe United States" has been superseded by " The TaxBurden on Tobacco" since 1966. This pamphlet"undertakes to trace the history of tobacco taxes from theyears of the Civil War down through [the present year]"(Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: iii). The trade association promoting the welfare of the tobaccoindustry is the Tobacco Merchants Association of the U.S. It iscomposed of manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, importers,exporters, leaf dealers, suppliers, and firms interested in theindustry. Its Bulletins cover legislation, trends, specialreports; its numerous other publications and activities seek toimprove industry operations and expand outlets (e.g.,international) f or potential sales (Tobacco MerchantsAssociation, 1971: 1-4). The tobacco industry's point of view is nurtured and protectedby the Tobacco Institute, a nonprofit corporation founded in1958. Its membership includes major U.S. manufacturers ofcigarettes, smoking and chewing tobacco, and snuff: The BlochBrothers Tobacco Company, Brown & Williamson TobaccoCorporation, Conwood Corporation, G. A. Georgopulo & Company,Helme Products, Larus & Brother Company, Liggett & Myers,Lorillard, Philip Morris Incorporated, R. J. Reynolds Industries,Scotten-Dillion Company, and United States Tobacco Company. The Institute is financed by contributions from the largecorporations according to their share of the market. Theinstitute reports on the pro-tobacco side of the medical story,attempting to discredit antismoking publicity, and publishesinformation on the historical role of tobacco, its place in thenational economy, the industry itself, and the public's use oftobacco products. The Council for Tobacco Research, created in 1953 in responseto medical bulletins reporting on the hazards of smoking,processes and administers millions of research grants."Although research money was to be awarded with no stringsattached [The Council] nicely serve[s] the purpose of identifyingthe industry with the welfare of humanity and spreading good willthrough the scientific community" (Wagner, 1971: 80). The scientific data continue to be attacked from both sides.Since 1954 a great quantity of research has been published and,in turn, disputed. For example, "the press played up theHammond and Auerbach study and the claim that twelve beagles haddeveloped lung cancer" from cigarettes. "The findingshave subsequently been downgraded by ' v the author to twomicroscopic tumors with the further revelation that two dogs inthe control group also developed tumors" (Maxwell, 1971: 1). Another area of contention has developed around therelationship between cigarette smoke itself and lung cancer. Arecent paper by Dr. Geoffrey Myddelton given at the Second WorldConference on Smoking and Health in London, September 20-24,1971, compares the incidence of smoking and lung cancer invarious countries. He indicates, "Japan smokes 86% as muchas Britain but has only 27% of its lung cancer. Canada smokestwice as many cigarettes as the Netherlands but has only 69% asmuch lung cancer." He goes on to correlate the use of dieselfile] in England to lung cancer (Maxwell, 1971: 2). From the other side, the United States Public Health Service1972 report The Health Consequences of Smoking maintains that"nonsmokers as well as smokers may be harmed by cigarettes,. . . tobacco smoke in closed cars and poorly ventilated roomscan contaminate the atmosphere for everyone. . . . The chiefdanger is exposure to low levels of the deadly gas, carbonmonoxide. Experiments, with animals have shown that variousconcentrations of the colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas'adversely affect' the structure and function of the heart andlungs. The implication is that this may also be true in man"(Study Says Cigarette Smoke Also May Harm Nonusers, 1972: 1). It is estimated that at the present time one and a half to twomillion adults give up smoking every year. Sensing the hazards ofthe future, some cigarette, companies sought fiscal security indiversification and substitution; tobacco manufacturers are nowmarketing, for example, safety razors, fertilizers, dog food,ballpoint pens, peanut butter and other non-nicotine products. By1967, sales on non-tobacco products accounted for approximatelyone-third of the, total sales of cigarette manufacturers. It remains to be seen whether tobacco power will be whittledaway any further in the next few years. Some feel that "thetobacco subsystem has succeeded in keeping the health question alow priority item on the government's agenda by playing onegovernment agency off against another.... This subsystem cutsacross institutional lines and includes the paid representativesof tobacco growers, marketing organizations and manufacturers.,.Congressmen representing tobacco growing states [are] leadingmembers of four subcommittees, including two ,appropriationssubcommittees and two committees in each house of Congresshandling tobacco legislation. . . . Tobacco power [is] thusfirmly entrenched and well supported" (Wagner, 1971: 121). On the other hand, a strongly worded commentary by an industryspokesman cites Justice John Marshall's statement to illustrateindustry's precarious position: "The power to tax involvesthe power to destroy." He continues with a description ofthe tobacco industry's present situation: The onslaught of state and local taxes on tobacco products... represents a most serious threat to all segments of ourindustry.... We are now facing a calculated attempt to destroy,or at least drastically curtail, the sale of smoking products.The political and economic climate is most favorable for thisattack. Smoking and health is a prime political issue in the samecontext as air pollution, crime in the streets, and consumerism.At the same time, local governments are verging on bankruptcy.Revenue of any sort is therefore a must. It is a tough battle,and cigarette industry is currently bearing the largest part ofthe attack (Regensburg, 1971: 146). The revenues gained from tobacco tax collections aresignificant. Over $2.1 billion in Federal taxes and over $2.5billion in state cigarette taxes were collected in Fiscal Year1971 (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 4-6, 8; USDA, Tobacco Situation,1971b: 44). Total tobacco taxes were $4.8 billion in 1971compared with $1.7 billion in 1950. In 1970 tobacco taxes accounted for 1.1% of total federal taxreceipts and represented 13.8 percent of all excise taxes (USDA,Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 40). This places the tobacco tax as theseventh largest source of collection by the Federal governmentbehind the major giants, e.g., income and profit taxes (bothcorporate and individual), employment taxes, manufacturers excisetaxes, alcohol taxes, and estate and gift taxes. In terms ofindividual commodities it ranks behind only alcohol. Thus,federal revenue would be importantly affected if tobaccoconsumption were to decline. CONCLUSION The big question is how the Federal government plans toproceed. Six tobacco bills are now pending in Congress. One ofthese bills would give the Federal Trade Commission authority toset maximum permissible limits on tar and nicotine. Another wouldestablish a graduated cigarette tax based on tar content. The FTC is presently carrying on negotiations with theindustry to come up with a "clear and conspicuous"health warning for its print advertising. It is expected that theindustry, " which has been working closely with the FTC'will' take some 'voluntary' labeling action" (WhereCigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 57). The industry feels the pressure; one member explains: "Weare resigned to it. Over-all.... the industry mood is much morerelaxed-now that we have this first big year behind us"(Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 57). The public is clamoring for government action; a 1970 CollegePoll'. surveying-youths 18 and older on more than 100 campusesreveals that 96% believe that smoking is dangerous to one'shealth (College Poll, 1971). Further, a 1969 study on teenage (13- to 18-yearolds) smokingattitudes, motivation and habits indicates "deep teenagedissatisfaction with cigarette smoking, considerable knowledge ofits ill effects, but a very exaggerated estimate of theacceptance of smoking by the adult world" (LiebermanResearch, 1969: 1-20). And, a 1970 nationwide survey of teenagersrevealed: "72% of non-smokers identified physicians as theone group that could persuade them not to start smoking and 42%of those who smoked said their physician's advice would influencethem to stop" (Doctors, 1970: 24). Critics of the industry claim: "The controversy aboutsmoking and health continues largely because of the energy, timeand money spent by the tobacco industry in keeping thiscontroversy alive" (College Poll, 1971). In September, 1935, Fortune Magazine published a discussion ofthe medical implications of smoking. It concluded that: This much can be said: That the possible benefit to bederived from tobacco is always less than the possible harm (Robert,1949: 256). Official policy has never accepted this judgment. In recentyears, steps have been taken to discourage smoking, althoughthere is little conclusive evidence that consumption patterns arechanging. It can be expected that official policy and alterationsin individual behavior will both evolve slowly during the comingyears. The socioeconomic impact of a sudden change in officialpolicy would be great, a circumstance reflecting the momentum ofseveral centuries of intense commercial activity. References Brooks, J. E. The Mighty Leaf: Tobacco Thru the Centuries,Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1952, 12, 27, 56, 71-72, 88,93-98, 102, 112-113, 146-147, 165, 167, 215216, 219, 242-243,245, 258, 271, 274. "Cigarette Ad Ban Ruled Constitutional by Panel,"Washington Post (Washington, D.C.), October 21, 1971."Cigarette Advertising and the Public Health," ColumbiaJournal of Law: Social Problems, 6 (1) : 110-114, 1970."Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1965," NewYork Times (New York, New York), July 9, 1965. "CigaretteSales Up Despite Ad Curbs," Washington Post (Washington,D.C.), January 1, 1972,3. "College Poll Shows Students' Smoking Habits,"Tobacco Reporter, June, 1971. Council of State Goverments. The Book of the States,1968,196-197,200-208,212-213. Diehl, H. Tobacco and Your Health, New York: McGrawHill BookCo., 1969, 154-156, 161-162. "Doctors Could Disuade Youths From Smoking,"Pediatric News, 4(2) :24, 1970. Federal Trade Commission. "FTC StatisticalSupplement," December, 1970, 3. Fritschler, A. T. Smoking and Politics, New York:Appleton-Century-Cross, Inc., 1969, 145. Gottsegen, J. J. Tobacco-A Study of its Consumption in theUnited States, New York-Chicago: Pitman Publishing Corp., 1940,8-10, 28, 87, 147, 153, 155. Hamilton, A. E. This Smoking World, New York: The Century Co.,1927, 168, 205. Heimann, R. K. Tobacco and Americans, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1960, 22-23, 83-84, 90, 93, 155-156. Lehman Brothers. About Tobacco, (N.P.), 1955, 39. Lieberman Research, Inc. "The Teenager Looks at CigaretteSmoking," Report of a Study Conducted for the AmericanCancer Society, November, 1969, 1-20. Maxwell, J. C., Jr. "Preliminary Year End Estimate,"The Maxwell Report, November, 1971,1-2. Middleton, A. P. Tobacco Coast, Charlottesville: University ofVirginia Press, 1953, 93-94, 104-107, 114-117, 120-121. Morison, S. E. The Oxford History of the American People, NewYork: Oxford University Press, 1965, 93-94. National InteragencyCouncil on Smoking and Health. "State Activities,"Bulletin, July-September 1971, 1. Neuberger, M. B. Smoke Screen: Tobacco and the Public Welfare,Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1963, 52, 62. Redmond, D. E., Jr., "Tobacco and Cancer: The FirstClinical Report, 1761," New England Journal of Medicine,28-9 (1) : 21, 1970. Regensburg, A. "The Tax That Destroys," NATDCoordinator, XXXI: 146, April, 1971. Robert, J. C. The Story of Tobacco, Chapel Hill: University ofNorth Carolina Press, 1949, 11, 99-101, 106107, 117, 169, 247,256. "Study Says Cigarette Smoke Also May Harm Nonusers,"Washington Post (Washington, D.C.), January 10, 1972, 1 (6). "Tobacco Advertising Could End in 1975," Herald(Lexington, Kentucky), January 18, 1970, 7. Tobacco Institute. "Connecticut and Tobacco,"Washington: Tobacco Institute, Undated], 20-23. "Kansas and Tobacco," Washington: Tobacco Institute,1970, 9. "Kentucky and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 0. - "Maryland and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 9-10, 21, 23. - "Massachusetts and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 17. -"Virginia and Tobacco," Washington: Tobacco Institute,1971, 19, 22, 28, 29. Tobacco Merchants Association. "Sales of Tobacco Productsto Minors," March 1971, 1-4. Tobacco Tax Council. "The Tax Burden on Tobacco,"1970, iii-iv, v, 2, 4-6,8,17,53. U.S. Department of Agriculture. "Tobacco Situation," Economic Research Service, TS-136, June, 1971a, 29-31. -"Tobacco Situation," Economic Research Service, TS-137,September, 1971b, 7, 39-44. Vlassis, T. "Should Pharmacists Sell Cigarettes?"Iowa Pharmacists, 24 (9) : 10, 15, 1969. Wagner, S. Cigarette Country, -New -York: Praeger Publishers,1971, 40, 63-64, 74, 80, 120-121, 166-173, 175, 190, 205, 216,220. Werner, C. Tobacco Land, New York: Tobacco Leaf PublishingCo., 1922, 100-102, 105, 358-359, 559. "Where CigaretteMakers Spend Ad Dollars Now," Business Week, December 25,1971, 56-57. Whiteside, T. "Annals of Advertising: Cutting Down,"The New Yorker, December 19, 1970, 58-80. 7 USC � 511 (b) (d), 1935. 7 USC � 515, 1936. 7 USC � 1303,1938. 7 USC � 1312, 1938. 7 USC � 1314, 1938. 26-USC �-5701, et seq. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-19IA088-000636-B009-96http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/histsum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100038 text/html 50558HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:00:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:05 GMTContent-length: 50340 Some Events in the History of Drugs A Summary of Historical Events Some Events in the History of Drugs 5000 B.C. The Sumerians use opium, suggested by thefact that they have an ideogram for it which has been translatedas HUL, meaning "joy" or "rejoicing." [AlfredR. Lindesmith, *Addiction and Opiates.* p. 207] 3500 B.C. Earlist historical record of the productionof alcohol: the description of a brewery in an an Egyptianpapyrus. [Joel Fort, *The Pleasure Seekers*, p. 14] 3000 B.C. Approximate date of the supposed origin ofthe use of tea in China. 2500 B.C. Earlist historical evidence of the eating ofpoppy seeds among the Lake Dwellers on Switzerland. [AshleyMontagu, The long search for euphoria, *Refelections*, 1:62-69(May-June), 1966; p. 66] 2000 B.C. Earliest record of prohibitionist teaching,by an Egyptian priest, who writes to his pupil: "I, thysuperior, forbid thee to go to the taverns. Thou art degradedlike beasts." [W.F. Crafts *et al*., *Intoxicating Drinksand Drugs*, p. 5] 350 B.C. Proverbs, 31:6-7: "Give strong drink tohim who is perishing, and wine to those in bitter distress; letthem drink and forget their poverty, and remember their misery nomore." 300 B.C. Theophrastus (371-287 B.C.), Greek naturalistand philosopher, records what has remained as the earliesundisputed reference to the use of poppy juice. 250 B.C. Psalms, 104:14-15: "Thou dost causegrass to grow for the cattle and plants for man to cultivate,that he may bring forth food from the earth, and wine to gladdenthe heart of man. 350 A.D. Earliest mention of tea, in a Chinesedictionary. 4th century St. John Chrysostom (345-407), Bishop ofConstantinople: "I hear man cry, 'Would there be no wine! Ofolly! O madness!' Is it wine that causes this abuse? No, for ifyou say, 'Would there were no light!' because of the informers,and would there were no women because of adultery." [Quotedin Berton Roueche, *The Neutral Spirit*, pp. 150-151] 450 Babylonian Talmud: "Wine is at the head ofall medicines; where wine is lacking, drugs are necessary."[Quoted in Burton Stevenson (Ed.), *The Macmillan Book ofProverbs*, p. 21] c. 1000 Opium is widely used in China and the farEast. [Alfred A. Lindensmith, *The Addict and the Law*, p. 194] 1493 The use of tobacco is introduced into Europe byColumbus and his crew returning from America. c. 1500 According to J.D. Rolleston, a British medicalhistorian, a medieval Russian cure for drunkenness consisted in"taking a piece of pork, putting it secretly in a Jew's bedfor nine days, and then giving it to the drunkard in a pulverizedform, who will turn away from drinking as a Jew would frompork." [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. p. 144] c. 1525 Paracelsus (1490-1541) introduces laudanum, ortincture of opium, into the practice of medicine. 1600 Shakespeare: "Falstaff. . . . If I had athousand sons the / first human principle I would teach themshould / be, to foreswear thin portion and to addict themselvesto sack." ("Sack" is an obsolete term for"sweet wine" like sherry). [William Shakespeare,*Second Part of King Henry the Forth*, Act IV, Scene III, lines133-136] 17th century The prince of the petty state of Waldeckpays ten thalers to anyone who denounces a coffee drinker.[Griffith Edwards, Psychoactive substances, *The Listener*, March23, 1972, pp. 360-363; p.361] 17th century In Russia, Czar Michael Federovitchexecutes anyone on whom tobacco is found. "Czar AlexeiMikhailovitch rules that anyone caught with tobacco should betortured until he gave up the name of the supplier." [Ibid.] 1613 John Rolf, the husband of the Indian princessPocahontas, sends the first shipment of Virginia tobacco fromJamestown to England. c. 1650 The use of tobacco is prohibited in Bavaria,Saxony, and in Zurich, but the prohibitions are ineffective.Sultan Murad IV of the Ottoman Empire decrees the death penaltyfor smoking tobacco: "Whereever there Sultan went on histravels or on a military expedition his halting-places werealways distinguished by a terrible rise in executions. Even onthe battlefield he was fond of surprising men in the act ofsmoking, when he would punish them by beheading, hanging,quartering or crushing their hands and feed. . . . Nevertheless,in spite of all the horrors and persecution. . . the passion forsmoking still persisted." [Edward M. Brecher et al., *Licitand Illicit Drugs*, p. 212] 1680 Thomas Syndenham (1625-80): "Among theremedies which it has pleased the Almighty God to give to man torelieve his sufferings, none is so universal and efficacious asopium." [Quoted in Louis Goodman and Alfred Gilman, *ThePharmacological Basis of Theraputics*, First Edition (1941), p.186] 1690 The "Act for the Encouraging of theDistillation of Brandy and Spirits from Corn" is enacted inEngland. [Roueche, op. cit. p. 27] 1691 In Luneberg, Germany, the penalty for smoking(tobacco) is death. 1717 Liquor licenses in Middlesex (England) aregranted only to those who "would take oaths of allegianceand of belief in the King's supremacy over the Church"[G.E.G. Catlin, *Liquor Control*, p. 14] 1736 The Gin Act (England) is enacted with the avowedobject of making spirits "come so dear to the consumer thatthe poor will not be able to launch into excessive use ofthem." This effort results in general lawbreaking and failsto halt the steady rise in the consumption of even legallyproduced and sold liquor. [Ibid., p. 15] 1745 The magistrates of one London division demandedthat "publicans and wine-merchants should swear that theyanathematized the doctrine of Transubstantiation." [Ibid.,p. 14] 1762 Thomas Dover, and English physician, introduceshis prescription for a diaphoretic powder," which herecommends mainly for the treatment of gout. Soon named"Dover's powder," this compound becomes the most widelyused opium preparation during the next 150 years. 1785 Benjamin Rush publishes his *Inquiry into theEffects of Ardent Spirits on the Human Body and Mind*; in it, hecalls the intemperate use of distilled spirits a"disease," and estimates the annual rate of death dueto alcoholism in the United States as "not less than 4000people" in a population then of less than 6 million. [Quotedin S. S. Rosenberg (Ed.), *Alcohol and Health*, p. 26] 1789 The first American temperance society is formedin Litchfield, Connecticut. [Crafts et. al., op. cit., p. 9] 1790 Benjamin Rush persuades his associates at thePhiladelphia College of Physicians to send an appeal to Congressto "impose such heavy duties upon all distilled spirits asshall be effective to restrain their intemperate use in thecountry." [Quoted in ibid.] 1792 The first prohibitory laws against opium in Chinaare promulgated. The punishment decreed for keepers of opiumshops is strangulation. 1792 The Whisky Rebellion, a protest by farmers inwestern Pennsylvania against a federal tax on liquor, breaks outand is put down by overwhelming force sent to the area by GeorgeWashington. Samuel Taylor Coleridge writes "Kubla Khan"while under the influence of opium. 1800 Napoleon's army, returning from Egypt, introducescannibis (hashish, marijuana) into France. Avante-garde artistsand writers in Paris develop their own cannabis ritual, leading,in 1844, to the establishment of *Le Club de Haschischins.*[William A. Emboden, Jr., Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L.: Ahistorical-ethnographic survey, in Peter T. Furst (Ed.), *Fleshof the Gods*, pp. 214-236; pp. 227-228] 1801 On Jefferson's recommendation, the federal dutyon liquor was abolished. [Catlin, op. cit., p. 113] 1804 Thomas Trotter, an Edinburgh physician, publishes*An Essay, Medical, Philosophical, and Chemical on Drunkennessand Its Effects on the Human Body*: "In medical language, Iconsider drunkenness, strictly speaking, to be a disease,produced by a remote cause, and giving birth to actions andmovements in the living body that disorder the functions ofhealth. . . The habit of drunkenness is a disease of themind." [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. pp. 87-88] 1805 Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Serturner, a Germanchemist, isolates and describes morphine. 1822 Thomas De Quincey's *Confessions of an EnglishOpium Eater* is published. He notes that the opium habit, likeany other habit, must be learned: "Making allowance forconstitutional differences, I should say that *in less that 120days* no habit of opium-eating could be formed strong enough tocall for any extraordinary self-conquest in renouncing it, evensuddenly renouncing it. On Saturday you are an opium eater, onSunday no longer such." [Thomas De Quincey, *Confessions ofan English Opium Eater* (1822), p. 143] 1826 The American Society for the Promotion ofTemperance is founded in Boston. By 1833, there are 6,000 localTemperance societies, with more than one million members. 1839-42 The first Opium War. The British force uponChina the trade in opium, a trade the Chinese had declaredillegal.. [Montagu, op. cit. p. 67] 1840 Benjamin Parsons, and English clergyman,declares: ". . . alcohol stands preeminent as a destroyer. .. . I never knew a person become insane who was not in the habitof taking a portion of alcohol every day." Parsons listsforty-two distinct diseases caused by alcohol, among theminflammation of the brain, scrofula, mania, dropsy, nephritis,and gout. [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. pp. 87-88] 1841 Dr. Jacques Joseph Moreau uses hashish intreatment of mental patients at the Bicetre. 1842 Abraham Lincoln: "In my judgment, such of usas have never fallen victims, have been spared more from theabsence of appetite, than from any mental or moral superiorityover those who have. Indeed, I believe, if we take habitualdrunkards as a class, their heads and their hearts will bear anadvantageous comparison with those of any other class."[Abraham Lincoln, Temperance address, in Roy P. Basler Ed.), *TheCollected Works of Abraham Lincoln, Vol. 1, p. 258] 1844 Cocaine is isolated in its pure form. 1845 A law prohibiting the public sale of liquor isenacted in New York State. It is repealed in 1847. 1847 The American Medical Association is founded. 1852 Susan B. Anthony establishes the Women's StateTemperance Society of New York, the first such society formed byand for women. Many of the early feminists, such as ElizabethCady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and Abby Kelly, are also ardentprohibitionists. [Andrew Sinclar, *Era of Excess*, p. 92] 1852 The American Pharmaceutical Association isfounded. The Association's 1856 Constitution lists one of itsgoals as: "To as much as possible restrict the dispensingand sale of medicines to regularly educated druggests andapothecaries. [Quoted in David Musto, *The American Disease*, p.258] 1856 The Second Opium War. The British, with help fromthe French, extend their powers to distribute opium in China. 1862 Internal Revenue Act enacted imposing a licensefee of twenty dollars on retail liquor dealers, and a tax of onedollar a barrel on beer and twenty cents a gallon on spirits.[Sinclare, op. cit. p 152] 1864 Adolf von Baeyer, a twenty-nine-year-oldassistant of Friedrich August Kekule (the discoverer of themolecular structure of benzene) in Ghent, synthesizes barbituricacid, the first barbiturate. 1868 Dr. George Wood, a professor of the theory andpractice of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, presidentof the American Philosophical Society, and the author of aleading American test, *Treatise on Therapeutics*, describes thepharmacological effects of opium as follows: "A sensation offullness is felt in the head, soon to be followed by a universalfeeling of delicious ease and comfort, with an elevation andexpansion of the whole moral and intellectual nature, which is, Ithink, the most characteristic of its effects. . . . It seems tomake the individual, for the time, a better and greater man. . .. The hallucinations, the delirious imaginations of alcoholicintoxication, are, in general, quite wanting. Along with thisemotional and intellectual elevation, there is also increasedmuscular energy; and the capacity to act, and to bear fatigue, isgreatly augmented. [Quoted in Musto, op. cit. pp. 71-72] 1869 The Prohibition Party is formed. Gerrit Smith,twice Abolitionist candidate for President, an associate of JohnBrown, and a crusading prohibitionist, declares: "Ourinvoluntary slaves are set free, but our millions of voluntaryslaves still clang their chains. The lot of the literal slave, ofhim whom others have enslaved, is indeed a hard one;nevertheless, it is a paradise compared with the lot of him whohas enslaved himself to alcohol." [Quoted in Sinclar, op.cit. pp. 83-84] 1874 The Woman's Christian Temperance Union is foundedin Cleveland. In 1883, Frances Willard a leader of the W.C.T.U.forms the World's Woman's Christian Temperance Union. 1882 The law in the United States, and the world,making "temperance education" a part of the requiredcourse in public schools is enacted. In 1886, Congress makes sucheducation mandatory in the District of Columbia, and interritorial, military, and naval schools. By 1900, all the stateshave similar laws. [Crafts et. al., op. cit. p. 72] 1882 The Personal Liberty League of the United Statesis founded to oppose the increasing momentum of movements forcompulsory abstinence from alcohol. [Catlin, op. cit. p. 114] 1883 Dr. Theodor Aschenbrandt, a German armyphysician, secures a supply of pure cocaine from thepharmaceutical firm of Merck, issues it to Bavarian soldiersduring their maneuvers, and reports on the beneficial effects ofthe drug in increasing the soldiers' ability to endure fatigue.[Brecher et. al. op. cit. p. 272] 1884 Sigmund Freud treats his depression with cocaine,and reports feeling "exhilaration and lasting euphoria,which is in no way differs from the normal euphoria of thehealthy person. . . You perceive an increase in self-control andpossess more vitality and capacity for work. . . . In otherwords, you are simply more normal, and it is soon hard to believethat you are under the influence of a drug." [Quoted inErnest Jones, *The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1, p. 82] 1884 Laws are enacted to make anti-alcohol teachingcompulsory in public schools in New York State. The followingyear similar laws are passed in Pennsylvania, with other statessoon following suit. 1885 The Report of the Royal Commission on Opiumconcludes that opium is more like the Westerner's liquor than asubstance to be feared and abhorred. [Quoted in Musto, op. cit.p. 29] 1889 The John Hopkins Hospital, in Baltimore,Maryland, is opened. One of its world-famous founders, Dr.William Stewart Halsted, is a morphine addict. He continues touse morphine in large doses throughout his phenomenallysuccessful surgical career lasting until his death in 1922. 1894 The Report of the Indian Hemp Drug Comission,running to over three thousand pages in seven volumes, ispublished. This inquiry, commissioned by the British government,concluded: "There is no evidence of any weight regarding themental and moral injuries from the moderate use of these drugs... . . Moderation does not lead to excess in hemp any more thanit does in alcohol. Regular, moderate use of ganja or bhangproduces the same effects as moderate and regular doses ofwhiskey." The commission's proposal to tax bhang is neverput into effect, in part, perhaps, because one of thecommissioners, an Indian, cautions that Moslem law and Hinducustom forbid "taxing anything that gives pleasure to thepoor." [Quoted in Norman Taylor, The pleasant assassin: Thestory of marihuana, in David Solomon (Ed.) *The MarijuanaPapers*, pp. 31-47, p. 41] 1894 Norman Kerr, and English physician and presidentof the British Society for the study of Inebriety, declares:"Drunkenness has generally been regarded as . . . a sin avice, or a crime. . . [But] there is now a consensus ofintelligent opinion that habitual and periodic drunkenness isoften either a symptom or sequel of disease . . . . The victimcan no more resist [alcohol] than an man with ague can resistshivering. [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit., pp. 107-108] 1898 Diacetylmorphine (heroin) is synthesized inGermany. It is widely lauded as a "safe preparation freefrom addiction-forming properties." [Montagu, op. cit. p.68] 1900 In an address to the Ecumenical MissionaryConference, Rev. Wilbur F. Crafts declares: "No Christiancelebration of the completion of nineteen Christian centuries hasyet been arranged. Could there be a fitter one than the generaladoption, by separate and joint action of the great nations ofthe world, of the new policy of civilization, in which GreatBritian is leading, the policy of prohibition for the nativeraces, in the interest of commerce as well as conscience, sincethe liquor traffic among child races, even more manifestly thanin civilized lands, injures all other trades by producingpoverty, disease, and death. Our object, more profoundly viewed,is to create a more favorable environment for the child racesthat civilized nations are essaying to civilize andChristianize." [Quoted in Crafts, et. al., op. cit., p. 14] 1900 James R. L. Daly, writing in the *Boston Medicaland Surgical Journal*, declares: "It [heroin] possesses manyadvantages over morphine. . . . It is not hypnotic; and there isno danger of acquiring the habit. . . ." [Quoted in Henry H.Lennard et. al. Methadone treatment (letters),*Science*,179:1078-1079 (March 16), 1973; p. 1079] 1901 The Senate adopts a resolution, introduced byHenry Cabot Lodge, to forbid the sale by American traders ofopium and alcohol "to aboriginal tribes and uncivilizedraces." Theses provisions are later extended to include"uncivilized elements in America itself and in itsterritories, such as Indians, Alaskans, the inhabitants ofHawaii, railroad workers, and immigrants at ports of entry."[Sinclar, op. cit. p. 33] 1902 The Committee on the Acquirement of the DrugHabit of the American Pharmaceutical Association declares:"If the Chinaman cannot get along without his 'dope,' we canget along without him." [Quoted in ibid, p. 17] 1902 George E. Petty, writing in the *Alabama MedicalJournal*, observes: "Many articles have appeared in themedical literature during the last two years lauding this newagent . . . . When we consider the fact that heroin is a morphinederivative . . . it does not seem reasonable that such a claimcould be well founded. It is strange that such a claim shouldmislead anyone or that there should be found among the members ofour profession those who would reiterate and accentuate itwithout first subjecting it to the most critical tests, but suchis the fact." [Quoted in Lennard et. al., op. cit. p. 1079] 1903 The composition of Coca-Cola is changed, caffeinereplacing the cocaine it contained until this time. {Musto, op.cit. p. 43] 1904 Charles Lyman, president of the InternationalReform Bureau, petitions the President of the United States"to induce Great Britain to release China from the enforcedopium traffic. . . .We need not recall in detail that Chinaprohibited the sale of opium except as a medicine, until the salewas forced upon that country by Great Britian in the opium war of1840." [Quoted in Crafts et al., op. cit. p. 230] 1905 Senator Henry W. Blair, in a letter to Rev.Wilbur F. Crafts, Superintendent of the International ReformBureau: "The temperance movement must include all poisonoussubstances which create unnatural appetite, and internationalprohibition is the goal." [Quoted in ibid.] 1906 The first Pure Food and Drug Act becomes law;until its enactment, it was possible to buy, in stores or by mailorder medicines containing morphine, cocaine, or heroin, andwithout their being so labeled. 1906 *Squibb's Materia Medical* lists heroin as"a remedy of much value . . . is is also used as a mildanodyne and as a substitute for morphine in combatting themorphine habit. [Quoted in Lennard et al., op. cit. p. 1079] 1909 The United States prohibits the importation ofsmoking opium. [Lawrence Kolb, *Drug Addiction*, pp. 145-146] 1910 Dr. Hamilton Wright, considered by some thefather of U.S. anti-narcotics laws, reports that Americancontractors give cocaine to their Negro employees to get morework out of them. [Musto, op. cit. p. 180] 1912 A writer in *Century* magazine proclaims:"The relation of tobacco, especially in the form ofcigarettes, and alcohol and opium is a very close one. . . .Morphine is the legitimate consequence of alcohol, and alcohol isthe legitimate consequence of tobacco. Cigarettes, drink, opium,is the logical and regular series." And a physician warns:"[There is] no energy more destructive of soul, mind, andbody, or more subversive of good morals than the cigarette. Thefight against the cigarette is a fight for civilization."[Sinclar, op. cit., p. 180] 1912 The first international Opium Convention meets atthe Hague, and recommends various measures for the internationalcontrol of the trade in opium. Supsequent Opium Conventions areheld in 1913 and 1914. 1912 Phenobarbital is introduced into therapeuticsunder the trade name of Luminal. 1913 The Sixteenth Amendment, creating the legalauthority for federal income tax, is enacted. Between 1870 and1915, the tax on liquor provides from one-half to two-thirds ofthe whole of the internal revenue of the United States,amounting, after the turn of the century, to about $200 millionannually. The Sixteenth Amendment thus makes possible, just sevenyears later, the Eighteenth Amendment. 1914 Dr. Edward H Williams cites Dr. Christopher Kochs"Most of the attack upon white women of the South are thedirect result of the cocaine crazed Negro brain." Dr.Williams concluded that " . . Negro cocaine fiends are now aknown Southern menace." [New York Times, Feb. 8, 1914] 1914 The Harrison Narcotic Act is enacted, controllingthe sale of opium and opium derivatives, and cocaine. 1914 Congressman Richard P. Hobson of Alabama, urginga prohibition amendment to the Constitution, asserts:"Liquor will actually make a brute out of a Negro, causinghim to commit unnatural crimes. The effect is the same on thewhite man, though the white man being further evolved it takeslonger time to reduce him to the same level." Negro leadersjoin the crusade against alcohol. [Ibid., p. 29] 1916 The *Pharmacopoeia of the United States* dropswhiskey and brandy from its list of drugs. Four years later,American physicians begin prescribing these "drugs" inquantities never before prescribed by doctors. 1917 The president of the American Medical Associationendorses national prohibition. The House of Delegates of theAssociation passes a resolution stating: "Resolved, TheAmerican Medical Association opposes the use of alcohol as abeverage; and be it further Resolved, That the use of alcohol asa therapeutic agent should be discourages." By 1928,physicians make an estimated $40,000,000 annually by writingprescriptions for whiskey." [Ibid. p. 61] 1917 The American Medical Association passes aresolution declaring that "sexual continence is compatiblewith health and is the best prevention of venerealinfections," and one of the methods for controlling syphilisis by controlling alcohol. Secretary of the Navy Josephus Danielsprohibits the practice of distributing contraceptives to sailorsbound on shore leave, and Congress passes laws setting up"dry and decent zones" around military camps."Many barkeepers are fined for selling liquor to men inuniform. Only at Coney Island could soldiers and sailors changeinto the grateful anonymity of bathing suits and drink withoutmolestation from patriotic passers-by." [Ibid. pp. 117-118] 1918 The Anti-Saloon League calls the "liquortraffic" "un-American," pro-German,crime-producing, food-wasting, youth-corrupting, home-wrecking,[and] treasonable." [Quoted in ibid. p. 121] 1919 The Eighteenth (Prohibition) Amendment is addedto the U.S. Constitution. It is repealed in 1933. In the sameyear, violent crime drops two-thirds and does not reach the samelevels again until after World War II. 1920 The U.S. Department of Agriculture publishes apamphlet urging Americans to grow cannabis (marijuana) as aprofitable undertaking. [David F. Musto, An historicalperspective on legal and medical responses to substance abuse,*Villanova Law Review*, 18:808-817 (May), 1973; p. 816] 1920-1933 The use of alcohol is prohibited in theUnited States. In 1932 alone, approximately 45,000 personsreceive jail sentences for alcohol offenses. During the firsteleven years of the Volstead Act, 17,971 persons are appointed tothe Prohibition Bureau. 11,982 are terminated "withoutprejudice," and 1,604 are dismissed for bribery, extortion,theft, falsification of records, conspiracy, forgery, andperjury. [Fort, op. cit. p. 69] 1921 The U.S. Treasury Department issues regulationsoutlining the treatment of addiction permitted under the HarrisonAct. In Syracuse, New York, the narcotics clinic doctors reportcuring 90 per cent of their addicts. [Lindesmith, *The Addict andthe Law*, p. 141] 1921 Thomas S. Blair, M.D., chief of the Bureau ofDrug Control of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, publishesa paper in the *Journal of the American Medical Association* inwhich he characterizes the Indian peyote religion a "habitindulgence in certain cactaceous plants," calls the beliefsystem "superstition" and those who sell peyote"dope vendors," and urges the passage of a bill inCongress that would prohibit the use of peyote among the Indiantribes of the Southwest. He concludes with this revealing pleafor abolition: "The great difficulty in suppressing thishabit among the Indians arises from the fact that the commercialinterests involved in the peyote traffic are strongly entrenched,and they exploit the Indian. . . . Added to this is thesuperstition of the Indian who believes in the Peyote Church. Assoon as an effort is made to suppress peyote, the cry is raisedthat it is unconstitutional to do so and is an invasion ofreligious liberty. Suppose the Negros of the South had CocaineChurch!" [Thomas S. Blair, Habit indulgence in certaincactaceous plants among the Indians, *Journal of the AmericanMedical Association*, 76:1033-1034 (April 9), 1921; p. 1034] 1921 Cigarettes are illegal in fourteen states, andninety-two anti-cigarette bills are pending in twenty-eightstates. Young women are expelled from college for smokingcigarettes. [Brecher et al., op. cit. p. 492] 1921 The Council of the American Medical Associationrefuses to confirm the Associations 1917 Resolution on alcohol.In the first six months after the enactment of the Volstead Act,more than 15,000 physicians and 57,000 druggests and drugmanufacturers apply for licenses to prescribe and sell liquor.[Sinclair, op. cit., p. 492] 1921 Alfred C. Prentice, M.D. a member of theCommittee on Narcotic Drugs of the American Medical Association,declares "Public opinion regarding the vice of drugaddiction has been deliberately and consistently corruptedthrough propaganda in both the medical and lay press. . . . Theshallow pretense that drug addiction is a 'disease'. . . . hasbeen asserted and urged in volumes of 'literature' by self-styled'specialists.'" [Alfred C Prentice, The Problem of thenarcotic drug addict, *Journal of the American MedicalAssociation*, 76:1551-1556; p. 1553] 1924 The manufacture of heroin is prohibited in theUnited States. 1925 Robert A. Schless: "I believe that most drugaddiction today is due directly to the Harrison Anti-NarcoticAct, which forbids the sale of narcotics without a physician'sprescription. . . . Addicts who are broke act as *agentprovocateurs* for the peddlers, being rewarded by gifts of heroinor credit for supplies. The Harrison Act made the drug peddler,and the drug peddler makes drug addicts." [Robert A.Schless, The drug addict, *American Mercury*, 4:196-199 (Feb.),1925; p. 198] 1928 In a nationwide radio broadcast entitled"The Struggle of Mankind Against Its Deadlist Foe,"celebrating the second annual Narcotic Education Week, RichmondP. Hobson, prohibition crusader and anti-narcotics propagandist,declares: "Suppose it were announced that there were morethan a million lepers among our people. Think what a shock theannouncement would produce! Yet drug addiction is far moreincurable than leprosy, far more tragic to its victims, and isspreading like a moral and physical scourge. . . . Most of thedaylight robberies, daring holdups, cruel murders and similarcrimes of violence are now known to be committed chiefly by drugaddicts, who constitute the primary cause of our alarming crimewave. Drug addiction is more communicable and less curable thatleprosy. . . . Upon the issue hangs the perpetuation ofcivilization, the destiny of the world, and the future of thehuman race." [Quoted in Musto, *The American Disease*, p.191] 1928 It is estimated that in Germany one out of everyhundred physicians is a morphine addict, consuming 0.1 grams ofthe alkaloid or more per day. [Eric Hesse, *Narcotics and DrugAddiction*, p. 41] 1929 About one gallon of denatured industrial in tenis diverted into bootleg liquor. About forty Americans permillion die each year from drinking illegal alcohol, mainly as aresult of methyl (wood) alcohol poisoning. [Sinclare, op. cit. p.201] 1930 The Federal Bureau of Narcotics is formed. Manyof its agents, including its first commissioner, Harry J.Anslinger, are former prohibition agents. 1935 The American Medical Association passes aresolution declaring that "alcoholics are validpatients." [Quoted in Neil Kessel and Henry Walton,*Alcoholism*, p. 21] 1936 The Pan-American Coffee Burreau is organized topromote coffee use in the U.S. Between 1938 and 1941 coffeeconsumption increased 20%. From 1914 to 1938 consumption hadincreased 20%. [Coffee, *Encyclopedia Britannica* (1949), Vol. 5,p. 975A] 1937 Shortly before the Marijuana Tax Act,Commissioner Harry J. Anslinger writes: "How many murders,suicides, robberies, criminal assaults, hold-ups, burglaries, anddeeds of maniacal insanity it [marijuana] causes each year,especially among the young, can only be conjectured."[Quoted in John Kaplan, *Marijuana*, p. 92] 1937 The Marijuana Tax Act is enacted. 1938 Since the enactment of the Harrison Act in 1914,25,000 physicians have been arraigned on narcotics charges, and3,000 have served penitentiary sentences. [Kolb, op. cit. p. 146] 1938 Dr. Albert Hoffman, a chemist at SandozLaboratories in Basle, Switzerland, synthesizes LSD. Five yearslater he inadvertently ingests a small amount of it, and observesand reports effects on himself. 1941 Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek orders the completesuppression of the poppy; laws are enacted providing the deathpenalty for anyone guilty of cultivating the poppy, manufacturingopium, or offering it for sale. [Lindesmith, *The Addict and theLaw*, 198] 1943 Colonel J.M. Phalen, editor of the *MilitarySurgeon*, declares in an editorial entitled "The MarijuanaBugaboo": "The smoking of the leaves, flowers, andseeds of Cannibis sativa is no more harmful than the smoking oftobacco. . . . It is hoped that no witch hunt will be institutedin the military service over a problem that does not exist."[Quoted in ibid. p. 234] 1946 According to some estimates there are 40,000,000opium smokers in China. [Hesse, op. cit. p. 24] 1949 Ludwig von Mises, leading modern free-marketeconomist and social philosopher: "Opium and morphine arecertainly dangerous, habit-forming drugs. But once the principleis admitted that is the duty of government to protect theindividual against his own foolishness, no serious objections canbe advanced against further encroachments. A good case could bemade out in favor of the prohibition of alcohol and nicotine. Andwhy limit the governments benevolent providence to the protectionof the individual's body only? Is is not the harm a man caninflect on his mind and soul even more disastrous than any bodilyevils? Why not prevent him from reading bad books and seeing badplays, from looking at bad paintings and statues and listening tobad music? The mischief done by bad ideologies, surely, is muchmore pernicious, both for the individual and for the wholesociety, than that done by narcotic drugs." [Ludwig vonMises, *Human Action*, pp. 728-729] 1951 According to United Nations estimates, there areapproximately 200 million marijuana users in the world, the majorplaces being India, Egypt, North Africa, Mexico, and the UnitedStates. [Jock Young, *The Drug Takers*, p. 11] 1951 Twenty thousand pound of opium, three hundredpounds of heroin, and various opium-smoking devices are publiclyburned in Canton China. Thirty-seven opium addicts are executedin the southwest of China. [Margulies, China has no drugproblem--why? *Parade*, 0ct. 15 1972, p. 22] 1954 Four-fifths of the French people questioned aboutwine assert that wine is "good for one's health," andone quarter hold that it is "indispensable." It isestimated that a third of the electorate in France receives allor part of its income from the production or sale of alcoholicbeverages; and that there Is one outlet for every forty- fiveinhabitants. [Kessel and Walton, op. cit. pp. 45, 73] 1955 The Prasidium des Deutschen Arztetages declares:"Treatment of the drug addict should be effected in theclosed sector of a psychiatric institution. Ambulatory treatmentis useless and in conflict, moreover, with principles of medicalethics." The view is quoted approvingly, as representativeof the opinion of "most of the authors recommendingcommitment to an institution," by the World HealthOrganization in 1962. [World Health Organization, *The Treatmentof Drug Addicts*, p. 5] 1955 The Shah of Iran prohibits the cultivation anduse of opium, used in the country for thousands of years; theprohibition creates a flourishing illicit market in opium. In1969 the prohibition is lifted, opium growing is resumed understate inspection, and more than 110,000 persons receive opiumfrom physicians and pharmacies as "registered addicts."[Henry Kamm, They shoot opium smugglers in Iran, but . . ."*The New York Times Magazine*, Feb. 11, 1973, pp. 42-45] 1956 The Narcotics Control Act in enacted; it providesthe death penalty, if recommended by the jury, for the sale ofheroin to a person under eighteen by one over eighteen.[Lindesmith, *The Addict and the Law*, p. 26] 1958 Ten percent of the arable land in Italy is underviticulture; two million people earn their living wholly orpartly from the production or sale of wine. [Kessel and Walton,op. cit., p. 46] 1960 The United States report to the United NationsCommission on Narcotic Drugs for 1960 states: "There were44,906 addicts in the United States on December 31, 1960 . .." [Lindesmith, *The Addict and The Law*, p. 100] 1961 The United Nations' "Single Convention onNarcotic Drugs of 10 March 1961" is ratified. Among theobligations of the signatory states are the following: "Art.42. Know users of drugs and persons charges with an offense underthis Law may be committed by an examining magistrate to a nursinghome. . . . Rules shall be also laid down for the treatment insuch nursing homes of unconvicted drug addicts and dangerousalcoholics." [Charles Vaille, A model law for theapplication of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,*United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics*, 21:1-12 (April-June),1961] 1963 Tobacco sales total $8.08 billion, of which $3.3billion go to federal, state, and local taxes. A news releasefrom the tobacco industry proudly states: "Tobacco productspass across sales counters more frequently than anythingelse--except money." [Tobacco: After publicity surge SurgeonGeneral's Report seems to have little enduring effect, *Science*,145:1021-1022 (Sept. 4), 1964; p. 1021] 1964 The British Medical Association, in a Memorandumof Evidence to the Standing Medical Advisory Committee's SpecialSub- committee on Alcoholism, declares: "We feel that insome very bad cases, compulsory detention in hospital offer theonly hope of successful treatment. . . . We believe that somealcoholics would welcome compulsory removal and detention inhospital until treatment is completed." [Quoted in Kesseland Walton, op. cit. p. 126] 1964 An editorial in *The New York Times* callsattention to the fact that "the Government continues to bethe tobacco industry's biggest booster. The Department ofAgriculture lost $16 million in supporting the price of tobaccoin the last fiscal year, and stands to loose even more because ithas just raised the subsidy that tobacco growers will get ontheir 1964 crop. At the same time, the Food for Peace program isgetting rid of surplus stocks of tobacco abroad."[Editorial, Bigger agricultural subsidies. . .even more fortobacco, *The New York Times*, Feb. 1, 1964, p. 22] 1966 Sen. Warren G. Magnuson makes public a program,sponsored by the Agriculture Department, to subsidize"attempts to increase cigarette consumption abroad. . . .The Department is paying to stimulate cigarette smoking in atravelogue for $210,000 to subsidize cigarette commercials inJapan, Thailand, and Austria." An Agriculture Departmentspokesman corroborates that "the two programs were preparedunder a congressional authorization to expand overseas marketsfor U.S. farm commodities." [Edwin B. Haakinsom, Senatorshocked at U.S. try to hike cigarette use abroad, *SyracuseHerald-American*, Jan. 9, 1966, p. 2] 1966 Congress enacts the "Narcotics AddictRehabilitation Act, inaugurating a federal civil commitmentprogram for addicts. 1966 C. W. Sandman, Jr. chairman of the New JerseyNarcotic Drug Study Commission, declares that LSD is "thegreatest threat facing the country today . . . more dangerousthan the Vietnam War." [Quoted in Brecher et al., op. cit.p. 369] 1967 New York State's "Narcotics AddictionControl Program" goes into effect. It is estimated to cost$400 million in three years, and is hailed by GovernmentRockefeller as the "start of an unending war . . ."Under the new law, judges are empowered to commit addicts forcompulsory treatment for up to five years. [Murray Schumach, Planfor addicts will open today: Governor hails start, *The New YorkTimes*, April 1, 1967] 1967 The tobacco industry in the United States spendsan estimated $250 million on advertising smoking. [Editorial, Itdepends on you, *Health News* (New York State), 45:1 (March),1968] 1968 The U.S. tobacco industry has gross sales of $8billion. Americans smoke 544 billion cigarettes. [Fort, op. cit.p. 21] 1968 Canadians buy almost 3 billion aspirin tabletsand approximately 56 million standard does of amphetamines. About556 standard doses of barbituates are also produced or importedfor consumption in Canada. [Canadian Government's Commission ofInquiry, *The Non-Medical Uses of Drugs*, p. 184 1968 Six to seven percent of all prescriptions writtenunder the British National Health Service are for barbituates; itis estimated that about 500,000 British are regular users.[Young, op. cit. p. 25] 1968 Brooklyn councilman Julius S. Moskowitz chargesthat the work of New York City's Addiction Services Agency, underits retiring Commissioner, Dr. Efren Ramierez, was a"fraud," and that "not a single addict has beencured." [Charles G. Bennett, Addiction agency called a"fraud," *New York Times*, Dec. 11, 1968, p. 47] 1969 U.S. production and value of some medicalchemicals: barbituates: 800,000 pounds, $2.5 million; aspirin(exclusive of salicylic acid) 37 milliion pounds, value"withheld to avoid disclosing figures for individualproducers"; salicylic acid: 13 million pounds, $13 million;tranquilizers: 1.5 million pounds, $7 million. [*StatisticalAbstracts of the United States*, 1971 92nd Annual Edition, p. 75] 1969 The parents of 6,000 secondary-level students inClifton, New Jersey, are sent letters by the Board of Educationasking permission to conduct saliva tests on their children todetermine whether or not they use marijuana. [Saliva tests askedfor Jersey youths on marijuana use, *New York Times*, Apr. 11,1969, p. 12] 1970 Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Laureate inMedicine and Physiology, in reply to being asked what he would doif he were twenty today: "I would share with my classmatesrejection of the whole world as it is--all of it. Is there anypoint in studying and work? Fornication--at least that issomething good. What else is there to do? Fornicate and takedrugs against the terrible strain of idiots who govern theworld." [Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, in *The New York Times*, Feb.20, 1970, quoted in Mary Breastead, *Oh! Sex Education!*, p. 359] 1971 President Nixon declares that "America'sPublic Enemy No. 1 is drug abuse." In a message to Congress,the President calls for the creation of a Special Action Officeof Drug Abuse Prevention. [The New Public Enemy No. 1, *Time*,June 28, 1971, p. 18] 1971 On June 30, 1971, President Cvedet Sunay ofTurkey decrees that all poppy cultivation and opium productionwill be forbidden beginning in the fall of 1972. [Patricia M Waldet al. (Eds.), *Dealing with Drug Abuse*, p. 257] 1972 Myles J. Ambrose, Special Assistant AttorneyGeneral of the United States: "As of 1960, the Bureau ofNarcotics estimated that we had somewhere in the neighborhood of55,000 addicts . . . they estimate now the figure is 560,000.[Quoted in *U.S. News and World Report*, April 3, 1972, p. 38] 1972 The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsproposes restricting the use of barbituates on the ground thatthey "are more dangerous than heroin." [Restrictionsproposed on barbituate sales, *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, Mar 16,1972, p. 32] 1972 The house votes 366 to 0 to authorize "a $1billion, three-year federal attack on drug abuse." [$1billion voted for drug fight, *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, March16, 1972, p. 32] 1972 At the Bronx house of corrections, out of a totalof 780 inmates, approximately 400 are given tranquilizers such asValium, Elavil, Thorazine, and Librium. "'I think they [theinmates] would be doing better without some of the medication,'said Capt. Robert Brown, a correctional officer. He said that ina way the medications made his job harder . . . rather thanbecoming calm, he said, an inmate who had become addicted to hismedication 'will do anything when he can't get it.'" [RonaldSmothers, Muslims: What's behind the violence, *The New YorkTimes*, Dec. 26, 1972, p. 18] 1972 In England, the pharmacy cost of heroin is $.04per grain (60 mg.), or $.00067 per mg. In the United States, thestreet price is $30 to $90 per grain, or $.50 or $1.50 per mg.[Wald et al. (Eds.) op. cit. p. 28] 1973 A nationwide Gallop poll reveals that 67 percentof the adults interviewed "support the proposal of New YorkGovernor Nelson Rockefeller that all sellers of hard drugs begiven life imprisonment without possibility of parole."[George Gallup, Life for pushers, *Syracuse Herald-American*,Feb. 11, 1973] 1973 Michael R. Sonnenreich, Executive Director of theNational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse, declares:"About our years ago we spent a total of $66.4 million forthe entire federal effort in the drug abuse area. . . . This yearwe have spent $796.3 million and the budget estimates that havebeen submitted indicate that we will exceed the $1 billion mark.When we do so, we become, for want of a better term, a drug abuseindustrial complex.: [Michael R. Sonnenreich, Discussion of theFinal Report of the National Commission on Marijuana and DrugAbuse, *Villanova Law Review*, 18:817-827 (May), 1973; p. 818] 1972 Operation Intercept. All vehicles returning fromMexico are checked by Nixon's order. Long lines occur and, asusual no dent is made in drug traffic. 1977 The Joint Committee of the New York BarAssociation concludes that the Rockefeller drug laws, thetoughest in the nation, have had no effect in reducing drug usebut have clogged the courts and the criminal justice system tothe point of gridlock. 1981 Congress ammends the 1878 Posse Comitatus Act,which forbids the armed forces to enforce civil law, so that themilitary could provide surveillance planes and ships forinterdiction purposes. 1984 U.S. busts 10,000 pounds of marijuana on farms inMexico. The seizures, made on five farms in an isolated sectionof Chihuahua state, suggest a 70 percent increase in estimatesthat total U.S. consumption was 13,000 to 14,000 tons in 1982.Furthermore, the seizures add up to nearly eight times the 1300tons that officials had calculated Mexico produced in 1983. [theSan Francisco Chronicle, Saturday, November 24, 1984] 1985 Pentagon spends $40 million on interdiction. By1990, the General Accounting Office will report that themilitary's efforts have had no discernible impact on the flow ofdrugs. 1986 The Communist Party boss, Boris Yeltsin said thatthe Moscow school system is rife with drug addiction, drunkennessand principles that take bribes. He said that drug addiction hasbecome such a problem that there are 3700 registered addicts inMoscow. [The San Francisco Chronicle, Sept. 22, 1986, p. 12] Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Main Page WT01-B22-20IA031-000652-B036-165http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/baum1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124929 text/html 17310HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:49:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:24 GMTContent-length: 17092 Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors by Dan Baum, 1996 Dan Baum has written what may be the best modern history ofthe political doings behind the War on Drugs over the last 30years. You can find a copy through your local bookstore, or visitDan Baum's Website: http://members.aol.com/danbaum/baum.html. William Bennett When William Bennett moved across town from the Department ofEducation to be "czar" at the Office of National DrugControl Policy, he brought his people with him. All white, allmale, none with law enforcement or social-service experience,some had been with Bennett the entire eight years since his debutat the National Endowment for the Humanities. Bennett's men held themselves above the mere budget-cutters,tax-slashers, regulation-busters, and states-rightsers thatcomprised the broader executive branch. John Walters, Bennett'schief of staff at Education and author of the punitive SchoolsWithout Drugs, had been to meetings of Ed Meese's Drug PolicyBoard and had been appalled at their inanity. Everybody was sobusy jockeying for position that nobody ever ventured an honestopinion or original idea. Bennett's office, on the other hand,prided itself on being one continuous philosophy forum, withgreat questions of political theory and national purpose thestuff of daily conversation. Envisioning themselves a kind ofideological Bennettista cavalry to the Republican infantry,Bennett's crew saw their mission at the drug office asfundamentally identical to that at Education or the Endowment: Toreform America's character, by force if necessary. It would have been okay with them to be assigned teenpregnancy, abortion, welfare -- any platform from which toharangue the public about values and exact punishment fortransgression. "Drugs are the hill we're fighting over atthe moment, but the war is much bigger than that," BruceCarnes, Bennett's budget director, would say. "Our fight isany issue that has a shade on character." The "hill" they'd just been given to fight over,though, wasn't just any piece of political turf, but was thehottest hot-button issue of the decade. More than half thecountry believed drugs to be the America's worst problem.Majorities favored mandatory drug tests for all citizens,warrantless police searches of suspected dealers' homes, androadblocks to search cars randomly. This wasn't mere nakedpaintings or politically correct social studies textbooks. Thiswas a chance to preach and kick ass on the nation's brightly litcenter stage. Even before Bennett's Senate confirmation, his men beganplotting their course. The same 1988 law that created the drugczar's office also required it to produce a drug-control strategyby September, and there was no time to waste. Bennett himselfwasn't around much. He'd checked himself into a $700-a-weektherapeutic resort to kick his two-pack-a-day cigarette habit. But in the lofty and freewheeling style to which they'dbecome accustomed, Bennett's core group of advisors began layingout the assumptions on which national drug policy would hereafterbe based. At this point, the United States had been fighting its War onDrugs for twenty years. Despite the billions spent, the millionsimprisoned, and the loss of liberties to both drug user andnon-user alike, drugs were cheaper, more potent, and used byyounger children than when Nixon started the War. The drugcartels were wealthier and more sophisticated than ever. Thenumber of cocaine dependents had grown. Drug violence, unheard ofat the start of the Drug War, now terrorized poor neighborhoods.Drug combatants died daily; just the number of slain innocentbystanders had tripled in the two years prior to Bush'sinauguration. Rather than evaluate the efficacy of the War onDrugs and the wisdom of pursuing it, Bennett and his men merelyshuffled the deck one more time. Under Nixon, heroin was the big bad drug. Halfway throughCarter's reign, marijuana nudged it aside. As the public'spassion to fight marijuana waned, cocaine was thrust forward todraw fire. Then crack. The Drug War front shifted endlessly too,from the border to the streets to Bolivia to the money-launderingbanks to the suburbs and back to the border again. Now it was the Bennettistas' turn, and they achieved the mostradical recasting of the country's "drug problem" yet:Drugs would no longer be discussed as a health problem. The physical dangers of illegal drugs had always been theDrug War's causa belli. Even the "zero tolerance"policy of the late Reagan years was couched in the rhetoric of"instantaneous addiction" and "the poisoning ofour children": health terminology. That had to stop. Because if the drug issue was going toserve the Bennettistas' decade-long crusade to police thenation's character, drug abuse needed to be placed in the samecategory as offensive art, multicultural teaching, and ethicalrelativism: a matter of morality. "The simple fact is that drug use is wrong,"Bennett decreed. "And the moral argument, in the end, is themost compelling argument." Terence Pell, Bennett's personallawyer from Education and now the drug office's chief counsel,put it this way: "We have to believe. If you think drugs arebad, that they make people bad neighbors, horrible parents,dangerous drivers and what have you, then you think drugs arebad. There's a moral dimension." If drugs are a health problem then addicts are"sick," and that cast them in a sympathetic light theBennettistas felt addicts didn't deserve. The decision to takedrugs that first time, after all, is voluntary. Walters directlyattacked the old approach. "The health people say 'nostigma,'" he would say, "and I'm for stigma." The medical model of drug abuse was to Bennett's men aphilosophic and practical morass. If you base prohibition ondrugs' health effects, what do you say to the millions ofoccasional users who convincingly claim to be uninjured by thedrugs they took? If you acknowledge that heavy drug users aresick, you create an expectation that the government will treatthem. The biggest problem with basing a prohibitive drug policy onthe health risks, though, was the invitation to comparisons. Theyear the chain-smoking Bennett became drug czar, tobacco killedsome 395,000 Americans -- more than died in both world wars.Alcohol directly killed 23,000 and another 22,400 on thehighways. The Natural Resources Defense Council in Marchpublished a report, widely praised by medical authorities,estimating that as many as 5,500 Americans would develop cancerfrom the pesticides they ate during their preschool years. Theincidence of breast cancer in American women had more thandoubled since World War II, owing largely to dioxin and otherpollutants. Cocaine, on the other hand, killed 3,308 people thatyear, slightly less than died from anterior horn cell disease.Heroin and other opiates killed 2,743. And no death frommarijuana has ever been recorded. Drugs damage without killing, of course, but even here otherpreventable health problems put illegal drugs in deep shade. TheGeneral Accounting Office, Congress's non-partisan investigativeagency, estimated that some 350,000 people were using cocainedaily in 1989. While that's a big number, 15 times that manychildren were going to bed hungry at least once a month thatyear, 50 times that many Americans were sleeping on the streets,and 100 times that many had no health insurance. Discussing drugs as a moral problem obviated suchcomparisons. If the case could be made that drug use is simplywrong, then it wouldn't matter that some people use drugs safely,that alcohol and tobacco kill more people than reefer and smack,that more American than European children know hunger. The Bennettistas worked hard to address the inconsistenciesof their approach. Their most glaring problem was the new drugczar himself. By any medical definition, Bennett was a drugaddict, so dependent on nicotine after giving up the drug in itssmokable form that he now carried everywhere a pack of nicotinechewing gum and was up to 40 milligrams of nicotine a day --about as much as in two packs of cigarettes. Alcohol was another problem. Bennett's drug office had noCongressional mandate to address it, his mainstream constituencyenjoyed it, and the alcohol industry's mulitmillion-dollar lobbywouldn't stand for further restrictions on booze. So the drugoffice needed somehow to place alcohol on the "moral"side of the line. No small trick. Aside from the cirrhosis andhighway deaths, booze was implicated in violent crime to a muchgreater degree than any illegal drug. The Justice Departmentfound that half of those convicted of homicide in 1989 were usingalcohol at the time of the killing, while fewer than six percentsaid they were on drugs alone. Bennett's men tiptoed through the minefield of alcohol andtobacco. John Walters took the position that marijuana, cocaine,and heroin, "enslave people" and "prevent themfrom being free citizens" in a way that alcohol and tobaccodo not. Bruce Carnes decided that drug taking was"life-denying," and "inward," but thatalcohol and tobacco were not. Illegal drugs, Bennett said in aspeech that May, "obliterate morals, value, character, ourrelations with each other and our relation to God." None ofthese conclusions was based on science, but collectively they hadthe effect of royal fiat. The Bennettistas also relied on a neat bit of tautology:marijuana, heroin, and cocaine are immoral because they areillegal. Why are they illegal? Because they are immoral.Compliance, not health, was the real issue. "Now that thegovernment has spoken to the subject that drugs areunlawful," said Paul McNulty, a Bennettista soul-matedirecting communications at the Justice Department, "aperson who disobeys the law has made a moral choice and should bedealt with appropriately." Bennett freely admitted drugenforcement was but an instrument of a wider agenda, calling for"the reconstitution of legal and social authority throughthe imposition of appropriate consequences for drug dealing anddrug use." "The drug crisis," he told theWashington Hebrew congregation, "is a crisis of authority,in every sense of the term, 'authority." Consequently, "a massive wave of arrests is a toppriority for the War on Drugs," Bennett announced.Washington, D.C. had arrested 45,000 of its citizens for drugs inthe two years prior to Bennett's appointment, "withoutmaking an appreciable dent in either the drug trade or the murderrate," Newsweek noted. But Bennett wanted more of the same.On the day he was sworn in, he declared the city a "highintensity drug trafficking area" and unveiled a massive planto fight drugs in the nation's capital. More than eighty federalagents would bolster the city's drug squad. A curfew would sweepthe streets of minors after 11 p.m. A judge ruled the curfewunconstitutional, but the mood was infectious. Some members ofCongress suggested declaring de facto martial law -- placing theD.C. police under federal control and sending in the Army andNational Guard. Of the $100 million Bennett wanted spent in D.C.,95 percent was for law enforcement. Of that, more than half wouldgo to a new prison, and until that could be built, Bennettproposed converting abandoned military buildings into makeshiftdrug prisons. As for the purpose of all this new incarceration,Bennett was characteristically blunt: "I'm not a person whosays that the first purpose of punishment isrehabilitation," he told Congress. "The first purposeis moral, to exact a price for transgressing the rights ofothers." Elvis Presley The year ended on an odd note for the War on Drugs. Four daysbefore Christmas 1971, Egil Krogh's phone rang. It was DwightChapin, from Bob Haldeman's staff. "The King is here," Chapin said. "King who?" Krogh asked. "No kings on thepresident's schedule today." "Not just any two-bit king," Chapin answered."The King. Elvis. The King of Rock." Elvis Presley had appeared that morning at the Northwest Gateof the White House and handed the guard a nearly illegiblesix-page letter on American Airlines stationery. He was anadmirer of the president, Presley wrote, and he wanted to helpspread Nixon's anti-drug message. He was well positioned, too:."The drug culture, the hippie elements, the SDS, BlackPanthers, etc. do not consider me as their enemy or as they callit The Establishment." To dispel any doubts as to his ownloyalty, Presley added in bold underline, "I call it Americaand I love it!" Then Presley made his pitch. "I can and will do moregood if I were made a Federal Agent at Large. . . . All I need isthe Federal credentials." Presley was registered at a nearby hotel under the name JonBurrows. "I will be here for as long as it takes to get thecredentials of a Federal Agent," Presley wrote. "I havedone an in-depth study of drug abuse and Communist brainwashingtechniques and I am right in the middle of the whole thing whereI can and will do the most good." Though he didn't mention it in the note to Nixon, Presley wasa collector of police badges. And he was a dopehound of legendaryexcess. But in the squareball Nixon White House, Presley foundperhaps the only people in the United States who didn't knowthat. Krogh certainly didn't. He took the letter at face value. At 12:30, the King was relieved of his present for the chiefexecutive - a nickel-plated .45 automatic, complete withammunition -- and ushered into the office of the president. Nixon was dressed like Nixon: blue suit, white shirt, tie.Elvis was dressed like Elvis: black velvet jacket, chest hair,gold medallions, sunglasses and a belt buckle big as a dinnerplate. He pulled up a sleeve to exhibit cufflinks the size ofhamsters. As Nixon bent close to examine them, Elvis launchedinto a tirade against the Beatles, who he accused of beinganti-American. "You know," Nixon said. "Those who use thedrugs are the protesters. You know, the ones who get caught up indissent and violence. They're the same group of youngpeople." "Mr. President," Elvis said, "I'm on yourside. I want to be helpful. And I want to help get people torespect the flag because that's getting lost." Then Elvis got to the point. "Mr. President, can you getme a badge from the Narcotics Bureau?" Krogh was afraid of this. He'd already called the number-twoman at BNDD who earlier that day had thrown Elvis out. Elvis hadgone there before stopping at the Northwest gate, and offered a$5,000 "donation" to BNDD in return for a badge. Nixon, not knowing any of that, looked uncertainly at Krogh."Bud, can we get him a badge?" "If you want to give him a badge, I think we can get himone." "I'd like to do that. See that he gets one." Elvis then did something nobody had ever done in the NixonOval Office; he gathered the president up in his arms and gavehim a big bear hug. The staff was stunned; the photographerdidn't even get a picture. Nixon endured it stiffly, handed outpresidential tie clasps, and dismissed the King with a hearty paton the shoulder. And so it came to pass that on the day Elvis Presley died ofa drug overdose in 1977, he was a credentialed Special Assistantin the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-21IA031-000652-B036-191http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/drug_law_timeline.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124944 text/html 15425HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:49:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:05 GMTContent-length: 15207 Drug Law Timeline Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Drug Law Timeline Significant Events in the History of our Drug Laws Year Event 1600s Colonial laws required farmers to grow hemp because it was used for ropes and sails on ships. A good hemp industry was important to the shipping industry. 1700s Hemp was the primary crop grown by George Washington at Mount Vernon, and a secondary crop grown by Thomas Jefferson at Monticello. 1844 Cocaine was synthesized 1845 A law prohibiting the public sale of liquor is enacted in New York State. It is repealed in 1847. 1847 The American Medical Association is founded. 1860s Opiates see widespread use as a pain killer for injured soldiers during the Civil War. Opiates were the first real miracle drugs because they allowed the patient to be anesthetized while the doctor performed surgery. Before the advent of opiates, the most common surgery was a simple amputation. That is, the doctor got several big strong people to hold the patient down and then literally sawed off an arm or a leg while the patient screamed in pain. For this reason, a good doctor was a fast doctor. Battlefield hospitals during the Civil War commonly had large piles of severed arms and legs. The use of opiates as anesthesia gave doctors time to work on the patient and actually made modern surgery possible. 1869 The Prohibition Party is formed. Gerrit Smith, twice Abolitionist candidate for President, an associate of John Brown, and a crusading prohibitionist, declares: "Our involuntary slaves are set free, but our millions of voluntary slaves still clang their chains. The lot of the literal slave, of him whom others have enslaved, is indeed a hard one; nevertheless, it is a paradise compared with the lot of him who has enslaved himself to alcohol." [Quoted in Sinclar, op. cit. pp. 83-84] 1870s The first laws against opium smoking were passed in San Francisco and Virginia City. Opium itself was not outlawed and remained available in any number of over-the-counter products. Only the smoking of opium was outlawed, because that was a peculiarly Chinese habit and the laws were specifically directed at the Chinese. The white people in the communities feared that Chinese men were luring white women to have sex in opium dens. The patent medicine industry started its rise. Because there were no restrictions on advertising, labeling, or contents of any products the patent medicine industry made up all sorts of concoctions including the opiates, cocaine, and other drugs, and sold them with the most extravagant advertising claims. This led to a rise in addiction. Addiction was poorly understood. Morphine and heroin were recommended as remedies for alcohol addiction. French Wine of Coca: Invigorating Tonic became a popular soft drink because it contained cocaine. It went on to become Coca-Cola and, together with other similar drinks like Pepsi-Cola, made the soda fountain a common part of the neighborhood pharmacy. 1874 The Woman's Christian Temperance Union is founded in Cleveland. In 1883, Frances Willard a leader of the W.C.T.U. forms the World's Woman's Christian Temperance Union. 1882 The law in the United States, and the world, making "temperance education" a part of the required course in public schools is enacted. In 1886, Congress makes such education mandatory in the District of Columbia, and in territorial, military, and naval schools. By 1900, all the states have similar laws. [Crafts et. al., op. cit. p. 72] The Personal Liberty League of the United States is founded to oppose the increasing momentum of movements for compulsory abstinence from alcohol. [Catlin, op. cit. p. 114] 1884 Sigmund Freud treats his depression with cocaine, and reports feeling "exhilaration and lasting euphoria, which is in no way differs from the normal euphoria of the healthy person. . . You perceive an increase in self-control and possess more vitality and capacity for work. . . . In other words, you are simply more normal, and it is soon hard to believe that you are under the influence of a drug." [Quoted in Ernest Jones, *The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1, p. 82] Freud later died of effects of tobacco-induced cancer. He was able to break his addiction to cocaine, but could not break his addiction to cigar smoking even though most of the lower part of his face had been removed by cancer surgery. Laws are enacted to make anti-alcohol teaching compulsory in public schools in New York State. The following year similar laws are passed in Pennsylvania, with other states soon following suit. 1906 The Pure Food and Drug Act was passed, forming the Food and Drug Administration and giving it power to regulate foods and drugs, and requiring labeling of contents on foods and drugs. The most important effect on the drug problem was the demise of the patent medicine industry. Drug addiction began a dramatic drop. 1914 The Harrison Tax Act was passed, effectively outlawing the opiates and cocaine. 1915 Utah passed the first state anti-marijuana law. Mormons who had gone to Mexico in 1910 returned smoking marijuana. It was outlawed at a result of the Utah legislature enacting all Mormon religion prohibitions as criminal laws. 1922 Narcotic Drug Import and Export Act - Intended to eliminate use of narcotics except for legitimate medicinal use 1924 Heroin Act -Makes it illegal to manufacture heroin 1937 Marijuana Tax Act Applies controls over marijuana similar to narcotics 1938 Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act FDA given control over drug safety, Drugs redefined: effect body even in absence of disease, Establishes class of drugs available by Prescription (Company determines status) 1942 Opium Poppy Control Act Prohibits growing poppy w/o license 1951 Durham-Humphrey Amendment Established more specific guidelines for prescription drugs: habit forming, safety, and evaluation of new drugs 1951 Boggs Amendment to the Harrison Narcotic Act Mandatory sentences for narcotic violations 1956 Narcotics Control Act Intends to impose even more severe penalties for narcotics violations 1965 Drug Abuse Control Amendments (DACA) Strict controls over amphetamines, barbiturates, LSD, etc. 1966 Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act (NARA) Allows treatment as an alternative to jail 1968 DACA Amendments Provides that sentence may be suspended and record expunged if no further violations within 1 year 1970 Comprehensive Drug Abuse and Control Act Replaces and updates all previous laws concerning narcotics and other dangerous drugs. Empasis on law enforcement. 1972 Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act Establishes federally funded programs for prevention and treatment 1973 Methadone Control Act Regulates methadone licensing 1973 Heroin Trafficking Act Increases penalties for distribution 1973 Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA) Consolidates NIMH, NIDA, and NIAAA under umbrella organization 1973 Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) Remodels Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs into DEA 1974 and 1978 Drug Abuse Treatment and Control Amendments Extends 1972 act 1978 Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education Amendments Sets up education programs within Department of Education 1980 Drug Abuse Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Amendments Extends prevention education and treatment programs 1984 Drug Offenders Act Sets up special programs for offenders and organizes treatment 1986 Analogue (Designer Drug) Act Makes use of substances with similar effects and structure to existing illicit drug illegal 1988 Anti-Drug Abuse Act Establishes oversight office: National Drug Control Policy 1992 ADAMHA Reorganization Transfers NIDA, NIMH, and NIAAA to NIH and incorporates ADAMHA's programs into the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-22IA031-000652-B036-228http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/soldis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125005 text/html 87163HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:49:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:28 GMTContent-length: 86945 Mythical Roots of US Drug Policy - Soldier's Disease andAddicts in the Civil War Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTS IN THE CIVIL WAR by Jerry Mandel* 1779 Haight St. San Francisco, CA 94117 Special thanks to Marvin Scott for kind encouragement andsuperb editing. THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTION IN THECIVIL WAR Abstract Soldier's Disease -- widespread addiction following massiveadministration of opiates during the Civil War -- is the earliestand most often repeated example of a drug problem before thenarcotics laws. The story exemplifies several basic themes usedin support of continued drug prohibition -- addiction is easy toacquire, hard to kick, and is a publicly noticed, i.e. asocial,problem. Soldier's Disease, though, is a myth. Not one caseof addiction was reported in medical records or the literature ofthe time; under ten references were made in the NineteenthCentury to addiction the cause of which was the Civil War; and noperjorative nickname for addicted veterans, like Soldier'sDisease, appeared in the literature until 1 9 15, and it did notbecome part of the Conventional Wisdom of drug experts untilalmost a century after Appomattox. THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTS IN THE CIVILWAR myth ... 1: a usu. traditional story of ostensiblyhistorical events that serves to unfold part of the world view ofa people or explain a practice, belief, or natural phenomena ... 3... b: an ill-founded belief held uncritically esp. by aninterested group. Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, 1973 The earliest (and often the only) example of opiate addictionas a social problem which is frequently cited by drug experts is Soldier'sDisease -- widespread addiction resulting from widespreadopiate use in the Civil War. Most writers who report Soldier'sDisease devote no more than three sentences to it. It is thebrevity, clarity, "catchiness," and conceptualimplication of "Soldier's Disease" which accounts forthe contemporary significance of such a fleeting reference.Possibly the lengthiest and most graphic description of opiateuse in the Civil War, resulting in massive addiction amongveterans, was provided by Gerald Starkey, a century after thatwar: In 1862 (sic) the Civil War broke out.... They would chargeeach other, literally pound chains down cannons and fire pointblank at the enemy and these young men were presented to theirfield surgeons with terrible shrapnel wounds ... along withterrible pain. About all the field surgeon could do was use the two newinvented tools that had been presented to him in the previousfive or six years I the hypodermic needle and syringe, along withMorphine Sulfate .... They injected the young wounded veteranswith huge amounts of Morphine daily (every four hours) to killtheir pain.... It was necessary for the surgeons to dofull-quarter amputations -- literally take the arms and legs offright at the start of the body, usually to stop infectiousgangrene. In 1865 there were an estimated 400,000 young War veteransaddicted to Morphine.... The returning veteran could be. .identified because he had a leather thong around his neck and aleather bag (with) Morphine Sulfate tablets, along with a syringeand a needle issued to the soldier on his discharge.... (T)hiswas called the "Soldier's Disease." (Starkey, 1971:482-84)1 The lesson to be learned from "Soldier's Disease"involves four linked hypotheses, phrased as fact, which form aparadigm justifying today's U.S. Drug policy. This paradigm is: Free access to opiates sooner or later breeds a massive use ofopiates. Widespread use of opiates leads to a lot of addicts. Addiction is long-term, often enough, forever. Addiction is a publicly manifest problem. In sum, free availability leads to a social problem. The historical record shows, however, that Soldier's Diseaseis a fanciful reconstruction of the past by writers I 00 years ormore after the Civil War. There was not, to my knowledge, asingle mention of Soldier's Disease, Army Disease, or any othersobriquet referring to addicted veterans, until a half -centuryafter the Civil War; not one addict was noted in any writing orstatistic compiled during or immediately after the Civil War; andreports of addicted veterans who began using during that War areonly rarely mentioned throughout the rest of the 19th Century. Soldier's Disease is a modern creation that has very little todo with the facts of 19th Century drug use. Rather, it is an ideawhich fits, which shores up, modern drug policies. It is anassertion about what opiates are supposed to do, applied to apast situation. In the next part -- Section I -- of this paper, the relevanceof Soldier's Disease to contemporary drug policy is addressed.Soldier's Disease is the only tale of a pre-Harrison Act opiateproblem which a self-respecting scholar in recent years couldpoint to as a pre-1914 social problem due to opiates. In Section2, the modern creation of Soldier's Disease, and its recentpopularity among drug experts, is shown by noting the first whomention the concept and when, a generation or two later, itbecame accepted by scholars of all persuasions. Then the focusturns to the historical evidence which would test, in order, thefour steps in the above paradigm. In Section 3 the questions are:"were opiates widely used by soldiers during the CivilWar?" and "was addiction among them widespread duringthe war?" In Section 4 the questions are: "wasthere wide-scale addiction among veterans after thewar?" and "was this a publicly manifest problem?"What follows is the evidence for answering these four questions:in order, " a tentative yes...... no," "no,"and "no." The conclusions will expand further on howthe mythic and the actual situation of Civil War opiate userelates to the current Drug policy debate. 1. The Relevance of Soldier's Disease To Contemporary U.S. Drug Policy The paradigm justifying U.S. opiate policy -- availabilityleads to use; use leads to addiction; addiction is long-term; andaddiction becomes a publicly manifest problem -- conveys the ideathat unavoidable Social consequences of free accessto opiates justify the enormous costs of contemporary U.S. drugpolicy. Of all the stories about the "bad old days"when opiates were legal, only Soldier's Disease providesconvincing I. evidence" that opiate availability led to a publiclymanifest problem, beyond merely a substantial increase in thenumbers of addicts. Thus, only the tale of Soldier's Diseasedemonstrates Step 4 of the paradigm. The very phrase"Soldier's Disease" connotes a publicly manifestproblem. Otherwise, the tales told about opiates before the lawsbanning them were either too far-fetched to be repeated in moderntimes, or reflect a social problem only if you believe theparadigm, (and often not even then). During and just before 1914,the type of stories carried by the press about opiates did notindicate a social problem which might lead to a need forprohibition, and the absence of media coverage of the HarrisonAct during the year it was passed by Congress further suggeststhe irrelevance of opiate use to a social problem. There were, in the medical as well as the mass media of thelate 19th and early 20th Centuries, occasional alarms soundedabout other publicly manifest opiate problems, but no scholar inrecent years believes that these were real or significant. (Forexample, the press periodically reported an opium problem,particularly white women smoking opium in Chinatown, with Chinesemen. A racist, not an opiate problem). Even the moralisticanti-opium writers of about a century ago, with rare and oftenunbelievable exceptions, did not point to a publicly noticedproblem.2 Today, there are imputed social problems, but not a demonstratedone, beyond Soldier's Disease. Historians David Musto andDavid Courtwright (Musto, 1972:2-4; and Courtwright, 1982:16-28)extend a tradition3 of research into the megatonnage of opiatesannually imported into the U.S. from well before the Civil Warthrough the early 20th Century. Additionally, opiates weretypically a key ingredient in patent medicines, and there was ahuge national campaign against them resulting in the Pure Foodand Drug Act. Neither the level of imports nor the widespread useof opiates in patent medicines, in the absence of belief in aparadigm such as we noted, suggest anything beyond widespreadavailability. The medical literature of the 19th Century is filled withdiscussions about opiates, many written by experts who believedits use was terrible. To them, a loss of "moral will,"perhaps best exemplified by secretiveness, including husbands andwives keeping large scale addictions hidden from their spousesfor many years,4 was a major problem. Addicts were deemed liars,which was only natural given the opprobrium attached to addictionin much of U.S. society long before there were drug laws. Themedical and pharmaceutical literature also had an on-goingcontest, essentially, to report the oldest, most long-time,addict with the largest habit. None of the above indicates thatthe behavior of 19th or early 20th Century addicts was a publiclyevident problem. In the years just before national drug prohibition, there wasbarely a sign of an opiate-caused social problem, Two newspapers,to my knowledge, were indexed for 1906-1912 -- the New York Timesand the San Francisco Call.5 In each, there were three basictypes of stories: recent state laws which were forerunnersof the Harrison Act in that they criminalized opiate use; arrests(over half being of Chinese Americans); and internationalstories. Opiates are assumed to be "evil" but the onlyallusion to a possible social consequence in any Times story isheadlined "Says Opium Aids Music Composers.-6 The onlypublic problem with opiates recounted in the Call, besides whitewomen in Chinese opiate dens7 and problems which result from thelocal laws, is lethargy among the troops at The Presidio.("It destroys the vitality of the user, and would in timemake the soldier a useless charge.") (S.F. Call, 1910b) 8 The year the nation's major opiate prohibition law was passed,the mass media, (at least the New York Times, San FranciscoChronicle, Washington Post, and the Hearst Press), gave virtuallyno coverage to Congressional discussion or passage of theHarrison Act, or when it was signed into law or took effect.(Aldrich, 1979) Fourteen months after it was signed, a medicaljournal presented the results of a one-question survey -"Inyour opinion what are the five most useful and important drugs inthe materia medica?" -- answered by teachers at leadingmedical schools. "Not only did it (opium) receive 102 votesout of 107, but in 60 instances it was named first."(Robinson, 1916) What the above suggests is not only that the rationales tojustify opiate prohibition circa 1914 could not be repeated byself-respecting scholars as rationales for continuedprohibition today, but that hardly a rationale was offered atall. The Harrison Act crept in on tip-toes, called a tax act,with no fanfare, no public interest or debate. When, a few yearslater, it became clear that this was a criminal law withconsiderable consequences, there was a brief flurry of criticismand a rationale provided for continuing opiate prohibition,namely the vileness and criminality of "junkies" andthe criminal cartels supplying them. Obviously, the consequencesof the law provided the rationale for justifying the law, butthere were not that many opiate addicts and it was not that big asocial problem for the debate to continue. "Evidence" of a social problem is needed to justifyopiate prohibition only when such prohibition is a significantsocial issue (which it was not in the years preceding theHarrison Act) and when criticism of drug laws crescendoes. Onlythen do scholars reconsider the rationales for the drug laws, andturn to the historical record for insights into contemporaryconcerns. It is only in these periods when the four parts of theparadigm, enunciated above, have to be demonstrated ifcontemporary drug policy is to be accepted. It is the final step-- the manifestation of a problem, in public -- which makes theother three socially significant. The only currently citedexample of the complete paradigm, in the absence of opiateprohibition, is Soldier's Disease ... and it's a myth. 2. Tracking The Develogment of The MM A. It's Roots The earliest portrayal of Soldier's Disease among Civil Warveterans appeared as World War I erupted over Europe (also theyear the Harrison Act, took effect). In "The Curse ofNarcotism in America -- A Reveille," Marks, a Yaleprofessor, intended to alert the U.S. to an enormous addictionproblem among Civil War veterans that would be replicated inanother war: Did you know that there is practically no old American familyof Civil War reputation which has not had its addicts?.... (I)twas the "army disease" because of its prevalence?....(W)ith the war that hangs over us, the drug evil will spread intoa giantism of even more terrible growth than the present?....(T)here are something like 4,000,000 victims of opium and cocainein this country today? (Marks, 1915:315)9 Marks feared the return of the "hydra-headeddrug-curse" of the Civil War, but others writing duringWorld War I about the consequences of combat upon drug use amongservicemen made no reference to the War Between the States.(Crothers, 1916; N.Y. Times, 1917; Stanley, 1918; and Weber,1918) In the nine years after World War I, a handful of authorsmentioned Civil War-related addiction, though none mentioned ArmyDisease or any such synonym. (Bishop, 1919 and 1920; IllinoisMedical journal, 192 1; World's Work, 1924; and Fell, 1924). "Army Disease" was next noted in The OpiumProblem. Terry and Pellens' encyclopedic work of 1928, whichbecame "regarded as the single most comprehensive work inthe field" only several decades later.10 (Ball, 1970) ForTerry and Pellens, "the Civil War gave it (chronic opiumintoxication) a considerable impetus (which) seems definitelyestablished." (Terry and Pellens, 1928: 5) Between 1928 andthe late 1950's, only a handful of scholars noted "ArmyDisease" (Terry, 193 1; Woods, 193 1: Dai, 1937: Barnes,1939; and Lindesmith, 1947), and even in the early 1960's it wasinfrequently mentioned (Isbell, 1960 and 1963; Kolb, 1960 and1962; Clausen, 196 1; Maurer and Vogel, 1962; and Sonnedecker,1963), though prior to the drug explosion of the mid- 1960'sthere were few scholars in the drug field. For the experts whothe past quarter century have claimed Soldier's Disease, if theycite any reference it is typically Terry and Pellens. B. The Contemporary Conventional Wisdom Since 1964, Soldier's Disease, in essence, was mentioned inabout 100 works by drug experts, half of these since 1973.11 Itwas also mentioned in several studies by prestigious governmentagencies and Drug and Crime Commissions.12 Among the experts aremany renowned critics of U.S. drug policies -- including EdwardBrecher, Alan Dershowitz, John Kaplan, Arnold Trebach and NormanZinberg. In the early 1970's a few writers questioned thefactuality of Soldier's (Kramer, 1971 and 1972; Swatos, 1972;Musto, 1973; and Quinones, 1975), but shortly thereafter theywere rebutted in a detailed historical analysis. (Courtwright,1978 and 1982)13 Since the mid- 1970's the mention of Soldier'sDisease has diminished, maybe because the critics had an impactor because most experts stopped probing the roots of U.S. drugpolicy after the early 1970's. Soldiers Disease is, however, still mentioned by many experts... and no one, yet, has responded to Courtwright. Though briefly stated, a consistent theme involving threecomponents is reiterated by almost all the cited drug experts,the only variation being in the synonyms used. First, morphine inparticular, and opiates in general, were administered by naivedoctors "indiscriminately" (also termed "promiscuous", "imprudent","uncontrolled", "overdosage","ignorant", etc.). Second, as a consequence of suchmedical naivete, addiction among soldiers was massive (alsotermed "prevalent", "commonplace","thousands", wholesale usage","rampant", etc.). Third, so widespread was theaddiction among soldiers and veterans that it became known asSoldier's Disease (also termed "army disease","soldier's illness", or "soldier'ssickness."),14 The only clear disagreement is the few who estimate the numberof addicted Civil War veterans. Some claim 45,000 (Ashley, 1972and 1978; Geis, 1973; Health PAC, 1970; and Kenny, 1972); others400,000. (H. Jones and Jones, 1977; Lingeman, 1969; Schwartz,1980; Starkey, 197 1; Summers et. al., 1975; and Westin andShaffer, 1972) Since no writer in either camp provides one cluefor their claim, the possibility that both estimates arose out ofthe thin air circa 1970 is not ruled out. Is today's conventional wisdom about Soldier's Disease anintellectual version of the children's game of Telephone where asimple message, after innumerable repetitions, becomes distortedand a new "catchy" message takes on a life of its own... or have recent writers captured the essence of opiateaddiction in a past era? That depends on the evidence during andjust after the Civil War. 3. Opiate Use and Addiction During The Civil War A. The Need For and Use Of Opiates During the Civil War, and at least until 1914, opiates wereconsidered the best medicine for controlling dysentery anddiarrhea and for containing the pain from war wounds. The SurgeonGeneral's history of the just ended Civil War was often lavish inits praise of opium. "Opium -- this medicine merits first place amongthese remedies. It was used almost universally in all cases ofsevere wounds, and was particularly useful in penetrating woundsof the chest, in quieting the nervous system and, indirectly inmoderating hemmorhage. (US Surgeon General, 1870 :645) But, how great was the need? How widely was it used? Given theneed, and the use, of opiates then, how many soldier addicts werethere in the Civil War? Official records from the Civil War show more incidents ofsevere illness for which opiates were the main remedy thanthere were wounds. More died from disease than were killedin battle or succumbed to wounds (For Union troops, 62%"disease," 19% "battle," and 12%"Wounds" of 360,000 deaths among Union troops).(Duncan, 1912:397) Union medical records (for medical problems,not deaths) show approximately 1,400,000 acute and 200,000chronic cases of diarrhea or dysentery, 250,000 wounds, and300,000 cases, combined, of typhoid, typhus, continued fever,venereal disease, scurvy, delerium tremens, insanity andparalysis. (Brooks, 1966:127) There were 30,000 amputationsreported performed by the Union's doctors. (US Surgeon General,1883) Among Confederate prisoners, 32% of the almost 19,000 whodied in captivity in the north succumbed to diarrhea ordysentery. (Brooks, 1966:126) In Andersonville prison fromFebruary 1864 to April 1865, of 12,541 recorded Union soldiercaptives who died, 45% did so from diarrhea or dysentery, andonly 7% from wounds, gangrene or "debility." (USSurgeon General, 1879:32) There was obviously a great needfor opiates. Civil War physicians frequently dispensed opiates. TheSecretary of War just after 1865 stated the Union Army was issued10 million opium pills, over 2,840,000 ounces of other opiatepreparations (such as laudunum or paregoric which, by weight,were well under half opium), and almost 30,000 ounces of morphinesulphate. (Courtwright, 1978:106-7 and 1982) B. Not One Report of Addiction In The Field Yet for all the quantities dispensed, there was not onereport from 1861-1865 of an addicted soldier. Could opiate addiction pass unnoticed, and have noconsequences, among troops living in raw conditions and oftenmoving from one place to another? Could so much morphine andopium preparations get used without generating a single addict? The 30,000 ounces of morphine is most easily explained.Probably, most of it was dusted or rubbed intowounds or, during anesthetization, rubbed into rawtissue. (Adams, 1952; and Brooks, 1966) In the campaign ofFredericksburg in December of 1862, "hypodermic syringeswere unknown, such drugs as morphine being doled out on the pointof a knife" by surgeons. (Duncan, 1985: 200) By the end ofthe war, the hypodermic needle was beginning to be used, inplaces -- "roughly 19 per cent of Union Army physicians werecapable of administering morphine hypodermically.... and evenfewer Confederate physicians were (so) capable."(Courtwright, 1978:105) Whether the hypodermic administration ofmorphine during the Civil War was extremely rare as some haveclaimed (US Surgeon General, 1888:547) or as others have impliedby their failure to note such use in medical histories of the war(Courtwright, 1978:104-105), or was frequent as one neurologistnoted (Courtwright, 1978:106), there is not one case mentionedwhere morphine was injected for pleasure, or to stave offwithdrawal pains. The Civil War lasted four years, with 1,500,000 three yearenlistments on the Union side. Thus, those ten million opiumpills dispensed by Union doctors average roughly two per soldierper year (assuming the pills survived combat conditions). Priorto amputations or other battlefield surgery, the patientroutinely expected and was routinely given one of these pills.Similarly, the 2,84 1,000 ounces of opiate preparations works outto about a half -ounce per Union soldier per year. Thoughphysicians argued about the benefits of opiates for the relief ofpain which accompanied "the fluxes" (diarrhea anddysentery), "the partisans of opium were very much in themajority" and used opium for dysentery and other forms offlux including "chronic fluxes." Army physicians"united opium with almost every medicine employed to checkthe progress of the disease," and despite typical failure tocure returned "almost always to opium as the drug which atleast alleviated, if it did not cure." Where the sufferingsof the patient were very great and continuous, and wheresleeplessness and restlessness had become a medical danger,opiates were highly recommended, even by the otherwise skepticalphysician. (US Surgeon General, 1879: 743-747) Again, applyingbasic arithmetic, and taking into account that there were manymore than the reported 1.6 million cases of dysentery anddiarrhea, it is easy to understand why there were periodicshortages of opiates. As with morphine, there is not a singlereport during the Civil War of a soldier rising opium forpleasure, and the single claim of opiates used to stave offwithdrawal pains (published 16 years after the War) was the"confession" of an officer charged with "desertingin the face of the enemy, and sentenced to be shot."15(Nolan, 1881) Though modern writers have accused the military doctors in theCivil War of not fully appreciating the addictive qualities ofopiates, one historian of Civil War medicine writes thatphysicians in the field did not fully appreciate the benefits ofopium. Tincture of opium and paregoric were always available, butnowhere in the records does one get the impression that they wereused routinely in the management of the fluxes. (Brooks, 1966:117) Morphine, too, may well have been underused, to judge from aleading, albeit unusual, neurologist at the time, S. WeirMitchell, who: (S)colded the medical profession for its reluctance in usingthis mighty painkiller, pointing out that some patients' agonieswere so severe the choice must lie between Morphine andamputation. (Adams, 1952:138) The naivete of military physicians regarding the negativeeffects of opiates, often noted shortly after the Civil War, hadto do basically with their misunderstanding the medical effectsof opiates, not the addictive properties of the drug.16 (USSurgeon General, 1879:735-750) There were no reports of addiction in situations which, acentury or so later, generated numerous such references. For theCivil War, one virtually never reads of a soldier sufferingwithdrawal pains, or dying of an OD; or a physician in the fieldbesieged for an opiate for feeding a habit (as distinct fromeasing pain or controlling diarrhea). In Wait Whitman'sdescription of the 80,000 to 100,000 sick and wounded he saw in600 hospital visits during three years of the Civil War, he notesthat many patients craved tobacco, sweets, or alcohol, yet henever once mentions opium. (Whitman, 1895) The sickness formsubmitted by physicians to the Surgeon General from mid- 1 862 tothe end of the war listed 152 categories of disease, including"serpent bite," "apoplexy,""insanity," "night blindness,""poisoning," "inebriation," "deliriumtremens" and "chronic alcoholism", but notaddiction or opiate deprivation. (US Surgeon General, Pt. 1, V.1). In the Surgeon General's history of the Civil War,"nostalgia ... .army itch .... poisoning .... alcoholism.... and venereal disease," but not opiate use, are singledout for special comment. Under "nostalgia" the problemof boredom is given prominence and smoking tobacco, drinkingalcohol, and gambling are singled out for their "sedativeinfluence," to "pass the dull hours" in lieu ofsatisfying the craving for excitement. (US Surgeon General, 1888:886) In sum, there is no hard evidence of addicts during theCivil War, and it is hard to believe it would have been missedhad addiction been significant. C. Not One Report of Addiction Immediately After The CivilWar If addiction among Civil War veterans was significant, itshould have been most noticed in the immediate post-War years.There were 63,000 soldiers whose chronic diarrhea carried onafter the war, (Adams, 1889) and over 20,000 survivors ofamputations reported by Union doctors. (US Surgeon General, 1883)When the Civil War ended, and veterans filled the prisons, NewYork State prison keepers at Auburn and Sing-Sing told ofcontraband smuggled into prisons, such as "whiskey,tobacco... yellow covered literature.... sugar, tea, coffee,butter, pies, cakes, liquor, looking glasses, combs, brushes,etc.", yet opiates were not mentioned. (North AmericanReview, 1867:572-74) In the Mississippi State Hospital, whoseadmission records of the mentally ill go back to 1855, the firstnarcotism case was recorded in 1884. (Jaquith, 1965) The editionof the United States Dispensatory, (the enormous physician's deskreference of the time), which appeared just after the Civil Wardevotes 27 pages to "opium" without noting the CivilWar. (Wood and Bache, 1868) Surely a significant minority ofthose 63,000 diarrhetics and 30,000 amputees were advised to takeopiates by their physicians, and willingly took what at the timewas the best relief of their problems. Yet only two references toveterans who began using opiates during the Civil War werepublished before 1880. (Day, 1868; and Oliver, 1872) (A thirdpre-1880 case-history of an addicted veteran, cited by some asdemonstrating Soldier's Disease, started using opiates after thewar). (Anon, 1876) D. The Logic For Claiming The Existence of ManyCivil War Addicts How, then, could recent experts agree on massive addictionduring the Civil War? Almost certainly it has to do with trust inthe statements of Terry and Pellens without bothering to checkthe original sources. The one exception -- the one historian whohas checked those sources and maintains the validity of addictionduring the Civil War -- is Courtwright, who believes thataddiction must exist ... even though it is not in evidence. Formorphine, Courtwright cites S. Weir Mitchell's claim that 40,000morphine injections were given at one army hospital in one year.This number is far beyond any other -- in fact, except for itthere would be no consideration of the widespread use ofmorphine other than what was rubbed and dusted into wounds.Courtwright considers the claim "puzzling, to say theleast," (and there are reasons for doubting Weir,personally),17 but he concludes if that number "is even halfcorrect, it seems impossible that a substantial portion of thepatients ... did not end the war as addicts.""Impossible" as it seems, not a single addict wasreported during the Civil War. Courtwright also notes "the frequency and casualness withwhich opiates were administered" and states that "vastquantities of opium preparations other than morphine weredispensed under circumstances (such as to those with chronicdiarrhea, dysentery or malaria) which could very easily lead toaddiction." The only trouble is "very easily" didnot occur. Disregarding the lack of documentation on a single addictduring the Civil War, Courtwright contends "that the warcontributed to the spread of addiction," and "offerthe fighting, sick and wounded veterans greatly expandedthe pool for iatrogenic addiction." (Courtwright,1982:55-56, emphasis added) Since opiates were widelyadministered in the early as well as last years of the Civil War,it is hard to imagine why addiction would only developafter the war. Nonetheless, accepting Courtwright's contentionfor the moment, the test of the validity of Soldier's Diseasethus depends on analysis of post-war addiction among veterans. 4. Reports of Addicted Veterans Through the 19thCentury Were it not for Horatio Day's The Opium Habit,published in 1868, the modern day notion of Soldier's Diseasemight never have developed. The latter of these two sentences byDay (quoted by Terry and Pellens) is, by far, the most widelycited writing on Soldier's Disease: The events of the last few years [Civil War] haveunquestionably added greatly to their [confirmed opium eaters']number. Maimed and shattered survivors from a hundredbattlefields, diseased and disabled soldiers released fromhostile prisons, anguished and hopeless wives and mothers made soby the slaughter of those who were dearest to them, have found,many of them, temporary relief from their sufferings in Opium. (Day, 1868:1) This remark, quoted by several modern writers,18 is the onlyreference to the Civil War in Day's 335 page tome. Day recountsmany types of persons who were addicts, but not one specific caseof a soldier or veteran.19 in context, Day's two-sentenceallusion to the Civil War suggests an extremely minor problemrecounted by an encyclopedic problem-seeker. A. Courtwright's Evidence Is Skimpy Courtwright recognizes that "army disease" was notan "epidemic," but still concludes: "It ispossible to document numerous references to addicted veteransboth as a class and as individuals." (Courtwright, 1978:1 11) Using the same evidence, and more, I reach oppositeconclusions. Why? In Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction In America Before 1940,Courtwright cites 1 18 books and articles published between theCivil War and the end of the century (Courtwright, 1982) yet inhis studies of Soldier's Disease he lists nine references toaddicted veterans, and only five appeared in the 19th Century2Oand were to veterans who had used opiates during the Civil War.Adding two more which I uncovered (Earle, 1880; Nolan, 188 1),and including two other brief and vague references (Crothers,1892 and 1893), this averages one reference every 4 years between18651899. The overwhelming majority of articles about opiate usewritten in the fifteen years following Appomatox, includingseveral by writers who presented lists of the types of people whowere addicts, do not single out the Civil War,21 nor can I findsuch a reference in newspapers of the time.22 None of these nine sources demonstrates that opiate addictionby Civil War veterans was of social significance. In addition tothose previously quoted (Day and Nolan, who writes of the alibiused by a deserter), there were three references by the mostprolific writers of the period, Mattison and Crothers (twice).23Mattison's sole mention appears at the end of his career, 3 yearsafter the War ended. (Mattison, 1898) Crothers wroteprolifically. If a "drug problem" could be unearthed,trust Crothers to lead the digging party.24 In the context of hisencyclopedic writings, Crothers' few mentions of the Civil Warsuggests its role in subsequent addiction was miniscule.(Crothers, 1892 and 1893) Further, when World War I broke out inEurope, Crothers urged combat physicians_to use opiatesliberally, and fears of a subsequent addiction problem weregroundless. (Crothers, 1916) Two other references are of toneaddicts, one -- of a long-time successful minister --demonstrating the difficulty of detecting addiction at the time.(Russell, 1887; and Keeley, 198 1) B. "Only Your Pharmacist Knows For Sure" The two other references suggest that for a while, in someplaces, there were some addicted veterans ... reported by thosewho would notice addicts even if the general public did notrecognize them -- i.e. the apothecaries who sold opiates. Terryand Pellens, reviewing an 1 878 study , noted that evenphysicians did not recognize the extent of addiction: Druggists were in a much better position to know the truth.... when counter sales were legal, and as a matter of commonpractice, physicians were called upon only by those opiate usersseeking (cure). (Terry and Pellens, 15) A Massachusetts study of 1871 "consulted" 20-30druggists and got mailed responses from 125 physicians. 40 ofthese physicians did not know of a single case of "opiumeating," and of 46 who commented on whether "theinjurious use of opium has increased of late years," 6 1 %answered it had not and another 13% answered it was diminishing.Only one physician, but at least two druggists, stated thatopiate use begun during the late war was an important cause foraddiction. (Oliver, 1872) Without denying the significance ofthis report, these mentions of addicted veterans had noramifications in the drug literature at the time. It was a statepublication with very limited circulation, the few summaries orreviews of the report in the medical literature at the time didnot mention the Civil War,25 and save for Terry and Pellens'lengthy excerpt from it in 1928 we might never have known thatsome pharmacists, at least, recognized that addicted veterans, asa class, were among the ranks of addicts.26 In Chicago in 1880, 50 pharmacists were surveyed about thecause of addiction of their regular opiate using customers. Themost mentioned were " rheumatism and neuralgia" (38each); "some" respondents, (but less than four),believed addiction was caused by sickness and pain and/or the"loss of property and position in society" due to therecent war. (Earle, 1880) (On another government survey, ofdoctors in Michigan in 1878, the Civil War was not mentioned).(Marshall, 1966) In toto, these surveys indicate that there was a small,temporary phenomenon of addicted veterans, which was not a socialproblem in the sense that anyone but a few pharmacists recognizedit in the quarter century after the Civil War. C. "Any" Vs. "Many" No one doubts that all the opiates used to alleviate the painfrom all the chronic diseases and continuous pain resulting fromthe Civil War resulted in some soldiers using and becomingaddicted to opiates. The issue, however, is not whether therewere any addicted veterans but if there were many.Courtwright's contention that "a substantial numberof them (veterans) eventually became addicted to opium ormorphine," and that "two events, the Civil War and thespread of hypodermic medication, triggered a massive increasein iatrogenic opium and especially morphine addiction,"(emphasis not in the original). (Courtwright, 1982) isunwarranted. In arguing that the importance of Soldier's Disease should notbe discounted, Courtwright stresses the importance on later 19thCentury addiction of the wrenching impact that War had on societyas a whole, such as the loss of loved ones, property, fortunesand social position. By such reasoning, any social event orcondition which occurs in reasonable proximity before an increasein drug use can be considered a "cause." Ergo, the ironhorse can be blamed for late 19th century addiction, or moviesand television for the increased drug problems of the last fewdecades. (In the Massachusetts study noted above, morepharmacists reported state restrictions on the use of alcohol a"cause" of recent opiate use than reported the CivilWar). However, Soldier's Disease is cited in the drug literaturethe past few decades to imply something quite specific -- namely,the presence of opiates, outside of strict and knowledgeablemedical control, ipso facto causes massive publicly notedaddiction, Nothing less. 5. Soldier's Disease and Drug Policy In sum, Soldier's Disease proves to be another myth. Inreality, the widespread use of opiates during the Civil Wargenerated so infinitesimal a problem that only two or threeapothecaries, and two or three of the most encyclopedic drugexperts, even speculated on the possibility of addicted soldiersfrom that War for almost half a century. Soldier's Disease didnot become the Conventional Wisdom until almost a century afterthat war. Implicit in the concept of Soldier's Disease are four aspectsof addiction which, together, are a paradigm used to justifycurrent opiate laws -- easy access leads to widespread use,addiction is easy to acquire, hard to kick, and its consequencesare powerful and publicly obvious. In the popular contemporaryidiom, the paradigm consists of "it's so good, don't eventry it once"; "once an addict, always an addict";and in the image of the "junkie". (Belief in thisparadigm, in the early 1970's, led many experts, and particularlycritics of U.S. military policy, to sound the tocsin about opiateuse by GIs for inevitably this would lead to a huge problem ofaddicted veterans ... which it didn't)27 Since each aspect of theparadigm is contradicted by the historical evidence, Soldier'sDisease is a mythic reconstruction of the past to make itcoincide with contemporary assumptions. How significant is the paradigm in justifying opiate laws?Each year over the past two decades the nation has spent billionsin drug law enforcement, resulting in an annual average of over ahalf million drug arrests, and has spent billions for tryingthose arrestees and incarcerating scores of thousands of them.Until the mid-1980's, when cocaine replaced opiates as the mostoften used and most frightening "hard drug," thedangers of opiate addiction formed the core of the nation'sperceived drug problem and most of the prisoners serving drugsentences had been convicted on opiate charges. Additionally,drugs are a major economic alternative for young poor people, aswell as a major source of police corruption. None of this --neither the public money, arrests, incarcerations, thecompetitive illegal economy, and police corruption -existedregarding drugs until there were prohibitory laws. How significant is Soldier's Disease for the paradigm whichshows opiate availability ipso facto causes a massive socialproblem? As noted in Section I of this paper, there is no otherpre-Harrison Act example of a currently believable socialproblem. Though an ancient and seemingly minor issue, addictionamong Civil War veterans functions as a lynchpin or cornerstone.Strip away Soldier's Disease, and the only problem suggested bythe paradigm are the medical consequences of addiction, whichoccurs in a large percentage of opiate users. The facts aboutaddiction among the Civil War's soldiers and veterans indicatesthat widespread addiction, too, is a natural result of freeaccess to drugs. The facts about Civil War drug use indicate open availabilityand no recognizable negative consequences; the facts, the pastfew generations, show extremely limited access to opiates and animmense "drug problem." It is in the illegal contextthat the modern "opiate problem" arises, rather than ina legal context such as the Civil War. The chemistry lesson ofthe Civil War is that opiates per se do not cause the problem,the context does. FOOTNOTES 1 The imagery of the "leather thong around hisneck and a leather bag" is, to my knowledge, unique toStarkey. 2 Occasionally a moralistic author of the late 19th Centurycited a social problem with opiates which no-one else evernoticed, but two problems were repeated enough to warrantcomment. T.D. Crothers in several articles claimed that morphine,in particular, led to crime. According to one scholar who studiedthe period, "No other writer ... asserts the strength andubiquity of this association .... (and) it is extremely difficultto accept the validity of his position." (Swatos, 1972),though at least one other expert claimed, as an alibi in a trialfor a property crime, (Kane, 1882b), that the cost of opiatesforced some persons with huge habits to steal. Still, before thelaws all but the extremely poor could easily afford any sizehabit. Crothers' unique assertions about opiate-caused crime cannot justify a policy which generates the extraordinarydrug-related crime of today. There were also occasional reports that addicts were lethargicand neglectful of personal hygiene and business. However, thetypes of people on 19th Century lists of addicts, were typicallyin demanding jobs. That, said the experts at the time, was whythey sought the "stimulating" effects of opiates. Themany reports of people not knowing their spouses were long termaddicts suggests that the lethargy and inattentiveness tobusiness was hardly blatant. Aside from the racist comments aboutopiate use in Chinatowns, the allegation that opiates effectedthe performance of a class of persons, such as impeding theperformance of soldiers (S.F. Call, 19 1 Ob), was rare. 3 Terry and Pellens, in their encyclopedic classic The OpiumProblem, also report import statistics, as does Kane, the authorof the longest scholarly work in the early 1880's. (Terry andPellens, 1928:50-5 1; and Kane, 1880). 4 "It has been reported that for many years husbands andwives, to say nothing of other members of a family, have lived incomplete ignorance of the existence of this condition in one orthe other." (Terry and Pellens: 2) 5 The S.F. Call index is on index cards at theUniversity of California, Berkeley library. 6 The full headline of this story is: Says Opium Aids Music Composers Jean Laporte Declares Many Owe Much of TheirFame to Smoking The Drug Colleagues Support Him Two Well Known Musicians Say a Few Pipes a Day Are No WorseThan Cigarettes - Doctors Contradict Them (N.Y. Times, 1912) 7 The obvious racism manifest in such headlines as"Crafty Chinese Are Doubly Accused" (S.F. Call, 1910a),becomes a "social problem" when white women areinvolved, as suggested by the following headline: 200 Seized In 62 Drug Dens Police and Detectives Sweep Chinatown, Battering In Doors ofOpium Places Two White Women Are Captured In Dragnet. (S.F. Call, 191lb) The S.F. Call on occasion linked opiate use to crime orlunacy, but each time the details indicated the problem was aresult of the law. (S.F. Call, 1910c and d, and 1911a) New YorkCity's Commissioner of Corrections said that if addicts aredeprived of opiates on arrest, "normal persons ... veryfrequently go insane." (N.Y. Times, 1914) 9 Estimates of the number of opiate addicts and "cocainefiends" circa 1915 varied enormously. Marks' estimated4,000,000; a U.S. Public Health Service expert estimated aminimum of 70,000 and, elsewhere, " I 18,000.... (and)granting (a) somewhat improbable assertion ... a maximum not morethan 187,000 users of opium," (Marks, 1915; Wilbert, 1914and 1915). 10 Had The Opium Problem gained earlier recognition asa classic, Soldier's Disease might have been the conventionalwisdom of drug experts before the late 1950's. The original 1928printing of 400 copies not sold out for decades. A 1 970 reprintsold much better. 11 Soldier's Disease citations attributable to specificauthors, starting with 1973, are: Abel, 1982; Ashley, 1978; Bean,1974; Bedworth and D'Elia, 1973; Bellis, 198 1; Blaine, Bozzettiand Ohlson, 1973; Brown, 1973; Califano, 1982; Conrad andSchneider, 1980; Coombs et. al., 1976; Courtwright, 1978 and1982; M. Cox, 1984; Cuskey, Johannes and Premkunar, 1973;Dershowitz, 1973; Ferguson, 1975; Finlator, 1973; Fuqua, 1978;Geis, 1973; Goode, 1984; Hofmann and Hofmann, 1975; Jacobs andFehr, 1987; H. Jones and Jones, 1977; Kaplan, 1983; King, 1974;Kittrie, 1974; Levine, 1973; Milby, 1981; Morrell, 1973; Muuss,1974; Pike and Goldstein, 1973; Rice, 1980; Roffman, 1973 and1976; Rublowsky, 1974; Rydell, 1980; Saper, 1974; Schwartz, 1980;Seymour and Smith, 1987; Shroeder, 1980; Smith and Seymour, 1986;Spain, 1975; Stephens and Slatin, 1974; Stimmel, 1975; Summerset. al., 1975; Trebach, 1982; Weinswig, 1973; Young et. al.,1977; and Zinberg, 1984. 12 Soldier's Disease was cited in publications by severalinfluential government agencies and prestigious commissionscreated to address the drug issue. Starting with 1973, referencesto Soldier's Disease can be found in: Los Angeles Sheriff'sDepartment, 1974; National Commission on Marihuana, 1973;Organized Crime Task Force, 1984; President's Commission onOrganized Crime, 1986; Strategy Council, 1975; U.S. AttorneyGeneral, 1984: and U.S. Department of H.E.W., 1975. 13 Despite my many criticisms, I respect Courtwright'sjudiciousness and his willingness to grapple with the issue(which no other expert who claims Soldier's Disease has done), Herecognizes and responds to contrary evidence, and criticizessimplistic recitations of Soldier's Disease. 14 Of the authors the past 30 years who reportwidespread addiction by Civil War veterans, over a third mentionSoldier's Disease, a third denote Army Disease, an occasionalauthor labels it Soldier's Illness or Soldier's Sickness, and theothers describe the phenomenon without noting a sobriquet. 15 The officer confessed at his trial that he was"suffering for want of the drug (opium) ... (and) so greatwas the craving that he temporarily deserted his post to ...obtain it, though knowing that his life would thereby beforfeited." (Nolan, 188 1). This smacks of tales from the1930's of murderers caught red-handed who, desperate to avoid theelectric chair, claimed marijuana "caused" their crime. 16 The failure to note opiate addiction as a significantproblem was not due to the absence of the concept of addictionduring and just after the Civil War, The commissioners of thePrison Association of New York in 1866 reported that men "ofa low order of morals ... (were) addicted to habits of profanityand intemperance." (North American Review, 1867:570) 17 An article on opiates by Mitchell -- on the effects ofopiates on birds -confirms him as an eccentric scientist. (BostonMSJ, 1870) Weir found that morphia did not induce steep"beyond a slight tendency to quietude, which we can never besure is not due to the habit of the wounded or sick pigeon ofseeking a remote corner and remaining at rest," but"used hypodermically in excessive amounts ... act asexcitants .... (and) in the duck they approach nearest to thetypical strychnic spasm." Weir also found "greatdifficulty with which pigeons, especially old birds, are poisonedby opiates." In All or part of Day's two sentences on the Civil War arequoted by five 20th Century writers, (Brecher et. al., 1972;Courtwright, 1978; Cuskey, Premkunar and Sigel, 1972; Quinones, 1975; and Terry andPellens, 1928), and closely paraphrased without attribution bysome others. 19 Calkins, Day's contemporary, refers to over 200 cases in Opiumand the Opium Appetite. but not one soldier who began opiateuse between 1861-65. 20 Courtwright and Terry and Pellens cite addicted Civil Warveterans who came to public attention in the 20th Century asevidence of that war's impact on subsequent addiction. Besideslending credence to the phenomenon they also demonstrate thatsuch addiction was benign and unnoticed. The octogenarians citedin 1928 by Terry and Pellens ("today in more than one oldsoldiers' home are cases of chronic opium addiction which datefrom this (Civil War) period") (Terry and Pellens, 69), orthe 82 year old Confederate veteran who "had been shot inthe head during the Civil War" and "had been addicted55 years" under medical supervision since then, (Waldorf,1973), reveal that the addiction of veterans was not a socialproblem, and not even a medical problem untilprohibition of opiates. 21 Apart from Courtwright's citations, of the 29 books orlargest articles about opiates, published between 1865-1879,which I have located, there is not an original reference tosoldiers addicted during the Civil War. (Brown, 1972: Calkins,1867 and 1871; Chaille, 1876; M.D., 1878; Frost, 1870; Gibbons,1870: Gould, 1878; Harrington, 1878; Ingals, 1877 and 1878;Layard, 1874 and 1878; Lippincott's, 1868; Ludlow, 1867;Mattison, 1876 a and b, and 1878 a and b; McFarland, 1877;National Quarterly Review, 1870; Parrish, 1869 and 1873; PopularScience, 1875; The Probe, 1869 a and b: Richet, 1878; R.S., 1869;and Warren, 1867). Several times as many articles were shorterpieces, and likewise made no mention of addiction linkedto the Civil War. 22 Four lengthy newspaper articles during the 1870's, aboutnon-Chinese opiate use, do not mention soldiers or veterans ofthe Civil War. (New York Daily Herald, 1877 and 1878; and NewYork Times, 1877 and 1878). 23 Two of the four 20th Century sources cited by Courtwrightwere also works by Crothers. (Crothers, 1900 and 1902). 24 Headings of 7 of the 18 chapters in Crothers' book Morphinismand Narcomanias From Other Drugs are "Chloralism ....Chioroformism .... Coffee Addiction .... Tea Inebriety ....Tobacco Inebriety .... Ether Inebriety .... (and) Addictions FromOther Drugs," these "others" including arsenic,ginger, cologne and lavender. (Crothers, 198 lb) 25 Three reviews of the 1872 Massachusetts study appeared inmedical journals at the time. None mentioned the Civil War (Amer.J of Medical Sciences, 1872; and Lancet, 1873), and one evenconsidered the reports of opiate habituation "exaggerated.... a piece of scandal," witness that in its subsequentannual report the Massachusetts Board of Health made "noallusion whatsoever to the subject (of opiates)" (MedicalTimes, 1873). 26 Morgan provides a lengthier excerpt of the 1872Massachusetts study than did Terry and Pellens, but omits thephysician's, and two pharmacists', comments. The single sentencerelevant to the Civil War -- "The taste for opium eatingamong soldiers retired from the army is alluded to by a few ofour correspondents" -- follows a listing of other causes ofaddiction, (injudicious prescribing, depressed nervous systems,overwork with deficient nutrition, a vicious mode of life, andintemperance). 27 In several fundamental respects, the opiate use of soldiersand veterans of the Vietnam War is not analogous to the Civil Warsituation, though the fears about what widespread opiate useamong GIs would engender once they were mustered out exactlyparallels the fears implicit in Soldier's Disease. The soldierswho used opiates in the Civil War did so to alleviate the painfrom wounds, and to help cure "the fluxes," but usingsuch drugs "to get high" or to reduce stress were theessential reasons for opiate use by Vietnam era GIs. In so far asa few veterans continued regularly using opiates in the 1970'sand 1980's, they contributed to a social problem because, in thecontext of illegality, any regular opiate use tends to be afinancial burden and criminal problem. The counterparts of theseGIs, a century earlier, went unnoticed. Further, the fact that somany GIs abandoned opiate use once out of Vietnam can be arguedas a demonstration of the effects of the U.S. approach of massivetreatment opportunities and massive enforcement. The handful ofaddicted veterans after the Civil War would suggest thatsuppression is not the root cause of why regular opiate usersquit before becoming addicted. REFERENCES Abel, Ernest 1982 Marijuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years, N.Y.,McGrawHill. (P. 189) Adams, George Worthington 1952 Doctors in Blue, N.Y., Henry Schuman. (Especially Pp.50-5 1, 116-19 and 228-29) Adams, J.F.A., 1889 "Substitutes For Opium In Chronic Diseases,"Boston Medical and Surgical Reporter, 21:351-56. Aldrich, Michael 1979 The Dope Chronicles - 1850-1950, ed. by Gary Silver withtext by Michael Aldrich, San Francisco. Harper and Row. (P, 9) American journal of the Medical Sciences 1872 "Report of the State Board of Health ofMassachusetts," 64:156-57. Anon 1876 Opium Eating, An Autobiographical Sketch By An Habituate, Philadelphia, Claxton, Remsen, and Haffelfinger. Ashley, Richard 1972 Heroin, N.Y., St. Martin's Press. (P. 5) 1978 "Opiates," in Andrew Kowl (ed.), High TimesEncyclopedia of Recreational Drugs, N.Y., Stonehill PublishingCo. (P. 224) Ball, John 1970 Foreward to the Reprint Edition of Terry and Pellens, TheOpium Problem, Montclair, New Jersey, Patterson Smith. (P. v) Ball, John and Carl Chambers, eds. 1970 The Epidemiology of Opiate Addiction in the UnitedStates, Springfield, Ill., Charles C. Thomas, Publisher. (Pp.41-43) Barnes, Harry Elmer 1939 Society In Transition, NY, Prentice-Hall. (P. 805) Bean, Philip 1974 The Social Control of Drugs, N.Y., John Wiley & Sons.(P. 18) Bedworth, Albert, and Joseph D'Elia 1973 Basics of Drug Education, N.Y., Baywood Publishing Co.(P. 147) Bellis, David 1981 Heroin and Politicians, Westport, Conn., Greenwood Press.(P. 5) Billings, John 1905 "Medical Reminiscences of the Civil War,"Transactions of the College of Physicians (Philadelphia),27:115-21. Bishop, Ernest S. 1919 "Legitimate Use of Narcotics In War Time,"American journal of Public Health, 9:321-29. 1920 The Narcotic Drug Problem, N.Y., Macmillan. (Pp. 24-5) Blaine, Jack, Louis Bozzetti and Kiell Ohlson 1973 "The Narcotic Analgesics: The Opiates," P. 60in Drug Use In America - Problem In Perspective, Technical Papersof the Second Report of the National Commission On Marijuana andDrug Abuse, Appendix Vol. 1, Patterns and Consequences of DrugUse, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. Boston Medical and Surgical journal 1870 "Effect of Opium and Its Derivative Alkaloids,"V. n.s. 5:99-1 00. Brecher, Edward and Editors of Consumer Reports 1972 Licit and Illicit Drugs, Boston, Little Brown. (Pp. 3 andI 1) Brooks, Stewart 1966 Civil War Medicine, Springfield, Illinois, Charles C.Thomas Publisher. (Especially Pp. 65, 88, 117 and 126-27) Brown, Bertram 1973 "The Treatment and Rehabilitation of NarcoticAddicts In The United States", Pp. 127-28 in Drug Use InAmerica - Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the SecondReport of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse,Appendix Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 2 "TheTreatment of Drug Dependence," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Off ice. Brown, H. James [1872] An Opium Cure Based Upon Science, Skill and MaturedExperi- 1972 ence, in Gerald Grob (ed.) American Perspectives of DrugAddiction, Five Studies, 1872-1912, N.Y., Arno Press. Calkins, Alonzo 1867 "Opium and Its Victims," Galaxy, 4:25-36. 1871 Opium and The Opium Appetite, Philadelphia, J.B.Lippincott. Chaille, Stanford 1876 "The Opium Habit, and 'Opium-Mania Cures'," NewOrleans Medical and Surgical journal, NS 3:767-75. Clausen, John 1961 "Drug Addiction, P. 24 in Robert Merton and R.Nisbet (eds.), Contemporary Social Problems, N.Y., Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. (Reprinted in Paul Rock (ed.), Drugs and Politics, New Brunswick, New Jersey, Transaction Books). Conrad, Peter and Joseph Schneider 1980 Deviance and Medicalization: From Badness To Sickness,St. Louis, C.V. Mosby Co. (P. II 4) Coombs, Robert, Lincoln Fry, and Patricia Lewis 1976 Socialization In Drug Abuse, Cambridge, Massachusetts,Schenckman Publishing Co. (P. 27) Courtwright, David 1978 "Opiate Addiction As A Consequence of The CivilWar," Civil War History, 24: 1 0 1 -1 1. 1982 Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction in America Before 1940,Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press. 1983 "The Hidden Epidemic: Cocaine Use In The South,1880-1920," journal of Southern History, 49:57-72. Cox, Meg 1984 "The Drug Trade: Abuse of Narcotics In U.S. Is by NoMeans A Recent Phenomenon," Wall Street Journal, December 3,1984. (P. 20) Crothers, T. D. 1892 "Some New Studies of the Opium Disease,"journal of the American Medical Association, 18:227-33, [1893] The Disease of Inebriety From Alcohol, Opium and Other 1981a Narcotic Drugs, The American Association for the Studyand Cure of Inebriety, T.C. Crothers (ed.), New York, Arno Press.(P. 323) 1899 "Criminal Morphomania," journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 33:388-91. 1900 "New Sources of Danger In The Use of Opium,"journal of the American Medical Association, 35:338-42. [1902] Morphinism and Narcomanias From Other Drugs, New York, 1981b Arno Press. 1916 "Hypnotics in the Treatment of Inebriety,"American journal of Clinical Medicine, 23:218-21. Cuskey, Walter, Johannes Ipsen and T. Premkunar 1973 "An Inquiry Into The Nature of Changes In BehaviorAmong Drug Users In Treatment," P. 199 in Drug Use InAmerica Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the SecondReport of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse,Appendix Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 2 "TheTreatment of Drug Dependence," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Office, D., M. 1878 The Personal Experiences of An Ex-Opium Habitue,"Medical Record, 13:399-400. Dai, Bingham [1937] Opium Addiction In Chicago, Montclair, New Jersey,Patterson 1970 Smith. (P. 35) Day, Horace 1868 The Opium Habit, With Suggestions As To The Remedy, N.Y.,Harper Brothers. Dershowitz, Alan 1973 "Constitutional Dimensions of CivilCommitment," P, 41 1 in Drug Use In America - Problem InPerspective, Technical Papers of the Second Report of theNational Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse, Appendix Vol.IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 3 "Drug Dependence andthe Legal System," Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. Duncan, Louis C. [1912] The Medical Department of the United States Army In The 1985 Civil War, Gaithersberg, Maryland, Butternut Press. Earle, Charles Warrington 1880 "The Opium Habit" Chicago Medical Review,2:442-46. (Reprinted in H. Wayne Morgan (ed.), Yesterday'sAddicts American Society and Drug Abuse, 1865-1920, Norman,Oklahoma, 1974). Federal Bureau of Investigation 1980-87 Crime In America - Uniform Crime Reports, annual, Washington D.C., GPO. Fell, Robert 1924 "The Social Aspects of Morphine Addiction,"Institutional Quarterly, (Illinois Department of Public Welfare),15:103-08. Ferguson, Robert 1975 Drug Abuse Control, Boston, Holbrook Press. (Pp.40-1) Finlator, John 1973 The Drugged Nation - A Narc's Story, N.Y., Simon andSchuster. (P. 9) Frost, C.P. 1870 "Opium: Its Uses and Abuses," Transactions ofthe Vermont Medical Society, 1869-70, 131-47. Fuqua, Paul 1978 Drug Abuse: Investigation and Control, N.Y., GreggDivision/ McGraw-Hill. (Pp. 26-7) Geis, Gilbert 1973 Not The Law's Business? .... Homosexuality, Abortion,Prostitution, Narcotics, and Gambling, Rockville, MD, N.I.M.H.Center for Studies of Crime and Delinquency. (P, 109) Gibbons, H. 1870 "Letheomania: the Result of the Hypodermic Injectionof Morphia," Pacific Medical and Surgical journal, N.S.3:481-95. Goode, Erich 1984 Drugs In American Society, 2nd Edit,, N.Y., AlfredKnopf.(P.217) Gould, S.W. 1878 "The Opium Habit," Medical and SurgicalReporter, 38:496-97. Harrington, H.L. 1878 "Hypodermic Use of Morphia," Chicago Medicaljournal and Examiner, 37:73-5. Health Policy Advisory Center 1970 "Drug Law History: Politics and Prohibition,"Health/PAC Bulletin, (No Volume No.):2-4. Hofmann, Frederick and Adele Hofmann 1975 A Handbook on Drug and Alcohol Abuse - The BiomedicalAspects, N.Y., Oxford University Press. (P. 37) Illinois Medical journal 1921 "Drug Addiction From The Lay Point of View,"Illinois Medical journal, 39:7 1. Ingals, Fletcher 1877 "Danger From Hypodermic Injections," ChicagoMedical journal and Examiner, 35:184-86. 1878 "Danger From The Hypodermic Injection ofMorphine," Chicago Medical journal and Examiner, 36:491-46. Isbell, Harris 1960 "Clinical Research On Addiction In The UnitedStates," P. II 4 in Robert Livingston (ed.), Narcotic DrugAddiction Problems, Proceedings of Symposium on the History ofNarcotic Drug Addiction, 1958, Public Health Service PublicationNo. 1050, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. 1963 "Historical Development of Attitudes Toward OpiateAddiction in The United States," Pp. 154-69 in SeymourFarber and Roger Wilson (eds.), Conflict and Creativity, (Part IIof Control of the Mind), N.Y., McGraw-Hill. Jacobs, Michael and Kevin Fehr 1987 Drugs and Drug Abuse: A Reference Text, 2nd Edition,Toronto, Addiction Research Foundation. (P. 1 1 2) (Also see lstEdition, 1983, P. 371). Jaquith, W.L. 1965 "The Treatment of Narcotism In Mississippi,"journal of the Mississippi State Medical Association, 6:15-7. Jones, Hardin and Jones, Helen 1977 Sensual Drugs - Deprivation and Rehabilitation of theMind, Cambridge and N.Y., Cambridge University Press. (P. 189) Kane, H.H. 1882a Opium-Smoking In America and China, N.Y., Putnam's Sons. 1882b "Some Medico-Legal Aspects of Morphia-Taking,"Alienist and Neurologist 3:419-433. Kaplan, John 1983 The Hardest Drug - Heroin and Public Policy, Chicago,University of Chicago Press. (P. 6 1) Keeley, Leslie 1881 The Morphine Eater: or From Bondage to Freedom, Dwight,Illinois, C. L. Palmer Co. Kenny, Maxine 1972 "Drug Law History - Politics and Prohibitions,"Pp. I I 0 - I I in Frank Browning and the Editors of Ramparts(eds.), Smack!, N.Y., Harrow Books (Harper Row). King, Rufus 1974 'The American System': Legal Sanctions to Repress DrugAbuse," P. 18 in James Inciardi and Carl Chambers (eds.)Drugs and the Criminal justice System, Beverly Hills, CA, SagePublications, Kittrie, Nicholas [19711 The Right To Be Different - Deviance and EnforcedTherapy. 1974 Penguin Books. (P. 217) Kolb, Lawrence, 1960 "Factors That Have Influenced the Management andTreatment of Drug Addicts," in Robert Livingston, (ed.),Narcotic Addiction Problems, Bethesda, MD, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service. 1962 Drug Addiction - A Medical Problem, Springfield, Ill.,Charles C. Thomas Publisher. (P. 145) Kramer, John 1971 "Introduction to the Problem of Heroin Addiction inAmerica," journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 4:15-2 1. 1972 "A Brief History of Heroin Addiction inAmerica," in David Smith and George Gay (eds.), "It'sSo Good, Don't Even Try It Once," Englewood Cliffs, NewJersey, Prentice-Haft. (P. 35) Layard, James Coulter 1874 "Morphine," Atlantic Monthly, 33:697-712. 1878 "Curing The Opium Habit - The Treatment In TheBinghampton Asylum," N.Y. Times, September 27. (Letter ToThe Editor) Levine, Samuel 1973 Narcotics and Drug Abuse, Cincinatti, W.H. Anderson Co.(P. 69) Lindesmith, Alfred 1947 Opiate Addiction, Bloomington, Indiana, Principia Press.(P. 196) (Also see 1968 revision, Addiction and Opiates, Chicago,Aldine. (P. 225) Lingeman, Richard R. 1969 Drugs From A to Z: A Dictionary, N.Y., McGraw-Hill. (P. I1) Lippincott's Magazine 1868 "Opium Eating," (unsigned), Lippincott'sMagazine, 1:404-09. Literary Digest 1919 "The Drug Disease," Literary Digest, 61:29-30. Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department 1974 Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. (Section 2, P. 12) Ludlow, Fitzhugh 1867 "What Shall They Do To be Saved?", Harpers,35:377-87. Marks, Jeannette 19 15 "The Curse of Narcotism In America - AReveille," American journal of Public Health, 5:314-22. Marshall, 0. [1878] "The Opium Habit In Michigan," in JohnO'Donnell and John Ball 1966 (eds.), Narcotic Addiction, Pp. 45-54. (Reprinted fromAnnual Michigan State Board of Health, 1878, 6:63-73). Mattison, J.B. 1876a "The Impending Danger," Medical Record, 11:69-7 1. 1876b "Opium Inebriety," Medical Record, 11:793-97. 1878a "Clinical Notes On Opium Habituation," MedicalRecord, 14:66-7. 1878b "The Responsibility of the Profession In TheProduction of Opium Inebriety," Medical and SurgicalReporter, 38:101-04. 1898 "Narcotic Inebriety In America," North AmericanReview, 166:254-55, Maurer, David and Victor Vogel [1954] Narcotics and Narcotic Addiction, Second Edition,Springfield, 1962 Illinois, Charles C. Thomas Publisher. (P. 6) McFarland, S.F. 1877 "Opium Inebriety and the Hypodermic Syringe,"Transactions of the Medical Society of the State of New York, (NoVolume): 289-93. Medical Times 1873 "Opium-Eating In Massachusetts," editorial,(Philadelphia) Medical Times, 3:520. Milby, Jesse 1981 Addictive Behavior and Its Treatment, New York, SpringerPublishing Co. (P. 242) Morgan, H. Wayne 1974 Yesterday's Addicts - American Society and Drug Abuse,1865-1920, Norman, Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma Press. Morrell, Michael 1973 " Maintenance Of Opiate Dependent Persons In TheUnited States: A Legal Medical History," Drug Use In AmericaProblem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the Second Report ofthe National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse, AppendixVol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 3 "DrugDependence and the Legal System," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Office. (P. 517) Musto, David 1973 TheAmerican Disease, New Haven, Yale University Press.(Pp. 1-2, 251) Muuss, Rolf E. 1974 "Legal and Historical Aspects of Drug Abuse InHistorical Perspective," Adolescence, 9:495-507. National Commission On Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1973 Drug Use In America: Problem In Perspective, WashingtonD.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. (P. 15) National Quarterly Review 1870 "Opium and the Opium Trade," National QuarterlyReview, 20:288-310. New York Daily Tribune 1877 "Opium and Its Consumers," July 10, 1877,(Unsigned). (P. 2) 1878 "Increase of a Dangerous Vice - The Opium HabitMorphia Syringes - Comments On Their Use By ProminentPhysicians," December 26, 1878, (Unsigned). (P. 8) New York Times 1877 "The Opium Habits Power - Its Extent In The UnitedStates," December 30, 1877, (unsigned). (P. 8) 1878 "The Opium Habits Power - Popular ErrorsCorrected," January 6, 1878, (unsigned). (P. 5) 1912 "Says Opium Aids Music Composers," January 21,1912, (unsigned). (Pt. 4, P. 12) 1914 "New Prison For Drug Users," June 30, 1914,(unsigned). (P. 7) 1917 "War Is Increasing The Drug-Consuming Habit,"April 29, 19 1 7 (unsigned). (Section 8, P. 5) Substantiallyreprinted in "The War and The Dope Habit," LiteraryDigest 54:1776-77. (June 9, 1917) Nolan, D.W. 1881 "The Opium Habit," Catholic World 33:827+. (P.83 1) North American Review 1867 "The Reformation of Prison Discipline," (NoAuthor), 105:55582. O'Donnell, John and John Ball 1966 Narcotic Addiction, N.Y., Harper & Row. (P. 1) Oliver, F.E. 1872 Massachusetts State Board of Health, Third Annual Report(For 1871), Boston, Wright and Potter, State Printers, (Pp.162-77). (Summarized in 1872, "Report of the State Board ofHealth of Massachusetts," American journal of the MedicalSciences, 64:156-57; reprinted, in part, Pp. 43-52 in H. WayneMorgan (ed.), Yesterday's Addicts; excerpted in Terry andPellens'The Opiate Problem, which is partly reprinted, Pp. 41-43in John Ball and Carl Chambers (eds.), The Epidemiology of OpiateAddiction in the United States. Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force 1984 Annual Report of the Organized Crime Drug EnforcementTask Force Program - March 1984, Washington D.C. (P. 4) Parrish, Joseph 1869 "Opium Smoking," The Probe, 1:59-6 1. 1873 "Opium Intoxication," (Reported by T.D.Crothers), Medical and Surgical Reporter, 29:361-64. Pike, Andrew and Eric Goldstein 1973 " History of Drug Use In The Military," DrugUse In America Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of theSecond Report of the National Commission On Marijuana and DrugAbuse, Appendix Vol. 1, Patterns and Consequences of Drug Use, Pt. 5"Drug Use In Selected Populations," Washington, D.C.,U.S. Government Printing Office. (P. II 15) Popular Science 1875 "The Use of Narcotics," (Reprinted FromChamber's journal, England), (No Author), 7:611-17. President's Commission on Organized Crime 1986 America's Habit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, andOrganized Crime, Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. (Pp. 190-91) Probe 1869a "Hypodermic Use of Opium," (No Author), TheProbe, 1:7-9. 1869b "Thoughts of An Opium," (No Author), TheProbe, 1:87-90. Quinones, Mark 1975 "Drug Abuse During The Civil War,"International journal of the Addictions, 10:1007-20. Rice, Jerry 1980 "A Chronicle of Federal Drug Enforcement Law,"(accompanying photo essay), Drug Enforcement (US Drug EnforcementAdministration), December, V. 7. (P. 4) Richet, Charles 1878 "Opium and Its Antidote," Popular Science,12:555-59. Robinson, Victor 1916 "A Symposium on Drugs," Medical Review ofReviews, 22:15-26. Roffman, Roger 1973 "Heroin and Social Welfare Policy," SocialWork, 18:22-32. 1976 "Addiction Concepts and the VietnamExperience," Urban and Social Change Review, 9:16-8. Rublowsky, John 1974 The Stoned Age: A History of Drugs In America, New York,G, P. Putnam's Sons (Capricorn Books). (Pp. 129-3 1) Russell, Ira 1887 "Opium Inebriety," Medico-Legal journal,5:144-50. Rydell, Wendy 1980 Drugs, North Miami, Florida, Merit Publications. (Pp.121-22) S., R. 1869 "Thirty Grains A Day," The Probe, 1:50-3. San Francisco Call 1910a "Crafty Chinese Are Doubly Accused," February4, 19 1 0, (unsigned). (P. 16) 1910b "Opium Dreams Grave Menace To Local Army,"August 29, 19 1 0, (unsigned). (Pp. I + 2) 1910C "Drug Habit City's Worst Evil," (by CharlersFickert), December 15, 1910. (P. 1) 1910d "Time For A General Crusade Against The OpiumEvil," (editorial), December 16, 1910. 1911 "200 Seized In 62 Drug Dens," November 26, 1911, (unsigned). (P. 17) Saper, Anthony 1974 "The Making of Policy Through Myth, Fantasy andHistorical Accident: The Making of America's NarcoticsLaws," British journal of Addiction, 69:183-193. (P.184) Schwartz, Linda 1980 Heroin: The Strongest Thing You Can Buy Without APrescription, (Pamphlet), Phoenix, Arizona, Do It Now Foundation. Seymour, Richard and David Smith 1987 Drug Free - A Unique, Positive Approach to Staying Out ofAlcohol and Other Drugs, NY, Sarah Lazin Books, 1987. (P. 37) Shroeder, Richard 1980 The Politics of Drugs, 2nd Edition, Washington D.C.,Congressional Quarterly Inc. (Pp. 3 and 77) Smith, David and George Gay 1972 "It's So Good, Don't Even Try It Once",Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall. Smith, David and Rick Seymour 1986 "Abuse Folio -- Opiates," High Times,(reprinted from High Times, March 1984). (P. 30) Sonnedecker, Glenn 1963 "Emergence of the Concept of Opiate Addiction,"journal Mondial de Pharmacie. (Reprinted Pp. 14-22 in RobertLivingston (ed.), Narcotic Drug Addiction Problems, WashingtonD.C., U.S. Public Health Service. Spain, James 1975 "The United States, Turkey and the Poppy," MiddleEast journal, 29(3):295-307. Stanley, L.L. 1918 "Drugs and Crime," journal of Criminal Law andCriminology, 9:341. Starkey, Gerald 1971 "The Use and Abuse of Opiates andAmphetamines," Pp. 48 1 484 in Patrick Healy and James Manak(eds.), Drug Dependence and Abuse Resource Book, Chicago,National District Attorney's Association. Stephens, Richard and Gerald Slatin 1974 "The Street Addict Role: Toward The Definition of aType," Drug Forum, 3:375-89. Stimmel, Barry 1975 Heroin Dependency - Medical, Economic and Social Aspects, N.Y., Stratton Intercontinental Medical Book Corp. (P. 4) Strategy Council on Drug Abuse 1975 Federal Strategy For Drug Abuse-and Drug TrafficPrevention, 1975, Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. (P. 5) Summers, Marcia, James Trost, E. Leif Zerkin, et. al. 1975 Our Chemical Culture - Drug Use and Misuse, Madison,Wisconsin, Stash Press. Swatos, William H. Jr. 1972 "Opiate Addiction in the Late Nineteenth Century.- AStudy of the Social Problem, Using Medical journals of thePeriod," International journal of the Addictions, 7:739-53. Terry, Charles E. 1931 "Development and Causes of Opium Addiction As ASocial Problem," journal of Educational Sociology, 4:335-42. Terry, Charles E. and Mildred Pellens [ 1928] The Opium Problem, Montclair, New Jersey, PattersonSmith. 1970 Trebach, Arnold 1982 The Heroin Solution, new Haven, Conn., Yale UniversityPress. (P. 38) United States Attorney General's Office 1984 Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program, 1983Annual Report, Washington D.C. (P. 4) United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare,Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration 1975 Treatment of Drug Abuse: An Overview, NationalClearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, Report Series 34, No.1, DHEW Publication No. (ADM)75-197. Rockville, MD. Waldorf, Dan, Martin Orlick and Craig Reinarman 1974 Morphine Maintenance - The Shreveport Clinic 1919-1923, Washington D.C., The Drug Abuse Council. (P. 20, 30-31) Warren, Edward 1867 "A Lecture On The Sub-cutaneous Injection ofMorphia," Medical and Surgical Reporter, 16:101-4. Weber, Albert 1918 "Drugs and Crime," journal of Criminal Law andCriminology, 9:351. Weinswig, Melvin H. 1973 Use and Misuse of Drugs Subject To Abuse, N.Y., Pegasus.(P. 19) Westin, Av and Stephanie Shaffer 1972 Heroes and Heroin, N.Y., Pocket Books. (P. 8) Whitman, Wait [1895] The Wound Dresser, edited by Richard Maurice Bucke,Boston, 1975 Folcroft Library Editions. (Orig. Boston, Small, Maynard& Co.) Wilbert, Martin 1914 "Sale and Use of Cocaine and Narcotics," PublicHealth Service Reports, 29: 3180-3183 (November 27, 1914), U.S.Public Health Service. (P. 3183) 1915 "The Number and Kind of Drug Addicts," PublicHealth Service Reports, 30(2):2289-2294, U.S. Public HealthService. (Pp. 2291-92) Wood, George B. and Franklin Bache 1868 United States Dispensatory, 12th Edition, Philadelphia,Lippincott + Co. (Pp. 609-32) Woods, Arthur 1931 Dangerous Drugs, New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press.P. 12) World's Work 1924 "Drug Addiction Decreasing in the UnitedStates," World's Work, 49:17. Young, Lawrence, Linda Young, Marjorie Klein, Donald Klein,and D. Beyer 1977 Recreational Drugs, N.Y., Berkley Book. (P. 167) Zinberg, Norman 1984 Drug Set and Setting, New Haven, Conn., Yale Un. Press.(P. 26) CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-23IA031-000652-B036-261http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/prohibit.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125020 text/html 36831HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:50:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:43 GMTContent-length: 36613 Prohibition and Violence by Richard Hamm "American Prohibitionists and Violence, 1865-1920" by Richard Hamm Today I want to post part of a paper I delivered at a Meetingof the Alcohol and Temperance History Group as an AffiliatedSociety of the American Association for the History of Medicine,at its 68th Annual Meeting at Pittsburgh in May 1995. At thattime I said I wasn't planning to publish it, for various reasons,but I have been urged by people whose views I value todisseminate it, so I placed it-in pieces-on the List serve of theATHG. It brought forth a good string, so I have agreed to placethis piece (essentially the Pittsburgh paper) on the Web page ofthe ATHG. The prohibitionists were social reform agitators who sought amajor change in their society's customs. Social reformers havebeen, of course, a nearly constant presence in American societysince the early 19th century. Accounts of many social reformers'campaigns, often deal with the violence inflicted upon reformersseeking change in society and the violence engaged in by somereformers to achieve their ends. Indeed, violence, even killingand attempted killing, seems almost endemic to the history ofsocial reforms in the United States. But, with the special casesof the Women's crusades of 1873 and Carry Nation aside, the vast-and ever-growing literature on the temperance movement payslittle attention to the issue of violence.(1) This gap is aserious deficiency. There are two limits to my work. First, I am most interestedin violence in its most dramatic and drastic forms, killing orattempting to kill people. So I will be talking mostly ofkillings, attempted killings, and mobbings (because after allthey can easily lead to killings). Second, I am talking aboutviolence in respons to or as a part of agitation and not violenceattendant to law enforcement. Thus I am going to pass oversilently the many studies, popular and not, of moonshining,bootlegging, and violence.(2) Violence in resistance to law orviolence undertaken by law officers is somewhat separate fromviolence associated with a social reform movement's agitation forchange. Such violence grows out the state's presumption to have amonopoly of force and its willingness to resort to force to gainthe ends of its policy. To break the law of the state is to riskits use of violence against you, hence the likelihood that thelaw breaker will engage in violence. Law enforcement and violencego together hand and glove. But within these limits there still broad area of violence tobe explored as reform and violence also seem to go together. Wecan break down violence associated with reform into two largecategories. First, violence, used by their opponents, to stopreformers from agitating. Second, violence by reformers directedat achieving their ends-in their view, a righteous violence. Abrief look of some reforms in American history shows theexistence of these two types of violence. Violence to deter reform, for example, surfaces in studiesand memory of the civil rights movement. The literature is filledwith works that explore the violence directed against civilrights advocates in the American South in the 1950s and 1960s. Weall know of the bombing of the Birmingham churches, the mobbingof sit in protesters and freedom riders, and the killing ofGoodman, Schwerner and Chaney.(3) Similarly, contemporarycommentary on the anti-abortion movement has focused on the waveof violence against doctors and workers at women's healthcenters, most notably in the cases of Pensacola shootings and therecent the shootings in Brookline. Historians of abolitionists, perhaps the most deeply studiedof all social reform movements, have delineated both types ofviolence in that crusade. They have explored the manyanti-abolitionist mobs of the Jacksonian era, including thatwhich mobbed and killed the abolitionist editor Eliajah Lovejoyin 1837. Also, they have spent considerable effort exploring theforces and meaning of John Brown's and other abolitionists'willingness to engage in terrorism to bring about the end ofslavery.(4) But virtually no where in the vast scholarly studiesof the prohibition movement are there similar studies of theprohibitionists and violence. Its not because violence is notthere On the issue of deadly violence against agitators, the recentscholarly literature is almost silent on the subject but the drysthemselves recorded that it happened. The temperance movement atits peak, sought to encourage the faithful and to preserve therecords of its achievements and struggles by publishing, amongother things, prohibition encyclopedias. Two standard referencebooks produced by the drys, The Pocket Cyclopedia ofTemperance (1916) and Standard Encyclopedia of the AlcoholProblem (1925-1930) show that drys included information onviolence against prohibitionists. Both works contain articles onso called "Temperance Martyrs." Indeed, scatteredthrough the six volumes and 2940 page Standard Encyclopediaare many accounts of mobbings, attempted killings, and killingsof drys. Some of the stories in the Standard Encyclopediaare classics. For instance, it details in the article onPennsylvania how a county chairman of the Anti-Saloon League wasshot at in 1913, but "fortunately the bullet, intended forhis heart, was arrested by a copy of the bible which he carriedunder his arm." The article includes a picture of the pagewhere the bullet was stopped. While such miraculous tales wererare, pedestrian tales of violence were common in the temperancemovement.(5) I have combined the counts of the Standard Encyclopediaand the Pocket Encyclopedia to come up with some ball parkfigures of the violence directed against prohibitionists. Thesenumbers exclude from them prohibitionists who suffered violenceas a result of official or unofficial law enforcement or (fromthe sources available) who suffered violence in uncertaincircumstances. For example, a minister who denounced violators ofa state prohibition law and sought to bring private prosecutionsin the courts and suffered violence would be in this estimateengaging in unofficial law enforcement and is not included in thefigures of prohibitionist agitators who experienced violence.Including such persons would roughly double the number ofassaults and triple the number of the killings. Combining the twolists, I have found the names of six drys who between 1874 and1908 were killed over their advocacy of their cause. At leastanother nineteen drys were mobbed, beaten, shot at, or had theirhomes (or businesses) dynamited for their support oftemperance.(6) Without a doubt, advocating prohibition was a dangerousbusiness for some of its agitators. On the other hand, thetemperance advocates seemed not to have engaged in violenceagainst their enemies. I know of no prohibitionist who engaged inviolence to the point of killing to bring about their goal of adry nation. Some prohibitionists, Carry Nation being the mostprominent though certainly not alone, did engage in direct actionagainst liquor sellers, destroying their place of business andtheir stock through violent means. Assaults on people sometimesemerged from such attacks. But such "hatchetation"aside, the prohibitionists did not seem to engage violence thatcould lead to killing. I would like to is explain two things.First, why the violence against drys has received so littleattention. And second, explain the relative dearth of righteousviolence by drys. Why does the scholarly literature not contain muchinformation on the topic of violence against prohibitionistagitators? One explanation can be dismissed out of hand, that isthat those who the opponents perpetuated their deeds against weretoo obscure to make an impact. Among the six prohibitionistkilled, are a doctor, a judge, a minister, four editors of reformor other newspapers (including the minister), and a United StatesSenator. (The Senator is Edward Carmack of Tennessee.) If youturn toward those who suffered assaults or mobbing for agitationon the temperance question, the trend is similar with editors andministers predominating. Those attacked included figures of somerenown in temperance history; for example Albert Banks-clergyman,dry editor, and propagandist- was shot and wounded and Samuel W.("Sam") Small- journalist, dry, and evangelist-wasmobbed and beaten. The violence occurred in all areas of thenation, though the South and West seem disproportionallyrepresented, and extended from the decade after the Civil Warthrough the second decade of the 20th century. It should appearmuch more prominently in the scholarly literature. Two general causes seem to explain why the violence againstprohibitionists for their agitation has received so littleattention. First, contentions from the time of the killing orother violence that the violence had nothing to do withprohibition may have led scholars not to consider the topic.Second, and more importantly, there was little place for accountsof such violence in the evolving scholarly interpretations ofprohibition. I know of at least one example of a dry killed over hisadvocacy of prohibition where non-prohibitionists sourcesasserted that he "was not slain because of his convictionsbut" because of a "personal difficulty."(7) Ifother killings and attacks have similar conflicting accounts (andlogic would indicate that they should, as it was in the interestsof the opponents of prohibition to downplay violence againsttheir enemies) it is likely that scholars have been misdirectedaway from the topic of violence against dry agitators. But, thereis little evidence that scholars have paid any attention to thetopic at all. While scholarly interpretations of prohibition have changeddramatically over time, all of them share the trait that theyeither have little room in their frameworks for discussions ofviolence or have a tendency to turn scholars away from approachesand sources that would explore issues violence. Since World WarII, scholarly interpretations of prohibition have been marked bytwo large trends. First, there is the focus on the social statusof the members of the movement.(8) Second, there is the questionof how, if at all, prohibition related to the reform movements ofthe day: populism, progressivism, and women's rights.(9) Scholarsworking in the field have thus tended to mine the sources toanswer questions about these concerns. Thus by combing membershiprolls, church records, tax records, census data, and othersources they have told us much about the social status of theprohibitionists. Similarly in exploring the links betweenanti-monopolism, regulation, peace reform, women's suffrage,divorce reform, and anti-prostitution (just to name some)scholars have illuminated the connections of the movement toother reforms. But in doing these things they have mostlyeschewed writing narratives of movement history that would haveconfronted the sources that raise the questions of violenceagainst drys and violence by drys.(10) It is to violence by drysthat I would like to turn now. One thing is clear about violence by drys: there was no dryequivalent to John Brown, there was no dry equivalent to MichaelF. Griffin or John Salvi The closest that the prohibitionmovement ever came to such figures was Carry Nation. Nation'strashing of saloons is the stuff of American legend and folklore.Moreover it has been the subject of some scholarly work.(11) Thusa look at Nation and her movement in the context of the righteousviolence of other movements is illuminating. When we talk about figures in reform movements adoptingviolence, two things stand out. First that they believed thattheir violence is justified; violence-even killing-has become anacceptable means of bringing about the change that they want.Second, they act violently because they perceive that theirmovement is loosing ground. Hence John Brown's moral certainty ofthe evil of slavery and belief that sin could only be expatiatedby the spilling of blood convinced him that violence wasacceptable. He, in turn, convinced others to fight and kill withhim in Kansas and Virginia because, after the Compromise of 1850with its Fugitive Slave Law and the Kansas Nebraska Act repealingthe Missouri compromise, for the abolitionists crusade theirenemies seemed to have gained the upper hand.(12) Similarly, thejustifiable homicide argument used by the advocates of violencein the anti-abortion movement give them a moral base for theiractions.(13) Significantly, also, the first killing byanti-abortionists came after it became clear that the SupremeCourt was not going to overturn Roe v. Wade , the second came after a pro-abortion candidate was electedpresident. How do these two factors, developing a view that seethe violence as acceptable and acting out of fear of failure ofthe reform play out in the prohibition movement and in the careerof Carry Nation? There was a potential for developing an ideology of righteousviolence, in the prohibition movement. And evidence of it doesnot rest alone on the career of Carry Nation. Before I turn toNation and her ideas for justifying her violence, let me turn toanother source that show that drys did enunciate such ideas. The1915 novel Quarrytown, written by Douglas Dobbins andpublished by the American Issue Publishing (the press of companyof the Anti-Saloon League) shows community organized righteousviolence in a favorable light. In this fictionalized account ofthe struggle against the return of saloons to a stone quarryingtown, the drys ultimately resort to violence. At the opening the town is dry and virtually free of crime.But the dry utopia vanishes, as neither law nor community actionoffer adequate protection from the evil trade. Drys fail to blockthe issuing of a liquor license at a state liquor licensing board(dominated by politicians beholden to the organized liquorinterest), a dry organized boycott falters when its denounced bya new editor of the town's newspaper, and citizen prosecutions ofthe saloon keeper for violations of the law falter beforecorrupted juries. Thus the saloon spreads crime and disorderthroughout the community, literally turning brother againstbrother in drunken brawls. After all other means have been triedthe dry townsmen resort to violence. One night after the saloonis shut, they engage a Boston Tea Party type raid on it,destroying its fixtures and stock. When the newspaper editorcondemns the act as lawlessness he is ostracized by the town.When the saloon keeper rebuilds, the temperance men of the townblow up the establishment with three separate dynamite bombs, thefirst being set away from where the proprietor slept to allow himtime to escape. Moreover, the local minister preached a sermon inadvance of the act calling for the blowing up of "everyhell-hole in the United States tomorrow with dynamite!" Andin case the message was not clear, the dynamite works. The saloonkeeper never came back and the town was the better for it: nomurders, or assaults, no wife beatings, and no squandering offood and education money on whisky occur within its borders.(14) Without ever saying it in so many words, this publication ofthe Anti-Saloon League legitimated violence against saloons. Butit did so in a rather limited way. Violence was not the firstresort, but the last resort for the drys of Quarrytown. Its onlybecause law and boycotts have failed them, and only after liquorbegins to wreck havoc in their community do they take action. Andtheir first action, does not threaten life or limb. Even thebombing is planned to allow the saloon keeper to escape harm.Similarly, Carry Nation carried the conviction that her violencewas justified and resorted to violence only after other means hadfailed. Once you get past the myth and hype, Nation's short career asa saloon smasher is revealing of the potential of righteousviolence in the prohibition movement. Nation captured thenational imagination in 1900 when she began single-handedlydestroying dives in Kansas. Her actions were quickly overshadowedby the hucksterism to which she resorted to keep her agitationgoing: the selling of hatchets and the appearances at resortslike Coney Island. She remained a national figure until her deathin 1911. Nation was motivated, like many drys, by a personalreligious belief that liquor selling was sinful. Indeed, in herautobiography she recounting receiving visions from God showingher the evils of liquor. And she adopted violence only afterother she had tried other means.(15) In 1900 Nation lived in state that had a two decade old, andwidely violated, policy of prohibition. Moreover, it must of haveseemed to her that the temperance movement was in a rut. In hertown of Medicine Lodge, working with the WCTU she closed thetown's seven bars through the tried a true techniques of thewomen's crusade of 1873: picketing with song, prayer, and moralappeals to the sellers and purchasers. These were techniques thathad been used against legal saloons, in Kansas there were nothingbut illegal ones. Moreover, for a decade now in Kansas the policyhad been widely violated, often with the contrivances of thestate's political leaders. And at the national level thetemperance movement was stalled. Between 1889 and 1907 no stateadopted prohibition. WCTU had lost its driving force with thedeath of Frances Willard in 1898 and the Prohibition Party hadsplintered into two warring camps. The leading temperanceorganizations seemed unable to advance the cause or indeed tostop the rollback movements in various states with prohibition.Hence, with conviction, and at a time when the movement wasfaltering, Nation turned away from moral suasion and turned toviolence. As she explained, "If there's anything that's weakand worse than useless it's this moral suasion. I despise it.these hell traps of Kansas have fattened for twenty years onmoral suasion."(16) And her violence struck a chord among some temperanceadvocates. While some debated the value of violence, othersjoined Nation. She soon headed an organization of several hundredsimilarly minded saloon foes. And, in a two month period,following her lead this group, and others, engaged in vigilanteaction against saloons in Kansas's major cities, Topeka andWichita. Mobbings and riots swept the cities; people were beatenand shots were fired in anger. And among some temperance workersthe violence was welcome. One woman letter writer to a WCTU paperwrote: "What if a few people do get killed[?] . . . I'mtired of this sentimental gush about 'stopping before it comes tobloodshed. . . .' I for one, hope a thousand more of them will besmashed in Kansas before she stops." The response to Nation,shows that the potential for righteous violence existed in thetemperance crusade.(17) Which raises new questions: Why was there only one CarryNation? Part of the answer lays in the changing circumstances ofthe prohibition movement. Soon after Nation's actions in Kansas,the Anti-Saloon League emerged as the dominate organization inthe temperance movement. And the League's techniques of politicallobbying, official law enforcement, and public opinion buildingchanged the fortunes of the crusade. For example, take the topicof national legislation; the League's Washington Office, between1902 and 1919, pressured the United States Congress to enact lawsthat: prohibited the sale of liquor in federal buildings, bannedthe transport of liquor through the mails, ended liquor sales innational soldiers' homes, retained a law excluding all alcoholicbeverages from Army posts, created Oklahoma as a dry state, andlimited and then prohibited the transportation of liquor into drystates. A similar record of success can be found in theprohibitionists' campaigns in the states in the same period.(18)The very success of the drys in gaining what they wanted throughthe political process made righteous violence redundant. This pattern of potential righteous violence in theprohibition crusade and the mostly unstudied violence usedagainst drys by their opponents, suggest that we need to lookmore deeply into prohibition as a reform movement. As Robin Roomwrote over twenty years ago, "we must attempt to understandthe antiliquor movement . . . as a massive, sustained organizedeffort with a highly developed set of tactics and coherent,tangible goals." (19) Indeed, if we seek a usable past, onethat might help deal with current social reform crusades, sayagainst abortion or cigarettes, it is imperative that we look,far deeper than I have here, into tactics, strategies, andcontexts, of the temperance crusade to see how they prompted orretarded violence. Richard F. Hamm SUNY Albany hamm@csc.albany.edu Notes (1) Typical of the treatment of the topic of violence and theprohibitionists can be found in examining the three availablesurveys of the movement's history. Norman Clark, Deliver UsFrom Evil: An Interpretation of American Prohibition(NewYork: W. W. Norton & Co., 1976) and Paul Aaron and DavidMusto, "Temperance and Prohibition In America: A HistoricalOverview" in Mark H. Moore and Dean Gernstein, eds., Alcoholand Public Policy: Beyond the Shadow of Prohibition(Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1981), 127-181 devote nospace to the topic. Jack S. Blocker, Jr. American TemperanceMovements: Cycles of Reform(Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1989),30- 34, 59-64, 74-79 mentions violence in connection withenforcement of the Maine Law and in the direct action of thewomen's crusades of 1873 and their precursors. Moreover, MarkLender, editor, Dictionary of American Temperance Biography(Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1984) does not contain a sketch ofany prohibitionists killed, either as response to agigation orbecause law enforcement activities. Three works discuss the role of violence associated withtemperance reform. Jed Dannebaum, Drink and Disorder:Temperance Reform in Cincinnati from the Washington Revival tothe WCTU (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press,1984) and Jack S. Blocker Jr., "Give to the Winds ThyFears": The Women's Temperance Crusade, 1873-1874(Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985); Robert Bader, Prohibitionin Kansas (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1986). On liquor law enforcement before national prohibition see:Stephen Cresswell, Mormons, Cowbosy, Moonshiners, andKlansmen: Federal Law Enforcment in the South and West, 1870-1893 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1991); WilliamF. Holmes, "Moonshining and Collective Violence: Georgia,1889- 1895," Journal of American History 67 (1980):589-611; William F. Holmes, "Whitecapping: Agrarian Violencein Mississippi, 1902-1906," Journal of Southern History35 (1969): 165-185; Wilbur R. Miller, Revenuers andMoonshiners: Enforcing Federal Liquor Law in the Mountain South,1865-1900 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,1991). (2) Indeed, certain killings connected to the civil rightscrusade have been used to illuminate the very nature of themovement and its opponents. See for example, Seth Cagin andPhilip Dray, We Are Not Afraid: The Story of Goodman,Schwerner and Chaney and the Civil Rights Campaign forMississippi (New York: Bantam Books, 1988) and HerbertShapiro, White Violence and Black Response From Reconstructionto Montgomery (Amherst: University of Massachsetts Press,1988). (3)On the topic of abolitionist violence and their reactionsto violence see, Jane H. Pease and William Pease,"Confrontation and Abolition in the 1850s," Journalof American History 58 (1972): 923-937; John Demos, "TheAntislavery Movement and the Problem of Violent 'Means,'" NewEngland Quarterly 37 (1964): 501-526; Lewis Perry, RadicalAbolitionism: Anarchy and the Government of God in AntislaeryThought (Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1973); MichaelFellman, "Rehearsal for the Civil War: Antislavery andProslavery at the Fighting Point in Kansas, 1854-1856," inLewis Perry and Michael Fellman, Antislavery Reconsidered: NewPerspectives on the Abolitionists (Baton Rouge: LouisianaUniversity Press, 1979), 287-307; Silvan S. Tomkins, "ThePsychology of Commitment: The Constructive Role of Violence andSuffering for the Individual and for His Society, in MartinDuberman, editor, The Antislavery Vanguard: New Essays on theAbolitionists (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965),270-298. On violence directed against abolitionists see "Gentlemanof Property and Standing:" Anti-Aboliton Mobs in JacksonianAmerica (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970). Beyondspecific works that deal with violence, three surveys of theabolitionist crusade show how intergal the topics of violence areto the reform's history as they devote attention to both theviolence against and by abolitionists: Ronald G. Walters, TheAntislavery Appeal: American Abolitionism After 1830 (NewYork: Norton, 1978); Merton L. Dillon, The Abolitionists: theGrowth of a Dissenting Minority (Dekalb: Northern IllinoisUniversity Press, 1974) and James B. Stewart, Holy Warriors:The Abolitionists and American Slavery (New York: Hill andWang, 1976). (4) Clarence T. Wilson, Deets Picket, and Harry G. McCain,editors, The Pocket Cyclopedia of Temperance (Topeaka:Temperance Society of Methodist Epsicopal Church, revisededition, 1916), 155-162; Ernest Cherrington, ed., StandardEncyclopaedia of the Alcohol Problem 6 volumes (Westerville,OH: American Issue Publishing Co., 1925-1930), 2618-2620, alsofor example see 85, and 1800-1801, & 2133 (bible story); evenmidway through the crusade, drys were recording the suffering oftheir martyrs, see: Cyclopaedia of Temperance and Prohibition(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1891), 201-202. (5) The list, derrived from SEAP and Pocketincludes: Dr. J. W. Beal and Judge D. R. Cox both killed inMalden, Missouri on Februray 18 1907; Edward W. Carmack, UnitedStates Senator from Tennessee, shot November 9, 1908 inNashville; Sam D. Cox, editor and publisher of The Sentinelkilled in Minatare, Nebraska on December 20 1906: Roderick D.Gambrell, editor of The Sword and Shield killed inJackson, Mississippi on May 5, 1887; Rev. John R. Moffett, editorof Anti-Liquor shot on November 11, 1892 in DanvilleVirginia; and Joseph B. Rucker editor of the Somerset Reporterkilled in Somerset, Kentucky on September 19, 1892. Two of thesekillings have received scholarly treatment, Paul Isaac, Prohibitionand Politics: Turbulent Decades in Tennessee, 1885-1920(Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1965) and Richard F.Hamm, "The Killing of John R. Moffett and the Trial of J. T.Clark: Race, Prohibition, and Politics in Danville,1887-1893," Virginia Magazine of History and Biography101 (1993): 375-404 (6) This is the case of John R. Moffett, for details see:Hamm, "Killing." The assertion that Moffett did not diefor his convictions generated a controversy between the slainman's brother and William Copeland, editor of the Danville paperat Moffett's death and later editor of the Times Dispatch.See: S. H. Thompson, The Life of John R. Moffett (Salem:McClung & White, 1895), 141-144. Richmond Times Dispatch,April 17, 1903, 4; Correspondence between W. W. Moffett &Richmond Times Dispatch Concerning Reverend John R.Moffett" bound typescript, Virginia Baptist HistoricalSociety, Botwright Library, University of Richmond, Richmond;Richmond Times Dispatch May 26, 1903, 4; Guide, WalterScott Copeland Papers #5497, E. J. Jordan, Jr., compiler, RareBooks and Manuscripts Alderman Library, University of Virginia. (7) After the pioneering work of Joseph Gusfield on thesocial status of temperance reformers, scholars rushed to testthis theory, and for nearly a generation, the study ofprohibition focused, as the title of one article put it, on"The Prohibitionists Who Were They?" Joseph R.Gusfield, Symbolic Crusade: Status Politics and the AmericanTemperance Movement (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,1963); Jack Blocker, Jr. "Modernity of Prohibitionists"and Charles A. Isetts, "A Social Profile of WCTU Crusade:Hillsboro, Ohio" in Jack Blocker Jr., ed., Alcohol Reformand Society: the Liquor Issue in Social Context (Westport,CN: Greenwood Press, 1979), 99-110, 149-170; Robert A. Hohner,"The Prohibitionists: Who Were They?" South AtlanticQuarterly 68 (1969): 491-505; Jack S. Blocker Jr., "Giveto the Winds Thy Fears": The Women's Temperance Crusade,1873-1874 (Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985). The salienceof relgious idenity and the prohibition issue emerged as a topicin political histories. Richard Jenson, The Winning of theMidwest, Social and Political Conflict, 1888-1896 (Chicago:University of Chicago Press, 1971); Paul Kleppner, The Crossof Culture: A Social Analysis of Midwestern Politics, 1885-1900(New York: MacMillian Free Press, 1970); Jed Dannebaum,"Immigrants and Temperance: Ethnocultural Conflict inCincinnati, 1845-1860" Ohio History 87 (Autumn 1978):125-139. (8) On the issue of whether prohibition should be considereda progressive reform, Richard Hofstader in The AmericanPolitical Tradition (New York: Vintage Books, 1954) and in Ageof Reform (New York: Vintage Books, 1955) and AndrewSinclair, Era of Excess: A Social History of the ProhibitionMovement (New York: Harper and Row, 1962) argued no. JohnBurnham in "New Perspectives on the Prohibition 'Experiment'of the 1920s" Journal of Social History 2 (1968):51-68; and James Timberlake in Prohibition and the ProgressiveMovement, 1900-1920 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,1963) challenged that view. Jack S. Blocker, Jr., Retreat fromReform: The Prohibition Movement in the United States, 1890-1913(Westport: Greenwood Press, 1976) plotted the temperancemovement's abandonment of broader social reform to concentrate onprohibition alone. Works by, Norman Clark and Austin Kerr,utilizing the organizational interpretation of Robert Wiebe,placed prohibition firmly within the panapoly of progressivereforms. See Clark, Deliver Us From Evil; K. Austin Kerr, Organizedfor Prohibition: A New History of the Anti-Saloon League (NewHaven, CN: Yale University Press, 1985). On the organizationalinterpretation see: Louis Galambos, "The EmergingOrganizational Synthesis of Modern American History," BusinessHistory Review 44 (Autumn 1980): 279-90; Samuel P. Hays, Responseto Industrialism, 1885-1914 (Chicago: University of ChicagoPress, 1957), 48- 70; Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The VisibleHand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business(Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1977); Louis Galambos,"Technology, Political Economy, and Professionalization:Central Themes of the Organizational Synthesis," BusinessHistory Review 57 (Winter 1983): 471-93. Recently, the workon temperance reform has focused on its relationship with largerquestion of reform in the history of women. Ruth Bordin, Womanand Temperance (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1981),15-33; Barbara Leslie Epstein, The Politics of Domesticity:Women, Evangelism and Temperance in Nineteenth Century America(Middletown, CN: Wesleyan University Press, 1981, 1986); RuthBordin, Francis Willard: A Biography (Chapel Hill, NC:University of North Carolina Press, 1986); Ian Tyrrell, Woman'sWorld Woman's Empire: the Woman's Christian Temperance Union inInternational Perspective, 1880-1930 (Chapel Hill, NC:University of North Carolina Press, 19. (9) I am as guilty as any other scholar in the field, seeRichard F. Hamm, Shaping the Eighteenth Amendment: TemperanceReform, Legal Culture, and the Polity, 1880-1920 (ChapelHill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995). We do not have agood modern history of the Prohibition Party, though Blocker, Retreatis a good start; similarily WCTU histories have tended to trailoff with Frances Willard's death. Where such narratives are to befound are in the local studies of an area or region. Localstudies which have looked at the mechanics of the movement likeRobert L. Hampel, Temperance and Prohibition in Massachusetts,1813- 1852 (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1982); haveoften focused on areas that did not have significant outbreaks ofviolence during temperance agitation. (10) The only full length biolgraphies of Nation are old andnegative, Herbert Asbury, Carry Nation (New York: Knopf,1929) and Robert Lewis Taylor, Vessel of Wrath: The Life andTimes of Carry Nation (New York: Signet Books, 1966). Therecent work by Robert Bader is more sympathic and connects herclearly to events in Kansas. Robert S. Bader, "Mrs.Nation," Kansas History 7 (1984/5): 246-262; and Prohibition,133-155. Nation is desperately in need of a biography whichcould use the insights of women's history, gender relations, andtemperance studies to illuminate her career. The place to beginsuch a reinterpretation of Nation is her autobiography, Carry A.Nation, The Use and Need of the Life of Carry A. Nation(Topeka, KA: F. M. Stevens and Sons, 1909). (11) Stephen B. Oates, To Purge This Land with Blood: ABiography of John Brown (New York: Harpers, 1970); Dillon, Abolitionists119,-243; Stewart, Holy,147-148, 151-161, 164-177;Walters, Antislavery, 28-33. (12) Lisa Belkin, "Kill For Life," New YorkTimes Magazine October 30, 1994, 47-50, 62, 76, 80;"Rescuing a City's Reputation," Transcript "AllThings Considered" August 26, 1994, 9-16. (13) Douglas Dobbins, Quarrytown (Westerville:American Issue Publishing, 1915), 48-48, 51-67, 71-80, 100-107,155-159, 184-189, 201-207. (14) Bader, Prohibition, 134-155; Taylor, Vessel,62-94, 113-142 (15) Quoted in Bader, Prohibition, 140; Hamm, Shaping,123-129. (16) Quoted in Bader, Prohibition, 149-150. (17) Blocker, Retreat, 197-234; Hamm, Shaping,155- 255; SEAP, 177, 207, 2725. (18) Robin Room, "Governing Images and the Prevention ofAlcohol Problems," Preventative Medicine 3 (1974):11-23, 11. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-24IA086-000619-B006-121http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/szasz1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033759 text/html 8342HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:37:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:18 GMTContent-length: 8125 The Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research From _Our Right To Drugs_ by Thomas Szasz, Praeger Publishers,NY (1992): *The Food and Drugs Act of 1906* Before 1907, all drugs could be sold and bought like any otherconsumer good. The manufacturer did not even have to disclose thecontents of his concoction. Hence the name patent medicine, theadjective alluding to the fact that the composition was a tradesecret, protected by a patented name. Although there is no evidence that the American consumer evercomplained about the free market in drugs, there is plenty ofevidence that his self appointed protectors complained bitterlyand loudly. The first landmark event in the federal regulation ofdrugs (and foods) was the Food and Drugs Act of 1906. What didCongress intend to achieve with this seemingly laudablelegislation? To protect people from the sale of"adulterated" or "misbranded" foods or drugs,that is, "assur[ing] the customer of the identity of thearticle purchased, not of its usefulness." I say Congress's aim in enacting this legislation wasseemingly laudable because, while it is desirable that peopleknow what drugs they buy, forcing manufacturers by law to listthe ingredients of their products is an unnecessary infringementon the free market -- the foot in the door ofpaternalistic-statist protectionism. If Great American Drugs,Inc., wants to market a mystery product, there is no reason whythe government should prevent it from doing so. And if I want tobuy such a pig in a poke, why should the government prevent mefrom making that choice? People who want to be informed about thedrugs they buy and use would abstain from purchasing mysteryproducts, and market forces would then create a supply oftruthfully labeled drugs. In short, there would be no need toprohibit the non-disclosure of the contents of medicinal (orother) products. It is enough to prohibit false disclosure and topunish it, as fraud, by both criminal and civil penalities. Asfor nondisclosure, it would be "punished" by theinvisible hand of the market. The truth is that behind Congress'sostensible aim of combating drug misbranding lay its growingantagonism to the habit of pharmacological self-pleasuring,manifested by the act's specifically mandating the listing on thelabel of what were then the main ingredients of Americans'favorite nostrums: alcohol, hypnotics, and sedatives. Therelevant lines of the Food and Drugs Act read as follows: That for purposes of this Act an article shall also be deemedmisbranded: ... if the package fails to bear a statement on thelabel of the quantity or proportion of any alcohol, morphine,opium, cocaine, heroin, alpha or beta eucaine, chloroform,cannabis, chloral hydrate, or acetanilide. It is implicit in this sentence that, back then, Congress tookfor granted the legality of a free market in drugs, includingcannabis, cocaine, heroin, and morphine. [...] *The Harrison Act (1914) and It's Aftermath* In 1914, Congress enacted another landmark piece of anti-druglegislation: the Harrison Narcotic Act. Originally passed as arecord-keeping law, it quickly became a prohibition statute. Inthe course of the next seven years, by a curious coincidence ofhistory -- if, indeed, it is a coincidence -- in Russia theSoviet Union replaced the czarist empire, while in the UnitedStates the free market in drugs was replaced by federal drugprohibition possessing unchallengeable authority. Excerpts fromtwo key Supreme Court decisions quickly tell the story. In 1915, in a test of the Harrision Act, the Court upheld itbut expressed doubts about its constitutionality: "While theOpium Registration Act of December 17, 1914, may have a moralend, as well as revenue, in view, this court, in view of thegrave doubt as to its constitutionality except as a revenuemeasure, construes it as such." Yet, only six years later the Court considered objection tofederal drug prohibition a taboo. In Whipple v. Martinson thejustices declared, "There can be no question of the authority of the Statein the exercise of its police power to regulate theadministration, sale, prescription, and use of dangerous andhabit-forming drugs.... The right to exercise this power is so manifest in theinterest of public health and welfare, that it is unnecessary toenter upon a discussion of it beyond saying that it is too firmlyestablished to be successfully called in question. In 1914, trading in and using drugs was a right. In 1915,limited federal drug controls were a constitutionallyquestionable tax revenue measure. By 1921, the federal governmenthad gained not only complete control over so-called dangerousdrugs, but also a quasi-papal immunity to legal challenge of itsauthority. Thus has the rejection of one of our most basicconstitutional rights become transformed into reverence for oneof our most baneful therapeutic-religious dogmas. Once ignited,the fire of "progressive" drug protectionism spread andsoon enveloped the whole contry, transforming the Harrison Actinto the legislative embodiment of the "moral principle thattaking narcotics for other than medicinal purposes was harmfuland should be prevented." That threw the monkey wrenchmedicinal purpose into the machinery of the trade in drugs; thisundefined and undefinable concept has haunted us ever since. In1920, drug prohibitionists won another major victory: Americawas, at last, alcohol-free -- if not de facto, then at least dejure. Since 1924, when Congress made it illegal to manufacture,possess, or sell heroin, America has been free from heroin aswell -- if not in practice, then at least in theory. [...] In retelling this tale, it is impossible to overemphasizethat, although initially the drug laws were intended to protectpeople from being "abused" by drugs others wanted tosell them, this aim was soon replaced by that of protecting themfrom "abusing" drugs they wanted to buy. The governmentthus succeeded in depriving us not only of our basic right toingest whatever we choose, but also of our right to grow,manufacture, sell, and buy agricultural products used by mansince antiquity. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-25IA031-000652-B036-277http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/murd3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125029 text/html 15406HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:50:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:48 GMTContent-length: 15188 Hemp Around Their Necks by Harry Anslinger Hemp Around Their Necks From The Murderers THE STORY OF THE NARCOTIC GANGS By HARRY J. ANSLINGER U. S. Commissioner of Narcotics and WILL OURSLER FARRAR, STRAUS AND CUDAHY, NEW YORK, 1961 In 1930 there was no federal law against smoking marijuana,and the average American citizen in an average community hadprobably never heard of "reefers" or "tea" orother words in the argot of marijuana users. But by the middlethirties we began to see the serious effects of marijuana on ouryouth. An alarming increase in the smoking of marijuana reefersin 1936 continued to spread at an accelerated pace in 1937.Before this, use of reefers had been relatively slight andconfined to the the Southwest, particularly along the Mexicanborder. Seizures by state officers in these two years, however, hadincreased a hundred percent and by hundreds of pounds. Reports Ireceived from thirty states showed an "invasion" bythis drug, either by cultivation or underworld importation. Marijuana was something new and adventuresome. The angle-wisemobsters were aiming their pitch straight at the mostimpressionable age group-America's fresh, post-depression crop ofteenagers. One adolescent gave a picture to an agent of a typical"smoker" in an apartment or "pad": "The room was crowded. There were fifty people but itseemed like five hundred. It was like crazy, couples lying all,over the place, a woman was screaming out in the hall, two,fellows were trying to make love to the same girl and this, girlwas screaming and crying and not making any sense. Her clotheswere mostly pulled off and she was snickering and blubbering andtrying to push these two guys away.... The place was nothing butsmoke and stink and these funny little noises I could hear butthey were way out, that far I could hardly hear them and theywere right there in the room, that laughing and crying and themusic and all that stuff. It was crazy wild. But I didn't want todo anything, I didn't want to sleep with those women or likethat. I just wanted to lie down because the room seemed big andEke a great tremendous crowd like at a ball game or something. .. ." Made from the hemp plant known as Cannabis sativa americana,marijuana is almost a twin brother to Cannabis sativa indica,otherwise called hashish. There are said to be almost threehundred names for the varieties of the hemp weed. In some partsof Asia it is called bhang; in South Africa it is called dagga.It is also challed chira and ganja. And many other names. The hemp weed grows best in warm climates but has also beenfound along roadsides north of Boston. It grows to heights offrom five and a half to fifteen or sixteen feet. Its leaves,seeds and flowers contain a substance which when chewed or smokedproduces hallucinatory effects. Elaborate technical processes have been developed for themanufacture of Cannabis cigarettes from the resin in the plants.Although pharmacists have never been able to isolate completelythe nature of the Cannabis "principal" that producesthe narcotic effect, it is known to exist in the fringes or hairson the leaves and in the flowers, and in the thick resin thatflows through the stalk and other parts of the plant. Cannabis grows wild in many parts of the world, and iscultivated in India, and illegally in certain areas of Africa,Mexico, Brazil and the United States. It also grows wild in partsof the United States, although we have been able to root the wildCannabis out of most communities. Origins of hemp weed are ancient. Rites that go backthousands of years, in temples long vanished, may wen haveevolved around the effects of some variant of the hemp weed.Worshipers of the Hindu god Siva were said to use Cannabisindica. In the eleventh century A.D., the Mohammedan sect calledthe Assassins, used hashish in so-called religious observances.They made homicide a high ritualistic art. Their name itself istoday a synonym for murder. Marijuana effects on the average user are described in abrochure we published in the Bureau for the information of laygroups. "The toxic effect produced by the active narcoticprinciple of Cannabis sativa, hemp, or marijuana," thereport states, "appear to be exclusively to the higher nervecenters. The drug produces first an exhaltation with a feeling ofwell being, a happy, jovial mood, usually; an increased feelingof physical strength and power, and a general euphoria isexperienced. Accompanying this exaltation is a stimulation of theimagination followed by a more or less delirious statecharacterized by vivid kaleidoscopic visions, sometimes of apleasing sensual kind, but occasionally of a gruesome nature.Accompanying this delirious state is a remarkable loss in spatialand time relations; persons and things in the environment looksmall; time is indeterminable; seconds seem like minutes andhours like days. "Those who are accustomed to habitual use of the drugare said eventually to develop a delirious rage after itsadministration during which they are temporarily, at least,irresponsible and prone to commit violent crimes. The prolongeduse of this narcotic is said to produce mentaldeterioration." One of the great difficulties with Cannabis is itsunpredictability. Physicians who have made hundreds of tests withCannabis report that there is no way to predict what effect ithave on the individual, both under controlled and noncontrolledconditions. One man has no reaction at all; the next may goberserk and try to stab somebody or harm himself. The medicalprofession after many such experiments was forced to drop thenarcotic as a possible analgesic because of this unpredictablequality. Much of the most irrational juvenile violence and that haswritten a new chapter of shame and tragedy is traceable directlyto this hemp intoxication. A gang of boys tear the clothes fromtwo school girls and rape the screaming girls, one boy after theother. A sixteen-year-old kills his en tire family of five inFlorida, a man in Minnesota puts a bullet through the head of astranger on the road; in Colorado husband tries to shoot hiswife, kills her grandmother instead and then kills himself. Everyone of these crimes had been proceeded (sic) by the smoking of one or more marijuana "reefers."As the marijuana situation grew worse, I knew action had to betaken to get the proper legislation passed. By 1937 under mydirection, the Bureau launched two important steps First, alegislative plan to seek from Congress a new law that would placemarijuana and its distribution directly under federal control.Second, on radio and at major forums, such that presentedannually by the New York Herald Tribune, I told the story of thisevil weed of the fields and river beds and roadsides. I wrotearticles for magazines; our agents gave hundreds of lectures toparents, educators, social and civic leaders. In networkbroadcasts I reported on the growing list of crimes, includingmurder and rape. I described the nature of marijuana and itsclose kinship to hashish. I continued to hammer at the facts. I believe we did a thorough job, for the public was alertedand the laws to protect them were passed, both nationally and atthe state level. We also brought under control the wild growingmarijuana in this country. Working with local authorities, wecleaned up hundreds of acres of marijuana we and uprooted plantssprouting along the roadsides. The 1937 law does not prohibit the sale of marijuana b puts atax of $100.00 an ounce on any sale or transfer of drug and makessuch sale or transfer illegal without proper registration andapproval from the Bureau. Possession without proper authorizationcan bring a prison term. The Marijuana Tax Act is patterned in general after theHarrison Act, but with some major technical variations,principally based on the fact that while marijuana is used inlaboratory tests it is not used for medical purposes. There were still some WPA gangs working in those days and weput them to good use. just outside the nation's capital, for somesixty miles along the Potomac River, on both banks, marijuana wasgrowing in profusion; it had been planted there originally byearly settlers who made their own hemp and cloth. The workerscleaned out tremendous river bank crops, destroying plants, seedsand roots. AR through the Midwest also, WPA workers were used forthis clean-up job. The. wild hemp was rooted out of America. During the Second World War, after Axis powers in the FarEast and Europe cut off our access to countries where hemp wasgrown for the making of cord and cloth, we developed, understrict controls, our own hemp growing program on the richfarmlands of Minnesota. Less than one thousandth of one percentwas ever diverted into illegal channels. After the war thisproduction stopped and the fields went back to ,corn and wheat.With the war's end, however, the narcotic branch of theunderworld was given a new lift by the publication of anextraordinary document which has come to be known as the LaGuardia Report. The title was a misnomer, it was actually a report of acommittee on marijuana which had been appointed by the"Little Flower" of New York to give an objectivepicture of marijuana from a scientific point of view. La Guardiawas always not only an honest official who warred against thesyndicate "tin horns," as he called them, but was alsoa good friend of Bureau of Narcotics. In Congress he foughtconsistently for increases for our Bureau to help us to achievethe power needed to do our job. The men who issued this document were men of science doctors,technicians, authorities Published as a book by the JacquesCattell Press in 1945, the report bore the tide: The MarijuanaProblem in the City of New York: Sociologic Medical,Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, by the Mayor'sCommittee on Marijuana. This report declared, in effect, that those who had beendenouncing marijuana as dangerous, including myself and expertsin the Bureau, were not only in error, but were spreadingbaseless fears about the effects of smoking Cannabis. I say thereport was a government printed invitation to youth andadults-above all to teenagers-to go ahead and smoke all thereefers they felt like. Relying solely on a series of experiments with a group of 77prisoners who volunteered to make the tests, the Mayor's expertsasserted that they found no major menace in the use of thisnarcotic, which they termed "a mild drug smoked by boredpeople for the sake of conviviality." The report further claimed that there was "noapparent" connection between "the weed" and crimesof violence, that smoking it did not produce aggressiveness orbelligerence as a rule, that it could be used for a number ofyears without causing serious mental or physical harm and thatwhile it might be habit forming it could be given up abruptlywithout causing distress; in other words, it did not produce thebodily dependence found in heroin, cocaine, morphine and otherdrugs. Finally, the report suggested that the drug is so mild thatit might well be used successfully as a substitute in the processof curing addiction to other drugs, or even in the treatment ofchronic alcoholism. Doctors and other authorities who studied the effects of thisdrug, however, tore the report apart for its inaccuracies andmisleading conclusions. The Journal of the American MedicalAssociation joined the. Bureau in condemning it as unscientific. "For many years medical scientists have consideredCannabis a dangerous drug," the Journal's editorial of April26, 1945 stated. "Nevertheless. . . . the Mayor's Committeeon Marijuana submits an analysis by seventeen doctors of tests on77 prisoners and, on this narrow and thoroughly unscientificfoundation, draws sweeping and inadequate conclusions whichminimize the harmlessness of marijuana. Already the book has doneharm. One investigator has described some tearful parents whobrought their 16-year-old boy to a physician after he had beendetected in the act of smoking marijuana. . . . The boy said hehad read an account of the La Guardia committee report and thiswas his justification for using marijuana.. A criminal lawyer for marijuana drug peddlers has alreadyused the La Guardia report as a basis to have defendants set freeby the Court. "The value of the conclusions," continued theeditorial, "is destroyed by the fact that the experimentswere conducted on 77 confined criminals. Prisoners were obligedto be content with the quantities of drug administered.Antisocial behavior could not have been noticed, as they wereprisoners. At liberty some of them would have given free rein totheir inclinations and would probably not have stopped at thedose producing 'the pleasurable principle. . . .' Publicofficials will do well to disregard this unscientific, uncriticalstudy, and continue to regard marijuana as a menace where it ispurveyed," the Journal concluded. There can be no doubt of the damage done by the report.Syndicate lawyers and spokesmen leaped upon its giddy sociologyand medical mumbo-jumbo, cited it in court cases, tried to spreadthe idea that the report had brought marijuana back into thefolds of good society with a full pardon and a slap on the backfront the medical profession. The lies continued to spread. They cropped up on paneldiscussions, in public addresses by seemingly informedindividuals. They helped once again, in a new and profitabledirection, to bewilder the public and make it unsure of its ownjudgments. This carefully nurtured public doubt was to pay offwith extra millions in the pockets of the hoods. One killer whohelped to nourish that doubt-a hoodlum called Lepke took amulti-million-dollar cut in exchange for the terror inspired bythe mere mention of his name. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-26IA086-000619-B006-164http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/heroin/twaino1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033856 text/html 15024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:38:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:42:48 GMTContent-length: 14806 Roughing It - Chapter XIII: The Gentle, InoffensiveChinese - by Mark Twain Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Roughing It Volume II Chapter XIII: The Gentle, Inoffensive Chinese Mark Twain, 1871 Of course there was a large Chinese population in VirginiaCity - it is the case with every town and city on the Pacificcoast. They are a harmless race when white men either let themalone or treat them no worse than dogs; in fact, they are almostentirely harmless anyhow, for they seldom think of resenting thevilest insults or the cruelest injuries. They are quiet,peaceable, tractable, free from drunkenness, and they are asindustrious as the day is long. A disorderly Chinaman is rare,and a lazy one does not exist. So long as a Chinaman has strengthto use his hands he needs no support from anybody; white menoften complain of want of work, but a Chinaman offers no suchcomplaint; he always manages to find something to do. He is agreat convenience to everybody - even to the worst class of whitemen, for he bears the most of their sins, suffering fines fortheir petty thefts, imprisonment for their robberies, and deathfor their murders. Any white man can swear a Chinaman's life awayin the courts, but no Chinaman can testify against a white man.Ours is the "land of the free" - nobody denies that -nobody challenges it. [Maybe it is because we won't let otherpeople testify.] As I write, news comes that in broad daylight inSan Francisco, some boys have stoned an inoffensive Chinaman todeath, and that although a large crowd witnessed the shamefuldeed, no one interfered. There are seventy thousand (and possibly one hundred thousand)Chinamen on the Pacific coast. There were about a thousand inVirgina. They were penned into a "Chinese quarter" - athing which they do not particularly object to, as they are fondof herding together. Their buildings were of wood; usually onlyone story high, and set thickly together along streets scarcelywide enough for a wagon to pass through. Their quarter was alittle removed from the rest of the town. The chief employment ofChinamen in towns is to wash clothing. They always send a billpinned to the clothes. It is mere ceremony, for it does notenlighten the customer much. Their price for washing was $2.50per dozen - rather cheaper than white people could afford to washfor at that time. A very common sign on the Chinese houses was:"See Yup, Washer and Ironer"; "Hong Wo,Washer"; "Sam Sing & Ah Hop, Washing." Thehouse-servants, cooks, etc., in California and Nevada, werechiefly Chinamen. There were few white servants and no Chinawomenso employed. Chinamen make good house-servants, being quick,obedient, patient, quick to learn, and tirelessly industrious.They do not need to be taught a thing twice, as a general thing.They are imitative. If a Chinaman were to see his master break upa center-table, in a passion, and kindle a fire with it, thatChinaman would be likely to resort to the furniture for fuelforever afterward. All Chinamen can read, write, and cipher with easy facility -pity but all our petted voters could. In California they rentlittle patches of ground and do a deal of gardening. They willraise surprising crops of vegetables on a sand-pile. They wastenothing. What is rubbish to a Christian, a Chinaman carefullypreserves and makes useful in one way or another. He gathers upall the old oyster and sardine cans that white people throw away,and procures marketable tin and solder from them by melting. Hegathers up old bones and turns them into manure. In California hegets a living out of old mining claims that white men haveabandoned as exhausted and worthless - and then the officers comedown on him once a month with an exorbitant swindle to which thelegislature has given the broad, general name of"foreign" mining tax, but it is usually inflicted on noforeigners but Chinamen. This swindle has in some cases beenrepeated once or twice on the same victim in the course of thesame month - but the public treasury was not additionallyenriched by it, probably. Chinamen hold their dead in great reverence - they worshiptheir departed ancestors, in fact. Hence, in China, a man's frontyard, back yard, or any other part of his premises, is made hisfamily burying-ground, in order that he may visit the graves atany and all times. Therefore that huge empire is one mightycemetery; it is ridged and wrinkled from its center to itscircumference with graves - and inasmuch as every foot of groundmust be made to do its utmost, in China, lest the swarmingpopulation suffer for food, the very graves are cultivated andyield a harvest, custom holding this to be no dishonor to thedead. Since the departed are held in such worshipful reverence, aChinaman cannot bear that any indignity be offered the placeswhere they sleep. Mr. Burlingame said that herein lay China'sbitter opposition to railroads; a road could not be builtanywhere in the empire without disturbing the graves of theirancestors or friends. A Chinaman hardly believes he could enjoy the hereafter excepthis body lay in his beloved China; also, he desires to receive,himself, after death, that worship with which he has honored hisdead that preceded him. Therefore, if he visits a foreigncountry, he makes arrangements to have his bones returned toChina in case he dies; if he hires to go to a foreign country ona labor contract, there is always a stipulation that his bodyshall be taken back to China if he dies; if the government sellsa gang of coolies to a foreigner for the usual five-year term, itis specified in the contract that their bodies shall be restoredto China in case of death. On the Pacific coast the Chinamen allbelong to one or another of several great companies ororganizations, and these companies keep track of their members,register their names, and ship their bodies home when they die.The See Yup Company is held to be the largest of these. The NingYeong Company is next, and numbers eighteen thousand members onthe coast. Its headquarters are at San Francisco, where it has acostly temple, several great officers (one of whom keeps regalstate in seclusion and cannot be approached by common humanity),and a numerous priesthood. In it I was shown a register of itsmembers, with the dead and the date of their shipment to Chinaduly marked. Every ship that sails from San Francisco carriesaway a heavy freight of Chinese corpses - or did, at least, untilthe legislature, with an ingenious refinement of Christiancruelty, forbade the shipments, as a neat underhanded way ofdeterring Chinese immigration. The bill was offered, whether itpassed or not. It is my impression that it passed. There wasanother bill - it became a law - compelling every incomingChinaman to be vaccinated on the wharf and pay a duly-appointedquack (no decent doctor would defile himself with such legalizedrobbery) ten dollars for it. As few importers of Chinese wouldwant to go to an expense like that, the lawmakers thought thiswould be another heavy blow to Chinese immigration. What the Chinese quarter of Virginia was like - or, indeed,what the Chinese quarter of any Pacific coast town was and islike - may be gathered from this item which I printed in theEnterprise while reporting for that paper: Chinatown. - Accompanied by a fellow-reporter, we made a tripthrough our Chinese quarter the other night. The Chinese havebuilt their portion of the city to suit themselves; and as theykeep neither carriages nor wagons, their streets are not wideenough, as a general thing, to admit of the passage of vehicles.At ten o'clock at night the Chinaman may be seen in all hisglory. In every little cooped-up, dingy cavern of a hut, faintwith the odor of burning Josh-lights and with nothing to see thegloom by save the sickly, guttering tallow candle, were two orthree yellow, long-tailed vagabonds, coiled up on a sort of shorttruckle-bed, smoking opium, motionless and with their lusterlesseyes turned inward from excess of satisfaction - or rather therecent smoker looks thus, immediately after having passed thepipe to his neighbor - for opium-smoking is a comfortlessoperation, and requires constant attention. A lamp sits on thebed, the length of the long pipe-stem from the smoker's mouth; heputs a pellet of opium on the end of a wire, sets it on fire, andplasters it into the pipe much as a Christian would fill a holewith putty; then he applies the bowl to the lamp and proceeds tosmoke - and the stewing and frying of the drug and the gurglingof the juices in the stem would well-nigh turn the stomach of astatue. John likes it, though; it soothes him; he takes about twodozen whiffs, and then rolls over to dream, Heaven only knowswhat, for we could not imagine by looking at the soggy creature.Possibly in his visions he travels far away from the gross worldand his regular washing, and feasts on succulent rats andbirds'-nests in Paradise. Mr. Ah Sing keeps a general grocery and provision store at No.13 Wang Street. He lavished his hospitality upon our party in thefriendliest way. He had various kinds of colored and colorlesswines and brandies, with unpronounceable names, imported fromChina in little crockery jugs, and which he offered to us indainty little miniature wash-basins of porcelain. He offered us amess of birds'-nests; also, small, neat sausages, of which wecould have swallowed several yards if we had chosen to try, butwe suspected that each link contained the corpse of a mouse, andtherefore refrained. Mr. Sing had in his store a thousandarticles of merchandise, curious to behold, impossible to imaginethe uses of, and beyond our ability to describe. His ducks, however, and his eggs, we could understand; theformer were split open and flattened out like codfish, and camefrom China in that shape, and the latter were plastered over withsome kind of paste which kept them fresh and palatable throughthe long voyage. We found Mr. Hong Wo, No. 37 Chow-chow Street, making up alottery scheme - in fact, we found a dozen others occupied in thesame way in various parts of the quarter, for about every thirdChinaman runs a lottery, and the balance of the tribe"buck" at it. "Tom," who speaks faultlessEnglish, and used to be chief and only cook to the TerritorialEnterprise, when the establishment kept bachelor's hall two yearsago, said that "Sometime Chinaman buy ticket one dollar hap,ketch um two tree hundred, sometime no ketch um anything; lotterylike one man fight um seventy - maybe he whip, maybe he get whipherself, welly good." However, the percentage beingsixty-nine against him, the chances are, as a general thing, that"he get whip herself." We could not see that theselotteries differed in any respect from our own, save that thefigures being Chinese, no ignorant white man might ever hope tosucceed in telling "t'other from which"; the manner ofdrawing is similar to ours. Mr. See Yup keeps a fancy store on Live Fox Street. He sold usfans of white feathers, gorgeously ornamented; perfumery thatsmelled like Limburger cheese, Chinese pens, and watch-charmsmade of a stone unscratchable with steel instruments, yetpolished and tinted like the inner coat of a sea-shell. ^1 Astokens of his esteem, See Yup presented the party with gaudyplumes made of gold tinsel and trimmed with peacocks' feathers. [Footnote 1: A peculiar species of the "jade-stone"- to a Chinaman peculiarly precious.] We ate chow-chow with chop-sticks in the celestialrestaurants; our comrade chided the moon-eyed damsels in front ofthe houses for their want of feminine reserve; we receivedprotecting Josh-lights from our hosts and "dickered"for a pagan god or two. Finally, we were impressed with thegenius of a Chinese bookkeeper; he figured up his accounts on amachine like a gridiron with buttons strung on its bars; thedifferent rows represented units, tens, hundreds, and thousands.He fingered them with incredible rapidity - in fact, he pushedthem from place to place as fast as a musical professor's fingerstravel over the keys of a piano. They are a kindly-disposed, well-meaning race, and arerespected and well treated by the upper classes, all over thePacific coast. No Californian gentleman or lady ever abuses oroppresses a Chinaman, under any circumstances, an explanationthat seems to be much needed in the East. Only the scum of thepopulation do it - they and their children; they, and, naturallyand consistently, the policemen and politicians, likewise, forthese are the dust-licking pimps and slaves of the scum, there aswell as elsewhere in America. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-27IA088-000636-B024-125http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/dequinc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122104850 text/html 34154HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:48:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:14 GMTContent-length: 33936 Confessions of an English Opium Eater Confessions of an English Opium Eater by Thomas de Quincey THE PLEASURES OF OPIUM It is so long since I first took opium, that if it had been atrifling incident in my life, I might have forgotten its date:but cardinal events are not to be forgotten; and fromcircumstances connected with it, I remember that it must bereferred to the autumn of 1804. During that season I was inLondon, having come thither for the first time since my entranceat college. And my introduction to opium arose in the following way. Froman early age I had been accustomed to wash my head in cold waterat least once a day: being suddenly seized with toothache, Iattributed it to some relaxation caused by an accidentalintermission of that practice; jumped out of bed; plunged my headinto a basin of cold water; and with hair thus wetted went tosleep. The next morning, as I need hardly say, I awoke withexcruciating rheumatic pains of the head and face, from which Ihad hardly any respite for about twenty days. On the twenty-firstday, I think it was, and on a Sunday, that I went out into thestreets; rather to run away, if possible, from my torments, thanwith any distinct purpose. By accident I met a collegeacquaintance who recommended opium. Opium! dread agent ofunimaginable pleasure and pain! I had heard of it as I had ofmanna or of Ambrosia, but no further: how unmeaning a sound wasit at that time! what solemn chords does it now strike upon myheart! what heart-quaking vibrations of sad and happyremembrances! Reverting for a moment to these, I feel a mysticimportance attached to the minutest circumstances connected withthe place and the time, and the man (if man he was) that firstlaid open to me the Paradise of Opium-eaters. It was a Sundayafternoon, wet and cheerless: and a duller spectacle this earthof ours has not to show than a rainy Sunday in London. My roadhomewards lay through Oxford-street; and near "the /stately/Pantheon," (as Mr. Wordsworth has obligingly called it) Isaw a druggist's shop. The druggist -- unconscious minister ofcelestial pleasures! -- as if in sympathy with the rainy Sunday,looked dull and stupid, just as any mortal druggist might beexpected to look on a Sunday; and, when I asked for the tinctureof opium, he gave it to me as any other man might do: andfurthermore, out of my shilling, returned me what seemed to bereal copper halfpence, taken out of a real wooden drawer.Nevertheless, in spite of such indications of humanity, he hasever since existed in my mind as the beatific vision of animmortal druggist, sent down to earth on a special mission tomyself. And it confirms me in this way of considering him, that,when I next came up to London, I sought him near the statelyPantheon, and found him not: and thus to me, who knew not hisname (if indeed he had one) he seemed rather to have vanishedfrom Oxford-street than to have removed in any bodily fashion.The reader may choose to think of him as, possibly, no more thana sublunary druggist: it may be so: but my faith is better: Ibelieve him to have evanesced,{1} or evaporated. So unwillinglywould I connect any mortal remembrances with that hour, andplace, and creature, that first brought me acquainted with thecelestial drug. Arrived at my lodgings, it may be supposed that I lost not amoment in taking the quantity prescribed. I was necessarilyignorant of the whole art and mystery of opium-taking: and, whatI took, I took under every disadvantage. But I took it: -- and inan hour, oh! Heavens! what a revulsion! what an upheaving, fromits lowest depths, of the inner spirit! what an apocalypse of theworld within me! That my pains had vanished, was now a trifle inmy eyes: -- this negative effect was swallowed up in theimmensity of those positive effects which had opened before me --in the abyss of divine enjoyment thus suddenly revealed. Here wasa panacea - a [pharmakon nepenthez] for all human woes: here wasthe secret of happiness, about which philosophers had disputedfor so many ages, at once discovered: happiness might now bebought for a penny, and carried in the waistcoat pocket: portableecstasies might be had corked up in a pint bottle: and peace ofmind could be sent down in gallons by the mail coach. But, if Italk in this way, the reader will think I am laughing: and I canassure him, that nobody will laugh long who deals much withopium: its pleasures even are of a grave and solemn complexion;and in his happiest state, the opium-eater cannot present himselfin the character of /Il Allegro/: even then, he speaks and thinksas becomes /Il Penseroso/. Nevertheless, I have a veryreprehensible way of jesting at times in the midst of my ownmisery: and, unless when I am checked by some more powerfulfeelings, I am afraid I shall be guilty of this indecent practiceeven in these annals of suffering or enjoyment. The reader mustallow a little to my infirm nature in this respect: and with afew indulgences of that sort, I shall endeavour to be as grave,if not drowsy, as fits a theme like opium, so anti-mercurial asit really is, and so drowsy as it is falsely reputed. And, first, one word with respect to its bodily effects: forupon all that has been hitherto written on the subject of opium,whether by travelers in Turkey (who may plead their privilege oflying as an old immemorial right), or by professors of medicine,writing /ex cathedra/, -- I have but one emphatic criticism topronounce -- Lies! lies! lies! I remember once, in passing abook-stall, to have caught these words from a page of somesatiric author: -- "By this time I became convinced that theLondon newspapers spoke truth at least twice a week, viz. onTuesday and Saturday, and might safely be depended upon for --the list of bankrupts." In like manner, I do by no meansdeny that some truths have been delivered to the world in regardto opium: thus it has been repeatedly affirmed by the learned,that opium is a dusky brown in colour; and this, take notice, Igrant: secondly, that it is rather dear; which I also grant: forin my time, East-India opium has been three guineas a pound, andTurkey eight: and, thirdly, that if you eat a good deal of it,most probably you must -- do what is particularly disagreeable toany man of regular habits, viz. die.{2} These weightypropositions are, all and singular, true: I cannot gainsay them:and truth ever was, and will be, commendable. But in these threetheorems, I believe we have exhausted the stock of knowledge asyet accumulated by man on the subject of opium. And therefore,worthy doctors, as there seems to be room for furtherdiscoveries, stand aside, and allow me to come forward andlecture on this matter. First, then, it is not so much affirmed as taken for granted,by all who ever mention opium, formally or incidentally, that itdoes, or can, produce intoxication. Now reader, assure yourself,/meo periculo/, that no quantity of opium ever did, or couldintoxicate. As to the tincture of opium (commonly calledlaudanum) /that/ might certainly intoxicate if a man could bearto take enough of it; but why? because it contains so much proofspirit, and not because it contains so much opium. But crudeopium, I affirm peremptorily, is incapable of producing any stateof body at all resembling that which is produced by alcohol; andnot in /degree/ only incapable, but even in /kind/: it is not inthe quantity of its effects merely, but in the quality, that itdiffers altogether. The pleasure given by wine is alwaysmounting, and tending to a crisis, after which it declines: thatfrom opium, when once generated, is stationary for eight or tenhours: the first, to borrow a technical distinction frommedicine, is a case of acute - the second, of chronic pleasure:the one is a flame, the other a steady and equable glow. But themain distinction lies in this, that whereas wine disorders themental faculties, opium, on the contrary (if taken in a propermanner), introduces amongst them the most exquisite order,legislation, and harmony. Wine robs a man of his self possession:opium greatly invigorates it. Wine unsettles and clouds thejudgment, and gives a preternatural brightness, and a vividexaltation to the contempts and the admirations, the loves andthe hatreds, of the drinker: opium, on the contrary, communicatesserenity and equipoise to all the faculties, active or passive:and with respect to the temper and moral feelings in general, itgives simply that sort of vital warmth which is approved by thejudgment, and which would probably always accompany a bodilyconstitution of primeval or antediluvian health. Thus, forinstance, opium, like wine, gives an expansion to the heart andthe benevolent affections: but then, with this remarkabledifference, that in the sudden development of kind-heartednesswhich accompanies inebriation, there is always more or less of amaudlin character, which exposes it to the contempt of theby-stander. Men shake hands, swear eternal friendship, and shedtears -- no mortal knows why: and the sensual creature is clearlyuppermost. But the expansion of the benigner feelings, incidentto opium, is no febrile access, but a healthy restoration to thatstate which the mind would naturally recover upon the removal ofany deep- seated irritation of pain that had disturbed andquarrelled with the impulses of a heard originally just and good.True it is, that even wine, up to a certain point, and withcertain men, rather tends to exalt and to steady the intellect: Imyself, who have never been a great wine-drinker, used to findthat half a dozen glasses of wine advantageously affected thefaculties -- brightened and intensified the consciousness -- andgave to the mind a feeling of being "ponderibus libratasuis:" and certainly it is most absurdly said, in popularlanguage, of any man, that he is /disguised/ in liquor: for, onthe contrary, most men are disguised by sobriety; and it is whenthey are drinking (as some old gentleman says in Athenaeus), thatmen [eantonz emfanixondin oitinez eidin]. -- display themselvesin their true complexion of character; which surely is notdisguising themselves. But still, wine constantly leads a man tothe brink of absurdity and extravagance; and, beyond a certainpoint, it is sure to volatilize and to disperse the intellectualenergies: whereas opium always seems to compose what had beenagitated, and to concentrate what had been distracted. In short,to sum up all in one word, a man who is inebriated, or tending toinebriation, is, and feels that he is, in a condition which callsup into supremacy the merely human, too often the brutal, part ofhis nature: but the opium-eater (I speak of him who is notsuffering from any disease, or other remote effects of opium)feels that the diviner part of his nature is paramount; that is,the moral affections are in a state of cloudless serenity; andover all is the great light of the majestic intellect. This is the doctrine of the true church on the subject ofopium: of which church I acknowledge myself to be the only member-- the alpha and the omega: but then it is to be recollected,that I speak from the ground of a large and profound personalexperience: whereas most of the unscientific{3} authors who haveat all treated of opium, and even of those who have writtenexpressly on the materia medica, make it evident, from the horrorthey express of it, that their experimental knowledge of itsaction is none at all. I will, however, candidly acknowledge thatI have met with one person who bore evidence to its intoxicatingpower, such as staggered my own incredulity: for he was asurgeon, and had himself taken opium largely. I happened to sayto him, that his enemies (as I had heard) charged him withtalking nonsense on politics, and that his friends apologized forhim, by suggesting that he was constantly in a state ofintoxication from opium. Now the accusation, said I, is not/prima facie/, and of necessity, an absurd one: but the defence/is/. To my surprise, however, he insisted that both his enemiesand his friends were in the right: "I will maintain,"said he, "that I /do/ talk nonsense; and secondly, I willmaintain that I do not talk nonsense upon principle, or with anyview to profit, but solely and simply, said he, solely andsimply, -- solely and simply (repeating it three times over),because I am drunk with opium; and /that/ daily." I repliedthat, as to the allegation of his enemies, as it seemed to beestablished upon such respectable testimony, seeing that thethree parties concerned all agreed in it, it did not become me toquestion it; but the defence set up I must demur to. He proceededto discuss the matter, and to lay down his reasons: but it seemedto me so impolite to pursue an argument which must have presumeda man mistaken in a point belonging to his own profession, that Idid not press him even when his course of argument seemed open toobjection: not to mention that a man who talks nonsense, eventhough "with no view to profit," is not altogether themost agreeable partner in a dispute, whether as opponent orrespondent. I confess, however, that the authority of a surgeon,and one who was reputed a good one, may seem a weighty one to myprejudice: but still I must plead my experience, which wasgreater than his greatest by 7000 drops a day; and, though it wasnot possible to suppose a medical man unacquainted with thecharacteristic symptoms of vinous intoxication, it yet struck methat he might proceed on a logical error of using the wordintoxication with too great latitude, and extending itgenerically to all modes of nervous excitement, connected withcertain diagnostics. Some people have maintained, in my hearing,that they had been drunk on green tea: and a medical student inLondon, for whose knowledge in his profession I have reason tofeel great respect, assured me, the other day, that a patient, inrecovering from an illness, had got drunk on a beef-steak. Having dwelt so much on this first and leading error, inrespect to opium, I shall notice very briefly a second and athird; which are, that the elevation of spirits produced by opiumis necessarily followed by a proportionate depression, and thatthe natural and even immediate consequence of opium is torpor andstagnation, animal and mental. The first of these errors I shallcontent myself with simply denying; assuring my reader, that forten years, during which I took opium at intervals, the daysucceeding to that on which I allowed myself this luxury wasalways a day of unusually good spirits. With respect to the torpor supposed to follow, or rather (ifwe were to credit the numerous pictures of Turkish opium-eaters)to accompany the practice of opium-eating, I deny that also.Certainly, opium is classed under the head of narcotics; and somesuch effect it may produce in the end: but the primary effects ofopium are always, and in the highest degree, to excite andstimulate the system: this first stage of its action alwayslasted with me, during my novitiate, for upwards of eight hours;so that it must be the fault of the opium-eater himself if hedoes not so time his exhibition of the dose (to speak medically)as that the whole weight of its narcotic influence may descendupon his sleep. Turkish opium-eaters, it seems, are absurd enoughto sit, like so many equestrian statues, on logs of wood asstupid as themselves. But that the reader may judge of the degreein which opium is likely to stupify the faculties of anEnglishman, I shall (by way of treating the questionillustratively, rather than argumentively) describe the way inwhich I myself often passed an opium evening in London, duringthe period between 1804-1812. It will be seen, that at leastopium did not move me to seek solitude, and much less to seekinactivity, or the torpid state of self- involution ascribed tothe Turks. I give this account at the risk of being pronounced acrazy enthusiast or visionary: but I regard /that/ little: I mustdesire my reader to bear in mind, that I was a hard student, andat severe studies for all the rest of my time: and certainly hada right occasionally to relaxations as well as the other people:these, however, I allowed myself but seldom. The late Duke of Norfolk used to say, "Next Friday, bythe blessing of Heaven, I purpose to be drunk:" and in likemanner I used to fix beforehand how often, within a given time,and when, I would commit a debauch of opium. This was seldom morethan once in three weeks: for at that time I could no haveventured to call every day (as I did afterwards) for "/aglass of laudanum negus, warm, and without sugar/." No: as Ihave said, I seldom drank laudanum, at that time, more than oncein three weeks: this was usually on a Tuesday or a Saturdaynight; my reason for which was this. In those days Grassini sangat the Opera: and her voice was delightful to me beyond all thatI had ever heard. I know not what may be the state of the Opera-house now, having never been within its walls for seven or eightyears, but at that time it was by much the most pleasant place ofpublic resort in London for passing an evening. Five shillingsadmitted one to the gallery, which was subject to far lessannoyance than the pit of the theatres: the orchestra wasdistinguished by its sweet and melodious grandeur from allEnglish orchestras, the composition of which, I confess, is notacceptable to my ear, from the predominance of the clangorousinstruments, and the absolute tyranny of the violin. The choruseswere divine to hear: and when Grassini appeared in someinterlude, as she often did, and poured forth her passionate soulas Andromache, at the tomb of Hector, &c. I question whetherany Turk, of all that ever entered the Paradise of opium-eaters,can have had half the pleasure I had. But, indeed, I honour theBarbarians too much by supposing them capable of any pleasuresapproaching to the intellectual ones of an Englishman. For musicis an intellectual or a sensual pleasure, according to thetemperament of him who hears it. And, by the bye, with theexception of the fine extravaganza on that subject in TwelfthNight, I do not recollect more than one thing said adequately onthe subject of music in all literature: it is a passage in the/Religio Medici/{4} of Sir T. Brown; and, though chieflyremarkable for its sublimity, has also a philosophic value,inasmuch as it points to the true theory of musical effects. Themistake of most people is to suppose that it is by the ear theycommunicate with music, and, therefore, that they are purelypassive to its effects. But this is not so: it is by there-action of the mind upon the notices of the ear, (the /matter/coming by the senses, the /form/ from the mind) that the pleasureis constructed: and therefore it is that people of equally goodear differ so much in this point from one another. Now opium, bygreatly increasing the activity of the mind generally, increases,of necessity, that particular mode of its activity by which weare able to construct out of the raw material of organic sound anelaborate intellectual pleasure. But, says a friend, a successionof musical sounds is to me like a collection of Arabiccharacters: I can attach no ideas to them. Ideas! my good sir? there isno occasion for them: all that class of ideas, which can beavailable in such a case, has a language of representativefeelings. But this is a subject foreign to my present purposes:it is sufficient to say, that a chorus, &c. of elaborateharmony, displayed before me, as in a piece of arras work, thewhole of my past life -- not, as if recalled by an act of memory,but as if present and incarnated in the music: no longer painfulto dwell upon: but the detail of its incidents removed, orblended in some hazy abstraction; and its passions exalted,spiritualized, and sublimed. All this was to be had for fiveshillings. And over and above the music of the stage and theorchestra, I had all around me, in the intervals of theperformance, the music of the Italian language talked by Italianwomen: for the gallery was usually crowded with Italians: and Ilistened with a pleasure such as that with which Weld thetraveller lay and listened, in Canada, to the sweet laughter ofIndian women; for the less you understand of a language, the moresensible you are to the melody or harshness of its sounds: forsuch a purpose, therefore, it was an advantage to me that I was apoor Italian scholar, reading it but little, and not speaking itat all, nor understanding a tenth part of what I heard spoken. These were my Opera pleasures: but another pleasure I hadwhich, as it could be had only on a Saturday night, occasionallystruggled with my love of the Opera; for, at that time, Tuesdayand Saturday were the regular Opera nights. On this subject I amafraid I shall be rather obscure, but, I can assure the reader,not at all more so than Marinus in his life of Proclus, or manyother biographers and auto-biographers of fair reputation. Thispleasure, I have said, was to be had only on a Saturday night.What then was Saturday night to me more than any other night? Ihad no labours that I rested from; no wages to receive: whatneeded I to care for Saturday night, more than as it was asummons to hear Grassini? True, most logical reader: what you sayis unanswerable. And yet so it was and is, that, whereasdifferent men throw their feelings into different channels, andmost are apt to show their interest in the concerns of the poor,chiefly by sympathy, expressed in some shape or other, with theirdistresses and sorrows, I, at that time, was disposed to expressmy interest by sympathising with their pleasures. The pains ofpoverty I had lately seen too much of; more than I wished toremember: but the pleasures of the poor, their consolations ofspirit, and their reposes from bodily toil, can never becomeoppressive to contemplate. Now Saturday night is the season for the chief, regular, andperiodic return of rest to the poor: in this point the mosthostile sects unite, and acknowledge a common link ofbrotherhood: almost all Christendom rests from its labours. It isa rest introductory to another rest: and divided by a whole dayand two nights from the renewal of toil. On this account I feelalways, on a Saturday night, as though I also were released fromsome yoke of labour, had some wages to receive, and some luxuryof repose to enjoy. For the sake, therefore, of witnessing, uponas large a scale as possible, a spectacle with which my sympathywas so entire, I used often, on Saturday nights, after I hadtaken opium, to wander forth, without much regarding thedirection or the distance, to all the markets, and other parts ofLondon, to which the poor resort on a Saturday night, for layingout their wages. Many a family party, consisting of a man, hiswife, and sometimes one or two of his children, have I listenedto, as they stood consulting on their ways and means, or thestrength of their exchequer, or the price of household articles.Gradually I became familiar with their wishes, theirdifficulties, and their opinions. Sometimes there might be heardmurmurs of discontent: but far oftener expressions on thecountenance, or uttered in words, of patience, hope, andtranquility. And taken generally, I must say, that, in this pointat least, the poor are far more philosophic than the rich - thatthey show a more ready and cheerful submission to what theyconsider as irremediably evils, or irreparable losses. Whenever Isaw occasion, or could do it without appearing to be intrusive, Ijoined their parties; and gave my opinion upon the matter indiscussion, which, if not always judicious, was always receivedindulgently. If wages were a little higher, or expected to be so,or the quartern loaf a little lower, or it was reported thatonions and butter were expected to fall, I was glad: yet, if thecontrary were true, I drew from opium some means of consolingmyself. For opium (like the bee, that extracts its materialsindiscriminately from roses and from the soot of chimneys) canoverrule all feelings into a compliance with the master key. Some of these rambles led me to great distances: for anopium-eater is too happy to observe the motion of time. Andsometimes in my attempts to steer homewards, upon nauticalprinciples, by fixing my eye on the pole-star, and seekingambitiously for a north-west passage, instead of circumnavigatingall the capes and head-lands I had doubled in my outward voyage,I came suddenly upon such knotty problems of alleys, suchenigmatical entries, and such sphynx's riddles of streets withoutthoroughfares, as must, I conceive, baffle the audacity ofporters, and confound the intellects of hackney- coachmen. Icould almost have believed, at times, that I must be the firstdiscoverer of some of these /terrae incognitae/, and doubted,whether they had yet been aid down in the modern charts ofLondon. For all this, however, I paid a heavy price in distantyears, when the human face tyrannized over my dreams, and theperplexities of my steps in London came back and haunted mysleep, with the feeling of perplexities moral or intellectual,that brought confusion to the reason, or anguish and remorse tothe conscience. Thus I have shown that opium does not, of necessity, produceinactivity or torpor; but that, on the contrary, it often led meinto markets and theatres. Yet, in candour, I will admit thatmarkets and theatres are not the appropriate haunts of theopium-eater, when in the divinest state incident to hisenjoyment. In that state, crowds become an oppression to him;music even, too sensual and gross. He naturally seeks solitudeand silence, as indispensable conditions of those trances, orprofoundest reveries, which are the crown and consummation ofwhat opium can do for human nature. I, whose disease it was tomeditate too much, and to observe too little, and who, upon myfirst entrance at college, was nearly falling into a deepmelancholy, from brooding too much on the sufferings which I hadwitnessed in London, was sufficiently aware of the tendencies ofmy own thoughts to do all I could to counteract them. -- I was,indeed, like a person who, according to the old legend, hadentered the cave of Trophonius: and the remedies I sought were toforce myself into society, and to keep my understanding incontinual activity upon matters of science. But for theseremedies, I should certainly have become hypochondriacallymelancholy. In after years, however, when my cheerfulness wasmore fully re-established, I yielded to my natural inclinationfor a solitary life. And, at that time, I often fell into thesereveries upon taking opium; and more than once it has happened tome, on a summer-night, when I have been at an open window, in aroom from which I could overlook the sea at a mile below me, andcould command a view of the great town of Liverpool, at about thesame distance, that I have sate, from sun-set to sun-rise,motionless, and without wishing to move. I shall be charged with mysticism, behmenism, quietism,&c. but /that/ shall not alarm me. Sir H. Vane, the younger,was one of our wisest men: and let my readers see if he, in hisphilosophical works, be half as unmystical as I am. -- I say,then, that it has often struck me that the scene itself wassomewhat typical of what took place in such a reverie. The townof Liverpool represented the earth, with its sorrows and itsgraves left behind, yet not out of sight, nor wholly forgotten.The ocean, in everlasting but gentle agitation, and brooded overby a dove-like calm, might not unfitly typify the mind and themood which then swayed it. For it seemed to me as if then first Istood at a distance, and aloof from the uproar of life; as if thetumult, the fever, and the strife, were suspended; a respitegranted from the secret burthens of the heart; a sabbath ofrepose; a resting from human labours. Here were the hopes whichblossom in the paths of life, reconciled with the peace which isin the grave; motions of the intellect as unwearied as theheavens, yet for all anxieties a halcyon calm: a tranquility thatseemed no product of inertia, but as if resulting from mighty andequal antagonisms; infinite activities, infinite repose. Oh! just, subtle, and mighty opium! that to the hearts ofpoor and rich alike, for the wounds that will never heal, and for"the pangs that tempt the spirit to rebel," bringestand assuaging balm; eloquent opium! that with thy potent rhetoricstealest away the purposes of wrath; and to the guilty man, forone night givest back the hopes of his youth, and hands washedpure from blood; and to the proud man, a brief oblivion forWrongs unredress'd, and insults unavenged; that summonest to thechancery of dreams, for the triumphs of suffering innocence,false witnesses; and confoundest perjury; and dost reverse thesentences of unrighteous judges: -- thou buildest upon the bosomof darkness, out of the fantastic imagery of the brain, citiesand temples, beyond the art of Phidias and Praxiteles -- beyondthe splendour of Babylon and Hekatompylos: and "from theanarchy of dreaming sleep," callest into sunny light thefaces of long-buried beauties, and the blessed householdcountenances, cleansed from the "dishonours of thegrave." Thou only givest these gifts to man; and thou hastthe keys of Paradise, oh, just, subtle, and mighty opium! ----- {1} /Evanesced:/ -- this way of going off the stage of lifeappears to have been well known in the 17th century, but at thetime to have been considered a peculiar privilege of blood-royal,and by no means to be allowed to druggists. For about the year1686, a poet of rather ominous name (and who, by the bye, didample justice to his name), viz. Mr. Flat-man, in speaking of thedeath of Charles II. expresses his surprise that any princeshould commit so absurd an act as dying; because, says he, Kings should disdain to die, and only /disappear./ They should /abscond/, that is, into the other world. {2} Of this, however, the learned appear latterly to havedoubted: for in a pirated edition of Buchan's /DomesticMedicine/, which I once saw in the hands of a farmer's wife whowas studying it for the benefit of her health, the Doctor wasmade to say -- "Be particularly careful never to take abovefive- and-twenty /ounces/ of laudanum at once;" the truereading being probably five- and-twenty /drops/, which are heldequal to about one grain of crude opium. {3} Amongst the great herd of travellers, &c. who showsufficiently by their stupidity that they never held anyintercourse with opium, I must caution my readers especiallyagainst the brilliant author of /"Anastasius."/ Thisgentleman, whose wit would lead one to presume him anopium-eater, has made it impossible to consider him in thatcharacter from the grievous misrepresenta-tion which he gives ofits effects, at pp. 215-17, of vol. I. - Upon consideration itmust appear such to the author himself: for, waiving the errors Ihave insisted on in the text, which (and others) are adopted inthe fullest manner, he will himself admit, that an old gentleman"with a snow-white beard," who eats "ample dosesof opium," and is yet able to deliver what is meant andreceived as very weighty counsel on the bad effects of thatpractice, is but an indifferent evidence that opium either killspeople prematurely, or sends them into a madhouse. But, for mypart, I see into this old gentleman and his motives: the fact is,he was enamoured of "the little golden receptacle of thepernicious drug" which Anastasius carried about him; and noway of obtaining it so safe and so feasible occurred, as that offrightening its owner out of his wits (which, by the bye, arenone of the strongest). This commentary throws a new light uponthe case, and greatly improves it as a story: for the oldgentleman's speech, considered as a lecture on pharmacy, ishighly absurd: but, considered as a hoax on Anastasius, it readsexcellently. {4} I have not the book at this moment to consult: but Ithink the passage begins -- "And even that tavern music,which makes one man merry, another mad, in me strikes a deep fitof devotion," &c. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-28IA031-000652-B036-299http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/canada1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125036 text/html 9321HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:50:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:18 GMTContent-length: 9104 The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. Panic and Indifference The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. P.J. Giffen, Shirley Endicott and Sylvia Lambert. A study in the Sociology of Law. (Highly recomended.) <Begin Quoted Text pgs 66-68> Another important claimant for credit in bringing about thelegislation was a young Conservative in Vancouver, H. H. Stevens.Stevens became a very vocal MP during the narcotics debates ofthe 1920s, and personally introduced several importantamendments. His zeal for narcotic drug prohibition was kindledduring his early investigations of the problem. According to his own account, when he learned about thegambling and opium trade being carried on in Vancouver'sChinatown, he took the following actions: I took it up with the Chief of Police, but he just brushed meoff. Then I went down into Chinatown itself, and visited thegambling joints and also saw personally the Chinese preparing rawopium for the market. When the Chief of Police refused to takeany action, I used to publish in the _Vancouver News Advertiser_exactly what I had seen the night before. This I did for severalweeks. It created quite a sensation in Vancouver, and as a resultthe civic authorities discharged the Chief and appointed Mr.Chamberlain. This man, when he became Chief of Police, did anexcellent job in clearing up Chinatown(29). He described his role in bringing about the first opium Actas follows: (In 1908) I was responsible for the matter being brought tothe attention of the then government. I remember taking some veryprominent eastern gentlemen around Pacific Coast cities andshowing them the effects and use of these drugs. They returned toOttawa and put it up to Sir Wilfred Laurier, and the result wasthe Bill that was introduced(13d,p.2899). <SNIP> The motives of H. H. Stevens and of the city councils areopen to question. They appear in this instance to have beenconcerned about moral reform and civic order but all wereassociated with anti-Chinese policies in other contexts. Stevenscame to be recognized as the "the city's leadinganti-Oriental spokesman" (30, p.91), in Parliament as atlocal rallies. Civic politicians, too, had an anti-Chineserhetoric as part of their election kit and, once elected, usuallysupported the use of municipal ordinances and licensing powersfor discriminatory purposes. <SNIP> The League's (Vancouver Anti-Opium League) representations toKing(Mackenzie) included an urgent telegram at the time when theBill was being sent to the Senate and the opium manufacturerswere lobbying for a moratorium to protect their financialinterests. INFORM GOVERNMENT NOT TO LET MANUFACTURERS DELAY LEGISTAION.CHINESE AT LARGE FAVOUR IMMEDIATE SUPPRESSION(2d). <End pgs 66-68> <Begin pg 203> THE PUBLIC Interested sections of the public became very vocal andactive during the same period in in demanding more severepenalties. The cry for heavier punishment was the result of adrug scare created almost entirely by alarmist stories in themass media. The stories, of which Emily Murphy's articles in_Maclean's_ were a prime example, reinforced pre-existinghostility to Orientals and augmented the horrifying spectre ofthe "dope fiend." The negative racial stereotypes andalarming drug mythology, spread by people who claimed to havefirst-hand knowledge, were accepted uncritically. The immediateresult of these fears and hostility was the emergence of aBritish Columbia drug lobby in 1921, with the straightforwardgoals of compulsory imprisonment and whipping for all traffickersand, where possible, deportation. Public fears about narcoticdrugs were particularly intense in British Columbia, the provincewith the largest concentration of Chinese immigrants.Accordingly, the greatest pressure on legislators for severepenalties originated in that province. Much of the demand forgreater punitiveness was linked to animus against the Chinese anda desire to get rid of them, seen most clearly in the proposalfor deportation. <End Quoted Text pg 203.> APPENDIX 2 - Persons Convicted of Offences Against the Opiumand Narcotic Drug Act by country of Birth 1922-1969(1) YEAR TOTAL Non-China(2) China % Other(3) 1922 1,858 733 1,117 60.1 1923 1,297 688 604 46.6 4 1924 997 327 633 66.5 5 1925 835 366 469 56.2 1926 743 240 495 66.5 7 1927 491 133 353 71.9 3 1928 608 187 412 67.8 7 1929 616 110 506 82.1 **** 82.1 % ***** 1930 461 164 281 60.9 1 1931 316 147 169 53.5 1932 NA 1933 230 108 122 53.0 1934 218 93 125 57.3 1935 165 101 64 38.3 1936 182 136 55 30.2 1937 220 177 35 15.9 8 1938 183 142 40 21.9 1939 226 192 24 10.6 11 1940 234 199 32 13.7 3 1941 273 241 31 11.4 1 1942 136 130 5 3.7 1 1943 136 128 8 5.9 1944 194 167 27 13.9 1945 212 199 13 6.1 1946 247 220 27 10.9 1947 341 321 16 4.7 4 1948 316 304 0 - 12 1949 353 350 2 .6 1 1950 356 346 5 1.4 5 1951 353 338 10 2.8 5 1952 367 359 5 1.4 3 1953 337 325 9 2.7 3 1954 306 291 11 3.6 4 1955 349 400 8 2.3 1 1956 382 377 0 - 5 1957 400 393 5 1.3 2 1958 488 486 1 .2 1 1959 565 560 3 .5 2 1960 467 460 3 .6 4 1961 464 459 3 .6 2 1962 334 277 1 .3 56 1963 318 309 5 1.6 4 1964 325 314 8 2.5 3 1965(4) 377 375 2 1966 428 418 10 1967 958 903 55 1968 1,372 1,326 46 1969 2,200 1,961 239 (1) From Criminal Statistics 1922 to 1969 (2) Includes Canada, the British Isles, the BritishCommonwealth, the United States and Europe. (3) Includes Asia and "not stated." (4) Chinese data no longer specified. --- APPENDIX 3 - Number of Aliens Deported from Canada havingbeen Convicted of Offences Under the Opium and Narcotic Drug Act from 1922to 1944(1) YEAR CHINESE US Citizens Others 1922 4 11 0 1923 92 29 9 1924 125 24 5 1925 88 24 7 1926 86 10 1 1927 55 13 1 1928 69 5 4 1929 59 6 4 1930 60 7 4 1931 70 1 5 1932 53 7 6 1933 81 1 5 1934 59 5 3 1935 60 6 3 1936 23 1 3 1937 16 1 1 1938 16 2 2 1939 22 3 0 1940 26 2 2 1941 14 1 1 1942 1 1943 1 1944 4 2 (1) From Annual Report, Department of Pensions and NationalHealth, 1934-5, Table 5, p. 110 and Annual Report, Department of NationalHealth and Welfare, 1944-5, Table 5, p.25. --- APPENDIX 6 - Possession Offences: Individual Drugs, 1922-1972 YEAR OPIUM MORPHINE COCAINE HEROIN MARIJUANA OTHER 1922 272 66 93 - - 665 1923 155 79 43 - - 564 1924 48 41 19 - - 276 <SNIP> 1929 56 26 10 12 - 285 (first one for heroin) <SNIP> 1937 39 23 3 64 4 18 (first year including marijuana) <SNIP> 1955 2 7 - 242 8 34 1956 - - - 29 1 322 1957 - 6 - 274 5 31 (No further opium charges after 1955) <SNIP> 1963 - 15 1 222 29 26 1964 - 13 1 227 39 18 1965 - 20 2 222 42 35 1966 - 21 1 193 112 50 1967 16 - 281 447 55 1968 - 10 1 199 817 49 1969 - 6 2 185 1,476 58 1970 201(2) 5,399 1971 1972 630 10,695(2) (1) Criminal Statistics (2) From Bureau of Dangerous Drugs, Health Protection Branch,Health and Welfare Canada 9/3/73. Source : CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-29IA087-000632-B027-281http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/opium_joint.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095603 text/html 4487HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:55:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:59:09 GMTContent-length: 4272 An Opium Joint Raided - 1891 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The New York Times September 28, 1891, p. 2 AN "OPIUM JOINT" RAIDED. LEE YOUNG'S PLACE ON PARK STREET CLEANED OUT BYTHE POLICE. All the Chinese resorts in the Sixth Precinctare closely watched to note visits of girls of tender age, whoare, in a certain sense, wards of the Society for the Preventionof Cruelty to Children. So last evening, when a girl of twelveyears halted in front of Lee Young's opium joint, 104 ParkStreet, looked up and down the street in a half- scared way, andwent swiftly into the place, which is one step down, DetectiveJoseph Schirmer was alert, and when, ten minutes later, she cameout she was followed until out of sight of those who werelounging about the den, and then accosted and taken to theElizabeth Street Station House. She began to tell a number of stories andendeavored to make Capt. Brooks believe that she was enticed intothe place. No harm befell her, she said, but a Chinaman chattedwith her while she watched a number of his countrymen who weresmoking opium. This was evidence enough to warrant a raid, andthe reserve force of the precinct was called out and a descentwas made on the den. Lee Young and fourteen other Celestials werearrested and locked up. Eleven pipes, 15 bowls, 8 pots, and 5boxes of opium, 6 "lay outs," 4 trays, scales, 2revolvers, and $82 in money were seized. Then the girl, who isCatherine Schuyler of 123 Monroe Street, was again questioned andshe admitted that she was sent to the den to buy 10 cents worthof opium for Annie Golden of Jefferson and Monroe Streets. Nosuch person was found and after Catherine's parents had beenvisited the police were of the opinion that a woman in theirhouse sent the child for the drug. Catherine was sent to the headquarters of Mr.Gerry's society, and will be at the Tombs today, when theprisoners are arraigned. Young's "joint" was raided a shorttime ago, when it was kept by Hung Lung. Nineteen persons werearrested, and six of them who were found smoking opium were fined$25 each. No one was smoking when the police burst into theplace, which is about 8 by 14 feet. [NOTE: The article from which this file wasexcerpted may include additional text and accompanyingillustrations.] Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-30IA087-000632-B027-309http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/opiumchina1899.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095625 text/html 13659HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:56:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:25 GMTContent-length: 13443 Opinions of over 100 Physicians on the use of Opium inChina - 1899 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Opinions of over 100 Physicians on the use ofOpium in China Compiled by William Hector Park American Presbyterian Mission Press, Shanghai,1899 Alcohol and Opium Compared. By W.H. Park, M.D. [ALCOHOL] 1. Of the millions of regular usersof alcohol a lamentably large number become slaves to the alcoholhabit. 2. Numbers of people boast of their"personal liberty" and claim that they can drink or notjust as they choose. All moderate drinkers (people who never getdrunk, and yet who take wine or beer daily with their meals andsocial glasses of something stronger as occasions arise) claimthat they are not slaves to alcohol, that they are not weakenedby it physically, and that its withdrawal entails no specialinconvenience; and they would be highly insulted if any oneshould intimate that they are being thereby morally or sociallydegraded. 3. Nevertheless, every one nipping alcoholoccasionally is in danger of forming the alcohol habit, and ifone takes it daily for any length of time the danger isincreased. The only safe rule is never to touch it. The slavishappetite is developed gradually in most cases, and, in strongwilled people, its confirmation may be a matter of years. 4. People take to drink on account of troubleand sorrow, and sometimes for pain and disease, some claimingthat it is prophylactic against certain diseases. 5. I had a classmate who said his father toldhim he might take a little whiskey whenever he felt ill, and hehad not experienced a well day since. 6. A sailor once told me how he alone of awhole ship's company escaped yellow fever in a certain SouthAmerican city by lying ashore "dead drunk" the wholetime the ship was in port. 7. The claim is constantly made that a moderateamount of alcohol consumed daily can be reckoned as food and thatit is only excess that is injurious. Some recent Frenchauthorities have set one liter of wine per day as the maximumamount a healthy man can imbibe without injury. 8. "All excess is injurious. North-polevoyages, military expeditions (experiences in India and theAshantee march), and the diminished power of resistance to thecold shown by drunkards, have conclusively demonstrated thatalcohol does not supply the place of other foods; and that thosehabituated to its use, damaged as they are in their vital organs,do not possess the same endurance of fatigue and the same powerof resistance to external morbific influences as do the healthy.Furthermore, clinical experience has amply proved that topers donot bear chloroform well, that they succumb more quickly toinjuries and surgical operations, and that they possess much lesspower of resistance than the temperate to the inroads of acutedisease."--Bartholow. 9. That the drunkard wastes his time is nosmall indictment against the alcohol habit. 10. In this country if a drinker falls ill, asa rule, he stops his allowance, and if the disease proves achronic one, he never goes back to it. 11. A physician can directhis patient to abstain from drink with a fair prospect of beingobeyed. 12. Persons who give way to drink, and becomeinebriates, are in these days regarded by some as moral imbecileswho if they did not drink would take up some other vice just asbad or perhaps worse. Banish the saloon, however, and in myopinion the majority of them would become respectable citizens. 13. We look down on saloons and undergroundplaces where liquor is sold and gambling allowed, and often referto them as "hells." 14. In most drunkards there still seems to besome spark of manhood left, still something to which we canappeal, still some hope of reformation. 15. Alcohol is not often used for suicidalpurposes. 16. The drunkard neglects wife and children,pawns their clothes for drink, beats, and on occasion murdersthem. 17. The drunkard is aggressive, quarrelsome andready to fight. 18. The drunkard becomes befuddled and losesall the money he has on his person, or grows generous and givesit away, or wastes his substance in riotous living. 19. Alcoholism tends to beggary, and nearly allbeggars, thieves and tramps are given to drink. 20. Alcohol has been used all over China fromtime immemorial and yet drunkards are comparatively rare. [OPIUM] 1. Of the million of regular users of opium allbecome slaves to the opium habit. 2. A few Chinese, who only smoke occasionally,in transacting business or on meeting a friend, claim that theycan smoke or not just as they choose, but no one who smokesdaily, be the amount ever so small, makes any such claim. When aman admits that he "smokes a pipe or two" he knows, andhis friends know, that he is a confirmed opium smoker. He alsoknows that he is weakened physically and that he cannot give itup without inconvenience--nay, even suffering--and he is notinsulted if you tell him he is being thereby morally andphysically degraded. 3. Every one "hitting the pipe"occasionally is in danger of forming the opium habit, and if onesmokes daily for any length of time the danger is not simplyincreased--it becomes absolute. The habit is certain and theconfirmation thereof sure. The habit is formed quickly. Not onein a thousand, be the will ever so strong, can smoke opium dailyfor a year (I might almost say for three months) without formingthe opium habit. 4 and 5. People take opium on account oftrouble and sorrow, and as for pain and disease it is thegreatest earthly soother. That opium will relieve pain and may beprophylactic against certain disease is no argument in favor ofallowing its unrestricted sales among any people. On thecontrary, the opium habit being so much worse than the diseasesit may alleviate or prevent, this is the strongest possibleargument in favor of its restriction. If it permanently cured allpain and prevented all disease all would be tempted to take to itand the human race would be in danger of extermination. 6. How would one's parents and friends at homefeel if he should write that he had rendered himself proofagainst all the deadly diseases of the East by becoming an opiumsmoker! 7. Opium can never be reckoned as a food. It istrue that the opium smoker eats less, but this is because hissecretions are diminished so that he becomes constipated, and asit were uses his food over and over again. Ugh! It makes me sickto think about it. No wonder he suffers from auto-toxaemia, andbecomes yellow, weak and emaciated. The amount of opium a healthyperson can consume daily without injury is absolutely nil. Thereis no room for the comparative degree in opium smoking. Anyamount is already too much. 8. All opium smoking is injurious. An opiumsmoking soldier is not worth the powder and lead it would take tokill him. The weakness and the diminished power of enduranceshown by opium smokers have conclusively demonstrated that opiumdoes not supply the place of the food it supplants; and thatthose habituated to its use, damaged as they are in every fiber,do not possess the same endurance of fatigue and the same powerof resistance to external morbific influences as to the healthy.Furthermore, clinical experience has amply proved that opiumsmokers do not bear chloroform well, that they succumb morequickly to injuries and surgical operations, and that theypossess much less power of resistance than non-smokers to theinroads of acute disease. 9. Many rich Chinese smoke all night and sleepnearly all day. Artisans, coolies, etc., waste from one to fourhours at the pipe, and this waste occurs not once or twice a weekbut every day in the year without curtailment and without fail. 10. If a smoker gets ill, except in some acuteviolent sickness such as pneumonia, he smokes more and more, andthe more chronic the disease the more firmly established thehabit. 11. A physician directing an opium smoker tostop smoking is only wasting his breath--he might as well talk tothe winds. 12. In this country nearly all moral imbecilesare opium smokers, but it by no means follows that all opiumsmokers are moral imbeciles. Without opium in China 80 percent ofthe present smokers would, in all probability, be respectablecitizens. 13. A friend of mine once asked a beggar, whoslept next door to an opium den, where he lived, and he replied,"Next door to hell." 14. In the opium smoker there does not seem tobe one spark of manhood left, nothing to which we can appeal. Inpleading with him we feel utterly helpless and hopeless. It iswell for Job's reputation that he never had to deal with opiumsmokers. 15. Opium is the handiest of all suicidalagents. Mr. Bourne, acting chief justice of Shanghai, says, inspeaking of Yunnan:--"Another bad result of the opium beingso ready at hand is the frequency of suicides, especially amongwomen. We heard of a case in which a mother and daughter-in-lawboth took opium and died, because of a quarrel over the breakingof a tea cup." 16. The opium smoker neglects wife andchildren, pawns their clothes for opium, drives them to commitsuicide and on occasion sells them, it may be, into somethingworse than slavery. 17. If the smoker can get his allowance he isquiet and retiring, but an opium-smoking chair coolie or boatmanwill out-quarrel creation to get the wherewithal to fill hispipe, and no greater sharks disgrace the earth than the yamenrunners of China, who are all the time "raising the autumnwind" to get the money to buy opium. 18. The smoker keeps a clear head in regard tomoney matters, and except for wasting it for opium he is oftenmore careful in spending it than non-smokers. Rich, stingyfathers, whose sons are spending money fast and furious with wineand women, sometimes hire parasites to lead them into opiumsmoking with a hope to saving money. 19. Opium smoking tends to beggary, and inChina nearly all beggars, thieves and sharpers are given toopium. 20. Opium has been used all over China for onlyabout sixty years and yet, according to the EncyclopediaBritannica, one-fourth to three- tenths of the people are alreadyopium smokers. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-31IA031-000652-B036-348http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/saved1867.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125058 text/html 68547HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:50:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:39 GMTContent-length: 68331 What Shall They Do to Be Saved - 1867 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Harper's magazine 35, Aug. 1867, pp. 377-87 What Shall They Do to Be Saved? I have just returned from forty-eight hours'friendly and professional attendance at a bedside where I wouldfain place every young person in this country for a single hourbefore the Responsibilities of Life have become the sentinels andHabit the jailor of his Will. My patient was a gentleman of forty, who forseveral years of his youth occasionally used opium, and, for thelast eight has habitually taken it. During these eight years hehas made at least three efforts to leave it off, in each instancediminishing his dose gradually for a month before its entireabandonment, and in the most successful one holding the enemy atbay but for a single summer. In two cases he had no respite ofagony from the moment he dropped till he resumed it. In the thirdcase, a short period of comparative repose succeeded the firstfiery battle, but in the midst of felicitations on his victory hewas attacked by the most agonizing hemicranial headaches(resulting from what I now fear to have been already permanentdisorganization of the stomach), and went back to his nepenthe ina state of almost suicidal despair, only after the torture hadcontinued for weeks without a moment's mitigation. He had first learned its seductions, as happenswith the vast majority of Anglo-Saxon opium-eaters, through amedical prescription. An attack of inflamed cornea was treatedwith caustic applications, and the pian assuaged by internaldoses of M'Munn's Elixir. When my friend came out of his darkroom and bandages at the end of a month he had consumed twentyounces of this preparation, whose probable distinction from thetincture known as laudanum I point out below in the note. [FN*] ________ * Mr. Frank A. Schlitz has kindly made for me aspecial analysis of M'Munn's Elixir which seems to prove that theprocess of its preparation amounts to more than thedenarcotization of opium, which is spoken of on the wrapper ofeach vial. As nearly as can be ascertained, M'Munn's Elixir issimply an aqueous infusion of opium--procured by the ordinarymaceration--and preserved from decomposing by the subsequentaddition of a small portion of alcohol. Narcotin being absolutelyinsoluble in water is eliminated as the circular says. This facealong would not account for the difference between its action andthat of laudanum. This is explained by the fact that all theother alkaloids possess diverse rates of solubility in water, andexist in M'Munn's Elixir in very different relative proportionsfrom those which they bear to each other in the alcoholictincture called laudanum. _____ Here it may not be superfluous to say that theformer preparation has all the essential properties of thelatter, save certain of the constipatory and stupefyingtendencies which, by a private process known to the assigns ofthe inventor, have been so masked or removed that it possesses inmany cases an availableness which the practitioner can notdespise, though compelled by the secrecy of its formula to rankit among quack medicines. The amount of it which my friend hadtaken during this month's eclipse represents an ounce of dry gumopium--in rough measurement a piece as large as a French billiardball. I thus particularize because he had never previously beenaddicted to the drug; had inherited a sound constitution, anddiffered from any other fresh subject only in the intensity ofhis nervous temperament. I wish to emphasize the fact that thesystem of a mere neophyte, with nothing to neutralize the effectsof the drug save the absorbency, so to speak, of the pain fromwhich it was given, could so rapidly adapt itself to them as todemand an increase of the dose in such an alarming ratio. Thereare certain men to whom opium is as fire to tow, and my friendwas one of these. On the 1st of October he sensibly perceived thetrifling dose of fifty drops; on the first of November he wastaking, without increased sensation, an ounce vial of"M'Munn" daily. From that time--totally ignorant of theterrible trap which lay grinning under the bait he dabbledwith--he continued to take opium at short intervals for severalyears. When by the physician's orders he abandoned"M'Munn," on the subsidence of the eye-difficulty, hissymptoms were uneasy rather than distressing, and disappearedafter a few days' oppression at the pit of the stomach and a fewnights' troubled dreaming. But he had not forgotten the sweetdissolving views at midnight, the great executive achievements atnoonday, the heavenly sense of a self-reliance which dare goanywhere, say anything, attempt anything in the world. He had notforgotten the nonchalance under slight, the serenity in pain, theapathy to sorrow, which for one month set him calm as Boodh inthe temple-splendors of his darkened room. He had not forgottenthat the only perfect peace he had ever experienced was there,and he remembered that peace as something which seemed to blendall the assuaged passion and confirmed dignity of old age withthat energy of high emprise which thrills the nerves of manhood.He had tasted as many sources of earthly pleasure as any man Iever knew; but the ecstasies of form and color, wine, Eros,music, perfume, all the luxuries of surrounding which wealthcould purchase or high-breeding appreciate, were as nothing tohim in comparison with the memory of that time on which hisfamily threw away their sympathy when they called it his"month of suffering." Accordingly, without much more instinct ofconcealment than if it were an occasional tendency to some slightconvivial excess, he had resort to M'Munn, in ounce doses,whenever the world went wrong with him. If he had a headache or atoothache; if the weather depressed him; if he had a certain"stint" of work to do without the sense of native vigorto accomplish it; if he was perplexed and wished to clear hishead of passion; if anxieties kept him awake; if irregularitiesdisturbed his digestion--he had always one refuge certain. Nofateful contingency could pursue him inside M'Munn's enchantedcircle. He was a young and wealthy bachelor, living the life of arefined bon vivant; an insatiable traveler, surrounded byflatterers, and without a single friend who loved him enough towarn him of his danger excepting those who, like himself, weretoo ignorant to know it. After three years of dalliance he becamean habitual user of opium, and had been one for eight years whenI was first called to him. By the time that the daily habit fasteneditself he had learned of other opiate preparations than M'Munn's,and finding a certain insufficiency characterize that tincture ashe increased the size of the dose, had recourse to laudanum,which contains the full native vigor of the drug unmodified. Thisnauseated him. He had the same experience with gum opium, opiumpills, and opium powder; so that he was driven to that form ofexhibition which sooner or later naturally strikes almost everyopium-eater as the most portable, energetic, andinstantaneous--morphia or one of its salts. My friend usuallykept the simple alkaloid in a paper, and dissolved it as heneeded it in clear water, sometimes substituting an equivalent of"Magendie's Solution," which contains sixteen grams ofthe salt diffused through an ounce of water by the addition of afew drops of sulfuric acid. When I first saw him he had reached adaily dose of twelve grains of sulphate of morphia, and onoccasions of high excitement had increased his dose withoutexaggerating the sensible effect to nearly twenty. The twelvewhich formed his habitual per diem were divided into two equaldoses, one taken immediately after rising, the other just beforesundown. As yet he had not begun to feel the worstphysical effects which sooner or later visit the opium-eater. Hisdigestion seemed unimpaired so long as he took his morphiaregularly; he was sallow and somewhat haggard, but thus far nodistressing biliary symptoms had manifested themselves; his sleepwas always dreamy, and he woke at short intervals during thenight, but invariably slept again at once, and had so adjustedhimself to the habit as to show no signs of suffering fromwakefulness; his hand was steady; his muscular system easilyexhausted, but by no means what one would call feeble. As hehimself told me, he had come to the conclusion to emancipatehimself because opium-eating was a horrible mental bondage. Thephysical power of the drug over him he only realized whenattempting its abandonment. Its spiritual thralldom was hishourly misery. He was connected by blood and marriage withseveral of the best families in the land. Money had not beenstinted in his education, and his capabilities were as great ashis advantages. He was one of the bravest, fairest, most generousnatures I ever came in contact with; was versatile as a YankeeCrichton; had ridden his own horse in a trotting match and beatenBill Woodruff; had carried his own little 30-ton schooner fromthe Chesapeake to the Golden Gate through the Straits ofMagellan; had swum with the Navigators' Islanders, shot buffalo,hunted chamois, and lunched on mangosteens at Penang. Through allhis wanderings the loftiest sense of what was heroic in humannature and divine in its purified form, the monitions of a mosttender conscience, and the echoes of that Puritan education whichabove all other schemes of training makes human responsibilityterrible, had gone with him like his tissue. He saw the good andgreat things within reach of a fulfilled manhood, and of a suddenwaked up to feel that they could on earth never be his. He wasnaturally very truthful, and, although the invariable tendency ofopium-eating is to extirpate this quality, could not flatterhimself. Other minds around him responded to a sudden call as hisown did not. Every day the need of energy took him more bysurprise. The image-graving and project-buildingcharacteristic of opium, which comes on with a sense of genialradiation from the epigastrium about a quarter of an hour afterthe dose, had not yet so entirely disappeared from its effect onhim, as it always does at a later stage of the indulgence. Butinstead of being an instigation to the delightful reveries whichensued on his earlier doses, this peculiarity was now anexecutioner's knot in the hands of Remorse. He was daily andnightly haunted by plans and pictures whose feverish unrealbeauty he remembered having seen through a hundred times. ThoseFata Morgana plans, should he again waste on them the effort ofconstruction? The result had been a chaos of aimless, ineffectualdays. Those pictures, why were they brought again to mock him?Were they not horrible impossibilities? Were they not, throughthe paralysis of his executive faculties, mere startlinglikenesses of Disappointment? In his opium dreams he had seen hisown ships on the sea; commerce bustling in his warehouse; moneyoverflowing in this bank; babies crowing on his knee; a wifenestling at his breast; a basso voice of tremendous natural powerand depth scientifically cultivated to its utmost power ofpleasing artists or friends; a country estate on the Hudson, orat Newport, with emerald lawns sloping down to the amber river onthe leek-green sea; the political and social influence of a greatlandholder. How pleasurably he had once perceived all thesepossible joys and powers! How undeludedly he now saw theirimpossible execution! So, coming to me, he told me that his object intrying to leave off opium was to escape from these horribleghosts of a life's unfulfilled promise. Only when he tried toabandon opium did he realize the physical hold the drug had onhim. Its spiritual thralldom was his hourly misery. For three months I tried to treat him in hisown house, here in the city. A practitioner of any experienceneed not be told with what success. I could reduce him to a doseof half a grain of sulphate of morphia a day, keep him there oneweek, and making a morning call at the expiration of that timediscover that some nocturnal nervous paroxysm had necessitatedeither a return to five grains or a use of brandy (which, thoughno drinker, he tried to substitute) sufficient to demand a muchlarger dose of opium in its reaction. He had lost most of hisnear connections, and not for one hour could any hired attendanthave withstood his appeal, or that marvelous ingenuity by which,without appeal, the opium-eater obtains the drug which, to him,is like oxygen to the normal man. This ingenuity manifests itself in subterfugesof a complicated construction and artistic plausibility whichmight have puzzled Richelieu; but it is really nothing to wonderat when we recollect the law of nature by which any extremeagony, so long as it continues remediable, sharpens andconcentrates all a man's faculties upon the one single object ofprocuring the remedy. If my house is on fire, I run to thehydrant by a mere automatic operation of my nerves. If my leg iscaught in the bite of a paying-out hawser, my whole brain focusesat once on that single thought, "an axe.' If I am enduringthe agony which opium alone can cause and cure, every faculty ofmy mind is called to the aid of the tortured body which wants it.When a man has used opium for a long time the condition of hisbrain supervening on his deprivation of the drug for a period oftwenty-four hours is such as very frequently to render himsuicidal. Cottle tells us how Coleridge one day took a walk alongBristol wharves, and sent his attendant down the pier to inquirethe name of a vessel, while he slipped into a druggist's on thequay and bought a quart of laudanum; but in no fibre of hisnature could Cottle conceive the awful sense of a forcedespotizing it over his will, a degradation descending on hismanhood, which Coleridge felt as he concentrated on that onesingle cry of his animal nature and the laudanum which it spokefor, fall the faculties of construction and insight which hadcreated the "Ancient Mariner" and the "Aids toReflection." Likewise I suppose there are very few peoplewho could patiently regard the fact that one of the very purestand bravest souls I ever knew had become so demoralized by theperseverance of disease and suffering as to deal like a lawyerwith his best friends, and shuffle to the very edge of falsehood,when his nature clamored for opium. I was particular to tell himwhenever I detected any evasion (an occasion on which his shameand remorse were terrible to witness) that I, personally, hadnonetheless respect for him. I knew he was dominated, and in nosense more responsible for breaking his resolution than he wouldhave been had he vowed to hold his finger in the gas-blaze untilit burned off. In this latter case the mere translation ofchemical decomposition into pain, and round the automaticnerve-arc into involuntary motion, would have drawn his fingerout of the blaze, as it did in the cases of Mutius Sevola andCranmer, if they ever attempted the feat credited them bytradition. In his case the abandonment of opium brought on anagony which took his actions entirely out of voluntary control,eclipsing the higher ideals and heroisms of his imagination atonce, and reducing him to that automatic condition in which thenervous system issues and enforces only those edicts which arecounseled by pure animal self- preservation. Whatever may havebeen the patient's responsibility in beginning the use ofnarcotics or stimulants (and I usually find, the case ofopium-eaters, that its degree has been very small indeed,therapeutic use often fixing the habit forever before a patienthas convalesced far enough even to know what he is taking)habituation invariably tends to reduce the man to the automaticplane, in which the will returns wholly to the tutelage ofsensation and emotion, as it was in infancy; while all theIntellectual, save Memory, and the most noble and imperishableamong the Moral faculties may survive this disorganization foryears, standing erect above the remainder of a personalitydefrauded of its completion to show what a great and beautifulhouse might have been built on such strong an shapely pillars.Inebriates have been repeatedly known to risk imminent death ifthey could not reach their liquor in any other way. The graspwith which liquor holds a man when it turns on him, even after hehas abused it for a lifetime, compared with the ascendancypossessed by opium over the unfortunate habituated to it for buta single year, is as the clutch of an angry woman to the embraceof Victor Hugo's Pieuvre. A patient whom, after habitual use ofopium for ten years, I met when he had spent eight years more inreducing his daily dose to half a grain of morphia, with a viewto its eventual complete abandonment, once spoke to me in thesewords: "God seems to help a man in getting out ofevery difficulty but opium. There you have to claw your way outover red-hot coals on your hands and knees, and drag yourself bymain strength through the burning dungeon- bars." This statement does not exaggerate the feelingof many another opium- eater whom I have known. Now, such a man is a proper subject, not forreproof, but for medical treatment. The problem of his case needembarrass nobody. It is as purely physical as one of small-pox.When this truth is as widely understood among the laity as it isknown by physicians, some progress may be made in staying thefrightful ravages of opium among the present generation. Now,indeed, it is a difficult thing to prevent relatives fromexacerbating the disorder and the pain of a patient, who, fromtheir uninformed standpoint, seems as sane and responsible asthemselves, by reproaches at which they would shudder, as at anyother cruelty, could they be brought to realize that their friendis suffering under a disease of the very machinery of volition;and no more to be judge harshly for his acts than a wound forsuppurating or the bowels for continuing the peristaltic motion. Finding--as is common with all physicians Ihave found so many times before--that no control of the casecould be obtained while the patient stayed at home, and deeplyrenewing my often-experienced regret that the science andChristian charity of this country have perfected no scheme bywhich either inebriates or opium-eaters may be properly treatedin a special institution of their own, I was at lengthreluctantly compelled to send my friend to an ordinary water-cureat some distance from town. The cause of my reluctance was not the prospectof a too liberal use of water, for by arrangement with the headsof the establishment I was able to control that as I chose;moreover, an employment of the hot-bath in what would ordinarilybe excess is absolutely necessary as a sedative throughout thefirst week of the struggle. I have had several patients whomduring this period I plunged into water at 110 degrees Fahrenheitas often as fifteen times in a single day--each bath lasting aslong as the patient experienced relief. In some cases thisElysium coming after the rack has been the only period for amonth in which the sufferer had anything resembling a doze. Myreluctance arose from the necessity of sending a patient in suchan advanced state of the opium disease so far away from me that Imust rely on reports written by people without my eyes, forkeeping personally au courant with the case; that I must consultand prescribe by letter, subject to the execution of my plans bymen, who, though excellent and careful, were ignorant of mytheories of treatment, and had never made this particular diseasea specialty. I accordingly sent Mr. A. away to the water-cure,all friendless and alone to fight the final battle of his lifeagainst tougher odds than he had ever before encountered. At notime in my life have I realized with greater bitterness thehelplessness of a practitioner who has no institution of his ownto take such cases to than when I shook his poor, dry sallow handand bade him goodbye at the station. As I said in the beginning, I am just home fromseeing the result. Mr. A. has fared as special cases always dowhere there is no special provision for them. To speak plainly,he had been badly neglected; and that, undoubtedly, without theslightest intention on the part of the heads of the house to doother than their duty. Six weeks ago I heard from the firstphysician that any friend was entirely free from opium, and,though still suffering, was steadily on the mend. I had nofurther news from him till I was called to his bedside by a notewhich said he feared he was dying, penciled in a hand astremulously illegible as the confession of Guy Fawkes. I was withhim by the earliest train I could take, after arranging with aneighbor for my practice, and found him in a condition which ledhim to say, as I myself said at the commencement of this article:"Would to God that every young person could stand for asingle hour by this bedside before Life's responsibilities havebecome the sentinels and Habit the jailer of the Will!" I had not been intelligently informedrespecting the progress of his case. He had been better at notime when I was told he was so, though his freedom from opium hadbeen of even longer duration than I was advised. For ninety dayshe had been without opium in any form. The scope of sountechnical an article leaves no room to detail what had beendone for him as alleviation. His prostration had been so greatthat he could not correspond with me himself until the moment ofhis absolutely extremity; and only after repeated entreaties totelegraph to myself and his family had been refused on the groundthat his condition was not critical, he managed to get off thepoor scrawl which brought me to his side. For the ninety days he had been going withoutopium he had known nothing like proper sleep. I desire to beunderstood with mathematical literalness. There had been periodswhen he had been semi-conscious; when the outline of things inhis room grew vaguer and for five minutes he had a dull sensationof not knowing where he was. This temporary numbness was the onlystate which in all that time simulated sleep. From the hour hefirst refused his craving, and went to the battlefield of bed, hehad endured such agony as I believe no man but the opium-eaterhas ever known. I am led to believe that the records of fatallesion, mechanical childbirth, cancerous affection, the stakeitself, contains no greater torture than a confirmed opium-eaterexperiences in getting free. Popularly this suffering is supposedto be purely intellectual-- but nothing can be wider of thetruth. Its intellectual part is bad enough, but the physicalsymptoms are appalling beyond representation. The look on theface of the opium sufferer is indeed one of such keen mentalanguish that outsiders may well be excused for supposing that isall. I shall never forget till my dying day that awful Chineseface which actually made me rein my horse at the door of theopium hong where it appeared, after a night's debauch, at sixo'clock one morning when I was riding in the outskirts of aPacific city. It spoke of such a nameless horror in its owner'ssoul that I made the sign for a pipe and proposed, in"pigeon English," to furnish the necessary coin. TheChinaman sank down on the steps of the hong, like a man hearingmedicine proposed to him when he was gangrened from head to foot,and made a gesture, palms downward, toward the ground, as one whosaid, "It has done its last for me--I am paying the maturedbills of penalty." The man had exhausted all that opiumcould give him; and now, flattery past, the strong one kept hisgoods in peace. When the most powerful alleviative known tomedical science has bestowed the last Judas kiss which isnecessary to emasculate its victim, and, sure of the prey,substitutes stabbing for blandishment, what alleviative, strongerthan the strongest, shall soothe such doom? I may givechloroform. I always do in the denouement of badcases--ether--nitrous oxide. In employing the first two agents Isecure rest, but I induce death nine cases out of ten. Nothing isbetter known to medical men than the intolerance of the system tochloroform or ether after opium. Nitrous oxide I am stillexperimenting with, but its simple undiffused form is toopowerful an agent to use with a patient who for many days must behourly treated for persevering pain. So the opium-eater is leftas entirely without anesthetic as the usual practice leaves himwithout therapeutic means. Both here and abroad opium-eaters havediscovered the fact that, in an inveterate case, where opiumfails to act on the brain through the exhausted tissues of thestomach, bichloride of mercury in combination with the dosebehaves like a mordant in the presence of a dye, and, so tospeak, precipitates opium upon the calloused surfaces of themucous and nervous layers. This expedient soon exhausts itself ina death from colliquative diarrhea, produced partly by the finaldecompositions of tissue which the poisonously antisepticproperty of opium has all along improperly stored away; partly bythe definite corrosions of the new addition to the dose. But inno case is there any relief to a desperate case of opium-eatingsave death. Remembering that Chinaman's faced I can notwonder at the popular notion regarding the abandonment of opium.Men say it is a mental pain; because spiritual woe is theexpression of the sufferer's countenance. And so it is, but thiswoe is underlain by the keenest brute suffering. Let me sketchthe opium-eater's experience on the rugged road upward. Let us suppose him a resolute man, who means tobe free, and with that intent has reduced to a hundred drops thedaily dose which for several years had amounted to an ounce oflaudanum. I am not supposing an extreme case. An ounce oflaudanum is a small per diem for any man who has taken hisregular rations of the drug for a twelvemonth. In the majority ofcases I have found an old habitue's daily portion to exceedthree, or the equivalent of that dose in crude opium or morphia;making seventy-two grains of the gum or twelve of its mostessential alkaloid. In one most interesting case I found a manwho having begun on the first of January with one half a grain ofsulphate of morphia for disease, at the end of March was, to allappearance, as hopeless an opium-eater as ever lived, takingthirty-two grains of the salt per day in the form of Magendie'sSolution. This, however, was an unusual case. According to myexperience the average opium-eater reaches twelve grains ofmorphia [microfiche illegible]... and may live after that totreble the amount: the worst case I ever knew attaining a dose ofninety grains, or one and a half of the drachm vials ordinarilysold. I am happy, in passing, to add that for more than two yearsboth the extreme cases just mentioned have been entirely cured. If the opium-eater has been in the habit ofdividing his daily dose he begins to feel some uneasiness withinan hour after his first deprivation, but it amounts to nothingmore than an indefinite restlessness. In any case his firstwell-marked opium torments occur early after he has been withoutthe drug for twenty-four hours. At the expiration of that time he begins tofeel a peculiar corded and tympanic tightness about theepigastrium. A feverish condition of the brain, which sometimesamounts to absolute phantasia, now ensues, marked off intoperiods of increasing excitement by a heavy sleep, which, aftereach interval, grows fuller of tremendous dreams, and breaks upwith a more intensely irritable waking. I have held a man's handwhile he lay dreaming about the thirty-sixth hour of hisstruggle. His eyes were closed for less than a minute by thewatch, but he awoke in a horrible agony of fear from what seemedto have been a year-long siege of some colossal and demoniacVicksburg. After the opium-eater has been for forty-eighthours without his solace this heavy sleep entirely disappears.While it stays it never lasts over half an hour at a time, and isso broken by the crash of stupendous visions as not to amount toproper slumber. During its period of continuance the opium-eaterwoos its approaches with an agony which shows his instinct of thecoming weeks of sleeplessness. It never rests him in any validsense. It is a congestive decomposition rather than any normalreconstruction of the brain. He wakes out of it each time with aheart more palpitating; in a perspiration more profuse; with agreater uncertainty of sense and will; with a more confusedmemory; in an intenser agony of body and horror of hopelessness. Every nerve in the entire frame now suddenlyawakes with such a spasm of revivification that no parallel agonyto that of the opium-eater at this stage can be adduced, unlessit be that of the drowned person resuscitated by artificialmeans. Nor does this parallel fully represent the suffering, forthe man resuscitated from drowning re-oxidizes all his surpluscarbon in a few minutes of intense torture, while the anguishwhich burns away that carbon and other matter, properly effete,stored away in the tissues by opium, must last for hours, days,and weeks. Who is sufficient for this long, long pull? From the hour this pain begins to manifestitself it continues (in any average case of a year's previoushabituation to the drug) for at least a week without one second'slull or exhaustion. A man may catch himself dozing between spasmsof tic-douloureux or toothache; he never doubts whether he isawake one instant in the first week after dropping his opium. Onepatient whom I found years ago at a watercure followed thewatchman all night on crutches through his tour of inspectionaround the establishment. Other people, after walking a longtime, shift from chair to chair in their rooms, talking toanybody who may happen to be present in a low-voiced, suicidalmanner, which inexperience finds absolutely blood-freezing. Latersuch rock to and fro, moaning with agony, for hours at a time,but saying nothing. Still others go to their beds at once, andlie writhing there until the struggle is entirely decided. I havelearned that this last class is generally the most hopeful. The period during which this pain is tocontinue depends upon two elements. 1st. How long has the patient habitually takenopium? 2d. How much constitutional strength remains tothrow it off? "How much has he taken in theaggregate?" is practically not an equivalent of the firstquestion. I have found an absolutely incurable opium-eater whohad never used more than ten grains of morphia per diem; but hehad been taking it habitually for a dozen years. In another casethe patient had for six months repeated before each meal theten-grain dose which served the other all day; but he was a manwhose pluck under pain equaled a woman's, and after a fortnight'sanguish of such horror that one could scarcely witness it withoutbeing moved to tears came out into perfect freedom. The formerpatient, although he had never in any one day experienced suchpowerful effects from opium as the latter, had used the drug solong that every part of his system had reconstructed itself tomeet the abnormal conditions, and must go through a secondprocess of reconstruction, without any anodyne to mask the painresulting from its decomposition, before it could again tolerateexistence of the normal kind. If opium were not an anodyne theterrible structural changes which it works would cause nosurprise; it would be felt eating out its victim's life like somuch nitric acid. During the early part of the opium-eater'scareer these structural changes go on with a rapidity whichpartly accounts for the vast disengagements of nervous force, theexhilaration, the endurance of effort, which characterize thisstage, later to be substituted by utter nervous apathy. By thetime the substitution occurs something has taken place throughoutthe physical structure which may be rudely likened to the finalequilibrium of a neutral salt after the effervescence between anacid and an alkali. So to speak, the tissues have now combinedwith their full equivalent of all the poisonous alkaloids inopium. Further use of it produces no new disengagements ofnervous force; the victim may double, quadruple his dose, but hemight as well expect further ebullition by adding moreaqua-fortis to a satisfied nitrate as to develop with opiumexhilarating currents in a tissue whose combination with thatdrug have already reached their chemical limit. FN* _____ *FN Isay "chemical" because so much it is possible to knownexperientally; and the very interesting examination of suchhigher forces as constantly seem to intrude in any nervousdisturbance would here involve the discussion of a theoretical"vital principle"-- something apart from and betweenthe soul and physical activities--which scientific men areuniversally abandoning. ___ The opium-eater now only continues his habit topreserve the terrible static condition to which it has reducedhim, and to prevent that yet more terrible dynamic condition intowhich he comes with every disturbance of equilibrium; a conditionof energetic and agonizing dissolutions which must last untilevery fiber of wrongly changed tissue is burned up and healthilyreplaced. Though I have called the early reactions of opiumrapid, they are necessarily much less so than those produced by asimple chemical agent. No drug approaches it in the possession ofcumulative characteristics; its dependence on the time elementmust therefore be always carefully considered in treating a case.This fact leads us to understand the other element in thequestion, how long the torments of the opium-fighter mustcontinue. Having ascertained the chronology of his case, we mustsay, "Given this period of subjection, has the patientenough constitutional vigor left to endure the period ofreconstruction which must correspond to it?" ** FN -------** (FN) Not correspond day by day. At that rate a reformingopium-eater (I use the particle in the physical sense, for veryfew opium-eaters are more to blame than any other sick persons)must pay a "shent per shent" which no constitutioncould survive. The correspondence is simply proportional. ------- I am naturally sanguine, and began my study ofopium-eaters with the belief that none of them were hopeless.Experience has taught me that there is a point beyond which anyconstitution--especially one so abnormally sensitive as theopium-eater's--can not endure keen physical suffering withoutdeath from spinal exhaustion. I once heard the eminent Dr.Stevens say that he made it a rule never to attempt a surgicaloperation if it must consume more than an hour. Similarly, I havecome to the conclusion never to amputate a man from hisopium-self if the agony must last longer than three months.Uneasiness--corresponding to the irritations of dressing astump--may continue a year longer; and few victims of the habitoutlive a certain opium-prurience, which has also its analogue inthe occasional titillation of a healed wound--these arecomparatively tolerable; but, if we expect to save a patient'slife, we must not protract an agony which so absolutelyinterferes with normal sleep as that of the opium-eater's forlonger than three months in the case of any constitution I havethus far encountered. Usually as early as the third day after itsabandonment (unless the constitution has become so impaired bylong habituation that there will probably be no vital reaction)opium begins to show its dissolutions from the tissue by aprofuse and increasingly acrid bilious diarrhea, which must notbe checked if diagnosis has revealed sufficient constitutionalvigor to justify any attempt at abandonment of the drug.Hemorrhoids may result; they must be topically treated; mildastringents may be used when the tendency seems getting out ofeventual control; bland foods must be given as often as theusually fastidious appetite will tolerate them; the only tonicmust be beef-tea--diffusible stimulus invariably increasing theagony, whether in the form of ale, wine, or spirits. Short ofthreatened collapse, the bowels must not be retarded. There isnothing in the faintest degree resembling a substitute for opium,but from time to time various alleviates, which can not bediscussed in an untechnical article, may be administered withbenefit. The spontaneous termination of the diarrhea willindicate that the effete matters we must remove have been mainlyeliminated, and that we may shortly look for a marked mitigationof the pain, followed by conditions of great debility butincreasingly favorable to the process of reconstruction. Thatprocess, yet more than the alleviate, demands a book rather thanan article. I have intentionally deferred any descriptionof the agony of the opium struggle as a sensation, until Ireturned from depicting general symptoms, to relate theparticular case which is my text. The sufferings of the patient,from whom I have just returned, are so comprehensive as almost tobe exhaustively typical. When simple nervous excitement had for two daysalternated with the already mentioned intervals of deliriousslumber, a dull, aching sensation began manifesting itselfbetween his shoulders and in the region of the loins. Appetitefor food had been failing since the first denial of that foropium. The most intense gastric irritability now appeared in theform of an aggravation of the typantic tightness, corrosive acidructations, heartburn, water-brash, and a peculiar sensation, aspainful as it is indescribable, of self-consciousness in thewhole upper part of the digestive canal. The best idea of thislast symptom may be found by supposing all the nerves ofinvoluntary motion which supply that tract with vitality,suddenly to be gifted with the exquisite sensitiveness to theirown processes which is produced by its correlative object in someorgan of special sense--the whole organism assimilating itself toa retina or a finger-tip. Sleep now disappeared. This initiatedan entire month during which the patient had not one moment ofeven partial unconsciousness. In less than a week from the beginning thesymptoms indicated a most obstinate chronic gastritis. There wasa perpetual sense of corrosion at the pit of the stomach verylike that which characterizes the fatal operation of arsenic.There was less action of the liver than usually indicates asalvable case, and no irritation of the lowest intestines. Paripassu with the gastritic suffering, the neuralgic pain spreaddown the extremities from an apparent center between the kidneys,through the trunk, from another line near the left margin of theliver, and through the whole medullary substance of the brainitself. Although I was so unfortunate as not to be beside himduring this stage, I can still infallibly draw on my wholeexperience for information regarding the intensity of this pain.Tic-douloureux most nearly resembles it in character. Like thatagonizing affection, it has periods of exacerbation; unlike it,it has no intervals of continuous repose. Like tic-douloureux,its sensation is a curiously fluctuating one, as if pain had beenfluidized and poured in trickling streams through the tubules ofnerve tissue which are affected by it; but, unlike that, itaffects every tubule in the human body--not a single diseasedlocality. Charles Reade chaffs the doctors very wittily in"Hard Cash" on their penchant for the word"hyperaesthesia," but nothing else exactly defines thatexaggeration of nervous sensibility which I have invariably seenin opium-eaters. Some of them were hurt by an abrupt slighttouch, and cried out at the jar of a heavy footstep like apatient with acute rheumatism. Some developed sensitiveness withthe progress of expurgating the poison, until their very hair andnails felt sore, and the whole surface of the skin suffered fromcold air or water like the lips of a wound. After all, utterlyunable to convey an idea of the kind of suffering, I must contentmyself by repeating, of its extent, that no prolonged pain of anykind known to science can equal it. The totality of theexperience is only conceivable by adding this physical torture toa mental anguish which even the Oriental pencil of De Quincey hasbut feebly painted; an anguish which slays the will, yet leavesthe soul conscious of its murder; which utterly blots out hope,and either paralyzes the reasoning faculties which might suggestencouragements, or deadens the emotional nature to them asthoroughly as if they were not perceived; an anguish whichsometimes includes just, but always a vast amount of unjustself-reproach which brings every failure and inconsistency, everymisfortune or sin of a man's life as clearly before his face ason the day he was first mortified or degraded by it--before hisface, not in one terrible dream, which is once for all over withsunrise, but as haunting ghosts, made out by the feverish eyes ofthe soul down to the minutest detail of ghastliness, and neverleaving the side of the rack on which he lies for a moment ofdark or daylight, till sleep, at the end of a month, first dropsout of heaven on his agony. A third element in the suffering must brieflybe mentioned. It results directly from the others. It is thatexhaustion of nervous power which invariably ensues on protractedpain of mind or body. it proceeds beyond reaction to collapse ina hopeless case; it stops this side of that in a salvable one. On reaching his room I found my friendbolstered upright in bed, with a small two-legged crutch at handto prop his head on when he became weary of the perpendicularposition. This had been his attitude for fifty days. Whether fromits impeding his circulation, the distribution of his nervouscurrents, or both, the prostrate posture invariably brought oncessation of the heart and the sense of intolerable strangling.His note told me he was dying of heart disease, but, as Iexpected, I found that malady merely simulated by nervoussymptoms, and the trouble purely functional. His food wasarrowroot or sago, and beef-tea. Of the vegetable preparation hetook perhaps half a dozen tablespoonfuls a day; of the animalvariable quantities, averaging half a pint per diem. This, thoughsmall, was far from the minimum of nutriment upon which life hasbeen supported through the most critical periods. Indeed, I haveknown three patients tided over stages of disease otherwisedesperately typhoid by beef-tea baths, in which the proportion ofozmazone was just perceptible, and the sole absorbing agency wasa faint activity left in the pores of the skin. But thesepatients had suffered no absolute disorganization. Thepractitioner had to encounter a swift specific poison, not tomake over tissues abnormally misconstructed by its long insidiousaction. On examination I discovered facts which I had oftenfeared, but never before absolutely recognized, in my friend'scase. The stomach itself, in its most irreproducible tissue, hadundergone a partial but permanent disorganization. The substanceof the organ itself had been altered in a way for which scienceknows no remedy. Hereafter, then, it can only be rechanged bythat ultimate decomposition which men call death. Over theopium-eater's coffin at least, thank God! a wife and sister canstop weeping and say, "He's free." I called to my friend's bedside a consultationof three physicians and the most nearly related survivor of hisfamily. I laid the case before them; assisted them to a fullprognosis; and invited their views. I spent two nights with myfriend. I have said that during the first month of trial he hadnot a moment of even partial unconsciousness. Since that timethere had been perhaps ten occasions a day, when for a periodfrom one minute in length to five, his poor, pain-wrinkledforehead sank on his crutch, his eyes fell shut, and to outsidershe seemed asleep. But that which appeared sleep was internally tohim only one stupendous succession of horrors which confusedlysucceeded each other for apparent eternities of being, and endedwith some nameless catastrophe of woe or wickedness, in a wakingmore fearful than the stage volcanically ruptured by it. Duringthe nights I sat by him these occasional relaxations, as Ilearned, reached their maximum length, my familiar presenceacting as a sedative, but from each of them he woke bathed inperspiration from sole to crown; shivering under alternateflushes of chill and fever; mentally confused to a degree whichfor half an hour rendered every object in the room unnatural andterrible to him; with a nervous jerk, which threw him quite outof bed, although in his waking state two men were requisite tomove him; and with a cry of agony as loud as any underamputation. The result of our consultation was a unanimousagreement not to press the case further. Physicians have nobusiness to consider the speculative question, whether deathwithout opium is preferable to life with it. They are called tokeep people on the earth. We were convinced that to deprive thepatient longer of opium would be to kill him. This we had noright to do without his consent. He did not consent, and I gavehim five grains of morphia** FN ----- ** (FN) To the younger menof the profession rather than to the public generally I need hereto say that this dose is not as excessive as it would naturallyappear to be in the case of a man who had used no form of opiumfor ninety days. When you have to resume the drug go cautiously.But you will generally find the amount of it required to producethe sedative effects in any case which returns to opium, afterabandonment of a long habituation, startlingly large, and slow inits effects. ----- between 8 and 12 o'clock on the morning of theday I had to return here. He was obliged to eat a few mouthfulsof sago before the alkaloid could act upon his nervous system. Ineed only point out the significance of this indication. Theshallower lying nervous fibers of the stomach had becomedefinitely paralyzed, and such digestion as could be perfectedunder these circumstances was the only method of getting thestimulant in contact with any excitable nerve-substance. In otherwords, mere absorbent and assimilative tissue was all of himwhich for the purpose of receiving opium partially surviveddisorganization of the superficial nerves. Of that survivingtissue, one mucous patch was irredeemably gone. (This particularfact was the one which cessation from opium more distinctlyunmasked.) At noon he had become tolerably comfortable; before Ileft (7 p.m.) he had enjoyed a single half hour of something likenormal slumber. He will have to take opium all his life.Further struggle is suicide. Death will probably occur at anyrate not from an attack of what we usually consider disease, butfrom the disintegrating effects on tissue of the habit itself.So, whatever he may do, his organs march to death. He will haveto continue the habit which kills him only because abandoning itkills him sooner; for self-murder has dropped out of the purviewof the moral faculties and become a mere animal question of time.The only way left him to preserve his intellectual facultiesintact is to keep his future daily dose at the tolerable minimum.Henceforth all his dreams of entire liberty must be relegated tothe world to come. He may be valuable as a monitor, but in theexecutive uses of this mighty modern world henceforth he cannever share. Could the immortal soul find itself in a moreinextricable, a more grisly complication? In publishing his case I am not violating thatHippocratic vow which protects the relations of patient andadviser; for, as I dropped my friend's wasted hand and stepped tothe threshold, he repeated a request he had often made to me,saying: "It is almost like Dives asking for amessenger to his brethren; but tell them, tell all young men,what it is, 'that they come not into this torment.'" Already perhaps--by the mere statement of thecase--I might be considered to have fulfilled my promise. Butsince monition often consists as much in enlightenment asintimidation, let me be pardoned for briefly presenting a fewconsiderations regarding the action of opium upon the humansystem while living, and the peculiar methods by which the drugencompasses its death. What is Opium? It is the most complicated drug in thePharmacopeia. though apparently a simple gummy paste, itpossesses a constitution which analysis reveals to contain noless than 25 elements, each one of them a compound by itself, andmany of them among the most complex compounds known to modernchemistry. Let me concisely mention these by classes. First, at least three earthy salts--thesulphates of lime, alumia, and potassa. Second, two organic andone simpler acid--acetic (absolutely vinegar), meconic (one ofthe most powerful irritants which can be applied to theintestines through the bile), and sulfuric. All three existuncombined in the gum, and free to work their will on the mucoustissues. A green extractive matter, which comes in all vegetalbodies developed under sunlight, next deserves a place by itself,because it is one of the few organic bodies of which no rationalanalysis has ever been pretended. Though we cannot state theconstitution of this chlorophyll, we know that, except by turningacid in the stomach, it remains inert on the human system, as onemight imagine would happen if he swallowed a bunch of greengrass. Lignin, with which it is always associated, is mere woodyfiber, and has no direct physical action. In no instance has anystomach been found to digest it save an insect's-- somenaturalists thinking that certain beetles make their horny wing-cases of that. I believe one man did think he had discovered asolvent for it in the gastric juice of the beaver, but that viewis not widely entertained. So far as it exists in opium it canonly act as a foreign substance and a mechanical irritant to thehuman bowels. Next come two inert, indigestible, and very similargummy bodies, mucilagin and bassorin. Sugar, are powerfullyactive volatile principle, and a fixed oil (probably allied toturpentine) are the only other invariable constituents of opiumbelonging to the great organic group of the hydro- carbons. I now come to a group by far the most importantof all. Almost without exception the vegetable poisons belong towhat are called the "nitrogenous alkaloids." Strychnia,brucia, ignatia, calabarin, woovarin, atropine, digitalin, andmany others, including all whose effect is most tremendous uponthe human system, are in this group. Not without insight did theearly discoverers call nitrogen azote, "the foe tolife." It so habitually exists in the things our body findsmost deadly that the tests for it are always the first whichoccur to a chemist in the presence of any new organic poison. Thenitrogenous alkaloids owe the first part of their name to thefact of containing this element; the second part to that of theirusually making neutral salts with acids, like an alkaline base.The general reader may sometimes have asked himself why thesealkaloids are diversely written-- as, e.g., sometimes"morphia," and sometimes "morphine." Thechemists who regard them as alkalies write them in the one way,those who consider them neutrals, in the other. Of thesenitrogenous alkaloids, even the nuts of the tree, which furnishesthe most powerful, swift poison of the world, contains butthree--the above-named strychnia, brucia, and ignatia--principlesshared in common with its pathological congener, the St. Ignatiusbean. Opium may be found to contain twelve of them; but as one ofthese (cotarnine) may be a product of distillation, and the other(pseudo-morphia) seems only an occasional constituent, I treatthem as ten in number--rationally to be arranged under threeheads. First, those whose action is merely acrid--sofar as known expending themselves upon the mucous coasts.(Pseudo-morphia when it occurs belongs to these.) So doporphyroxin; narceine; probably papaverine also; while meconin,whose acrid properties in contact with animal tissue are similarto that of meconic acid, forms the last of the group. The second head comprises but a singlealkaloid, variously called paramorphia or thebaine. (It mayinterest amateur chemists to know that its difference fromstrychnia consists only in having two less equivalents ofhydrogen and six of carbon--especially when they know how closelyits physical effects follow its atomic constitution.) A dose ofone grain has produced tetanic spasms. Its chief action appearsto be upon the spinal nerves, and there is reason to suppose it apoison of the same kind as nux vomica without the concentrationof that agent. How singular it seems to find a poison of thistotally distinct class--bad enough to set up the reputation ofany one drug by itself--in company with the remaining principleswhose effect we usually associate with opium and see clearest inthe ruin of its victim! The remainder, five in number, are the opiumalkaloids, which act generally upon the whole system, butparticularly, in their immediate phenomena, upon the brain. Imention them in the ascending order of their nervine power:narcotine; codeine; opianin; metamorphia, and morphia. The first of these the poppy shares in commonwith many other narcotic plants--tobacco the most conspicuousamong the number. In its anti- periodic effects on the humansystem it has been found similar to quinia, and it is anundoubted narcotic poison acting on the nerves of organic life,though, compared with its associates in the drug, comparativelyinnocent. The remaining four act very much like morphia,differing only in the size of the dose in which they proveefficient. Most perfectly fresh constitutions feel a grain ofmorphia powerfully; metamorphia is soporific in half-gain doses(American Journal of Pharmacy, September, 1861); opianin in itsphysical effects closely approximates morphia; codeia is aboutone-fifth as powerful; a new subject may not get sleep short ofsix grains; its main action is expended on the sympatheticsystem. It does not seem to congest the brain as morphia does;but its action on the biliary system is probably little lessdeadly than that of the more powerful narcotic. Looking at the marvelous complexity of opium wemight be led to the a priori supposition that its versatility ofaction on the human system must be equally marvelous. Miserably for the opium-eater, fortunately forthe young person who may be dissuaded from following in hisfootsteps, we are left in no doubt of this matter by theconclusions of experience. In practical action opium affects aslarge an area of nervous surface, attacks it with as muchintensity, and changes it in as many ways as its complexity wouldlead us to expect. I have pointed out the existence in opium of aconvulsive poison congeneric with brucia. The other chief activealkaloids, five in number, are those which specially possess thecumulative property. Poisons of the strychnia and hydro-cyanicacid classes (including this just mentioned opium alkaloid,thebaine), are swifter agents; but this perilous opium quintettesigns to every sense a lulling song from which it may not awakefor years, but wakes a slave. Every day that a man uses opiumthese cumulative alkaloids get a subtler hold on him. Even aphysician addicted to the practice has no conception how theirinfluence piles up. At length some terrible dawn rouses him out ofa bad sleep into a worse consciousness. Though the mostuntechnical man, he must already know the disorder which hastaken place in his moral nature and his will. For a knowledge ofhis physical condition he must resort to his medical man, andwhat, when the case is ten years old, must a practitioner tellthe patient in any average case? "Sir, the chances are entirely againstyou, and the possession of a powerfully enduring constitution, ifyou have it, forms a decided offset in your favor." He then makes a thorough examination of him byear, touch, conversation. If enough constitution responds to thecall, he advises an immediate entrance upon the hard road ofabnegation. If the practitioner finds the case hopeless hemust tell the patient so, in something like these words: "You have either suffered adisorganization of irreproducible membranes, or you havedeposited so much improper material in your tissue that your lifeis not consistent with the protracted pain of removing it. "One by one you have paralyzed all theexcretory functions of the body. Opium, aiming at all thosefunctions for their death, first attacked the kidneys, and withyour experimental doses you experienced a slight access ofdysuria. As you went on, the same action, progressively paralyticto organic life, involved the liver. Flatulence, distress at theepigastrium, irregularity of bowels, indicated a spasmodicperformance of the liver's work, which showed it to be under highnervous excitement. your mouth became dry through a cessation ofthe salivary discharge. Your lachrymal duct was parched, and youreye grew to have an arid look in addition to the dullnessproduced by opiate contraction of the pupil. All this time you continued to absorb an agentwhich directly acts for what by a paradox may be called fatalconservation of the tissues. Whether through its complexitycombined nitrogen, carbon, or both, the drug has interposeditself between your very personal substance and those oxidationsby which alone its life can be maintained. It has slowed thefires of your whole system. It has not only interposed but inpart it has substituted itself; so that along with much effetematter of the body stored away there always exists a certainundecomposed quantity of the agent which sustains this morbidconservation. **FN ----- ** (FN): I frequently use whathydropaths call "a pack" to relieve opium distress, andwith great benefit. After an hour and a half of perspiration, thepatient being taken out of his swaddlings, I have found in thewater which was used to wash out his sheet enough opium to haveintoxicated a fresh subject. This patient had not used opium fora fortnight. ----- "When this combination became established,you began losing your appetite because no substitution of freshmatter was required by your body for tissue wrongly conserved.The progressive derangement of your liver manifested itself inincreased sallowness of face and cornea; the organ was working onan inadequate vital supply because the organic nervous system wasbecoming paralyzed; the veins were not strained of that which isthe bowels' proper purgative and the blood's dire poison. You hadsealed up all but a single excretory passage--the pores of theskin. Perhaps when you had opium first given you you were toldthat its intent was the promotion of perspiration but did notknow the rationale. The only way in which opium promotesperspiration is by shutting up all the other excretory processesof the body, and throwing the entire labor of that function uponthe pores. (When the skin gives out the opium- eater is shut uplike an entirely choked chimney, and often dies in delirium ofblood-poisoning.) "For a while--the first six years,perhaps--your skin sustained the work which should have beenshared by the other organs--not in natural sweat, but violentperspiration, which showed the excess of its action. Then yourpalms became gradually hornier--your whole body yellower--at thesame time that your muscular system grew tremulous throughprogressively failing nervous supply. "About this time you may have had sometemporary gastric disturbance, accompanied with indescribabledistress, loathing at food, and nausea. This indicated that themucous lining of the stomach had been partially removed by thecorrosions of the drug, or that nervous power had suddenly cometo a standstill, which demanded an increase of stimulation. "Since that time you have been taking yourdaily dose only to preserve the status in quo. The condition bothof your nervous system and your stomach indicate that you mustalways take some anodyne to avoid torture, and your only anodyneis opium. "The rest of your life must be spent inkeeping comfortable, not in being happy.: Opium-eaters enjoy a strange immunity fromother disease. They are not liable to be attacked by miasma inmalarious countries; epidemics or contagions where they exist.They almost always survive to die of their opium itself. And anopium death is usually in one of these two manners: The opium-eater either dies in collapse throughnervous exhaustion (with the blood poisoning and deliriumabove-mentioned), sometimes after an overdose, but oftenerseeming to occur spontaneously; or in the midst of physical ormental agony, as great and irrelievable, as men suffer in hopefulabandonment of the drug, and with a colliquative diarrhea, bywhich--in a continual, fiery, acrid discharge--the systemrelieves itself during a final fortnight of the effete matterswhich have been accumulating for years. Either of these ends is terrible enough; let usdraw a curtain over their details. Opium is a corrosion and paralysis of all thenoblest forms of life. The man who voluntarily addicts himself toit would commit in cutting his throat a suicide only swifter andless ignoble. The habit is gaining fearful ground among ourprofessional men, the operatives in our mills, our weary sewingwomen, our fagged clerks, our disappointed wives, our formerliquor-drunkards, our very day-laborers, who a generation agotook gin; all our classes, from the highest to the lowest, areyearly increasing their consumption of the drug. The terribledemands, especially in this country, made on modern brains by ourfeverish competitive life, constitute hourly temptations to someform of the sweet, deadly sedative. Many a professional man of myacquaintance, who twenty years ago was content with histri-diurnal "whiskey," ten years ago, drop by drop,began taking stronger "laudanum cocktails," until hebecame what he is now--an habitual opium-eater. I have tried toshow what he will be. If this article shall deter any from animitation of his example, or excite an interest in thequestion--"What he shall do to be saved?"--I amcontent. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-32IA087-000632-B027-363http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/demon1883.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095656 text/html 8962HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:56:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:43 GMTContent-length: 8747 The Demon of the Orient - 1883 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The Demon of the Orient Allen S. Williams New York: "Published by the Author," 1883 Chapter IV. An American's Palace Joint The fact of an American deliberately investinghis money in the business of propagating a body-killing,soul-destroying vice like this one of opium smoking is sufficientto evoke a feeling of disgust, and should call down the strongestcondemnation from principled individuals, as it will shortly doin all probability from the courts of justice. The pioneer in this business was Frederick D.Hughes. He began joint keeping on a large scale in apartmentsadjoining the Cremorne Garden on West Thirty-second street, hebeing the principal of the firm who carried on the disreputablebusiness of the former resort. He is a devoted yachtsman, havingpreference for catamarans, and of those craft he has owned andsailed the swiftest of the swift. Among the fiends he isconsidered a good fellow. To the entrance to his joint a shortflight of stone steps led; there was an inner-glazed door and along hall. The smoking-room was entered from the rear; it was anextensive apartment, presenting a rich and gorgeous interior toeyes accustomed to the gloomy dens of Chinatown. The walls werecovered with heavy gilt and brown paper, with tasteful dado andfrieze. At either end of the room were rich mural hangingsfalling from the ceiling, and from the window cornices hunghandsome lambrequins and heavy curtains. Two brazen chandelierswere provided with globes of colored glass, which softened thedimly-burning lights, and rested the visual organs of thesmokers, while it enhanced the aesthetic beauty of theirsurroundings. Costly imported carpets covered the oiled floor;they gently sank beneath the feet but returned no sound. At the northern end of the room was afireplace, beneath a carven, colored mantel. In the long Winternights there glowed an anthracite coal fire, and the fuel slowlyconsuming seemed a not inapt simile to the physical and mentalorganizations of the smokers. They seemed to have no suchgruesome reflections, but contented lay and gazed into its fieryrecesses and imagined them to be unearthly grottoes, and conjuredup a host of jolly salamanders to people them. Reaching the length of the room on either side,and separated by a broad isle, were platforms about three feet inheight. These were strewn with soft, warm and yielding Smyrnarugs. Circular inflated rubber pillows were used for the headinstead of the barbarous neck-stiffening stools of Chineseorigin. In this place can, at the present writing, befound from ten to thirty habitues of a night. There lie theythroughout the long dream-night of enervating intoxication. Tothe neophyte the toned softness of the light, the gracefulabandon of the forms, negligent and lapped in lazy luxury upontheir Oriental couches, the silent footsteps of the attendants asthey move to and fro in the misty air, the dulcet and beautifullymodulated tones in which the fiends murmur, all creep upon themind like a vision from another world, and the imagination,reeking with the seductive fumes, yields itself up helplessly tothe beatitude of the hour. Apparently no vicious impulse, no harshthought, no remorseful recollection, disturbs the perfect harmonyof the surroundings; and the after memory of the Circeanenthrallment of Emotion and Reason appalls the senses at theterrible fascination of the gulf upon whose brink the opiumsmoker stands. Occasionally throughout the night demands aremade for beverages either harmless or intoxicating. Seltzerlemonade appears to be a favorite with the smokers at Cremorne,but that does not preclude their indulgence in vinous spirituousor malt liquors. The smoking habit is claimed by its infatuatedserfs to nullify the "curse o'rum." If they have nodesire for it they drink it just the same, perhaps through pure"cussedness." The joint is kept open all night and a goodpart of the day. Some of the most vicious fiends stay there fromthe opening to the closing hour, and at the last feel indisposedto leave. As is well-known, it is characteristic of the habit tohate exertion of any kind. To one under the god Opien's influence time isnil. So long as his money holds out, he will "hangout." This joint used to be kept open all the time, but itsproprietor now has the consideration to close up long enoughoccasionally to sweep out and ventilate his palace. As the proprietor has truly said all classeshave patronized his place; when he first opened, he was,according to his own statement, overrun with Wall street brokers,who, he says, are always after a new sensation. He once said toan inquiring visitor in whom he had confidence: "You would be astonished if I should nameover some of the people of both sexes who patronize my place. Ihave private rooms upstairs for the high toned ones, so that theycan come and go without seeing anyone but the cooks and the manat the door." It was the night of my debut in this palace,out from which the Chinese were barred, and all there were"sovereigns in their own right"--beingAmericans--although their pretense of ruling themselves was ashallow and pitiable mockery. I had not smoked enough to arriveat that blissful state which cold Northern English cannotexpress; which warm Southern Italian comes nearer to describingwith its dolce far niente, but which the kief of the Orientalscomprehensively and tersely tells. It is a perfect ease of body,brain, and conscience, a carelessness for what may come. Thesubject knows not fear, and wants nothing. I had not reached thisparadise, purchasable far from fifty cents to a dollar, however,and lazily reclined gazing at the proprietor, who was anentertaining and companionable host. He did not look half a bad fellow, and Ireflected that he must be a lover of nature, like all Corinthiansailors; by an easily followed step of thought the host'spersonality gave place to Henry D. Thoreau's. My pleasantreflections upon the simple life of the hermit of Walden Pond,who was among nature's most ardent lovers, were rudelyinterrupted by the host's voice uttering with a laugh, thefollowing sentiment: "Well, if I have got to send souls tohell, I am going to send lots of them." And the fiendslaughed too. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-33IA087-000632-B028-26http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/opiumwarfare1909.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095706 text/html 3794HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:56:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:46 GMTContent-length: 3579 The Warfare Against Opium Smoking in America - 1909 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Outdoor, Feb. 6, 1909, vol. 91, p275 The Warfare Against Opium-Smoking in America Last week the United States Senate passed theAnti-Opium Bill. When it was brought up in the House, immediateconsideration was prevented by certain leaders, chiefly becausethe bill, if passed, would involve a loss in revenue! The billforbids the importation into the United States, after April 1,1909, of smoking opium in any form or any preparation orderivative thereof. Opium, other than smoking opium, may beimported for medicinal purposes only, under regulations which theSecretary of Agriculture is authorized to establish.Transgressors of the law are to be punished by the forfeiture ofthe property and a fine of a sum not exceeding five thousanddollars or less than fifty dollars, or by imprisonment for anytime not exceeding two years, or both. The Outlook has alreadyshown the necessity for the passage of such a bill. The specialnecessity at the present time is evident from a telegram justreceived by the Right Rev. Charles H. Brent, D.D., Bishop of thePhilippine Islands and Chairman of the American delegates to theInternational Opium Conference which is about to meet atShanghai, China. Bishop Brent cables that, if this bill is notimmediately passed, every other nation of the twelveparticipating nations will be in a better light as to recentaction in its own constituency than is our own. And yet our ownDepartment of State was the originator of the Conference! We urgeour readers to telegraph to their Congressmen requesting thespeedy enactment of the Anti-Opium Bill as passed by the Senate.The provisions of the bill, which now awaits the action of theHouse, give ample leeway for all necessary use of opium byscientific or medical men. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-34IA087-000632-B028-50http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/opiumhabit1888.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095716 text/html 13663HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:57:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:51 GMTContent-length: 13447 How the Opium Habit is Acquired - 1888 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The Popular Science Monthly 33, Sept. 1888,663-67 How the Opium Habit is Acquired by Virgil G. Eaton I am not one of the persons who raise a greatcry about the evils of the "opium-habit." I have nodoubt that the continued use of narcotics, whether they betobacco or opium, is injurious to the nervous system; but I alsofirmly believe that the recuperative powers of the body are suchthat they can largely overcome any harmful results coming fromthe regular use of these substances. For instance, I know astonecutter who resides at Cape Elizabeth, Me., who for the pasttwenty years has used twenty cents' worth of black "navyplug" tobacco every day. He is a large, vigorous man,weighing over two hundred pounds. His appetite is good; he sleepswell, and, save for a little heart disturbance caused byoverstimulation, he is perfectly healthy, and is likely to liveuntil he is fourscore. He is now fifty-one years of age, and heassures me he has used tobacco since he was fourteen, and neverhad a fit of "swearing off" in his life. A peculiarand, I should say, a rather troublesome habit of his, is to go tobed every night with a big "quid" of hard"plug" tobacco between his molars. As this is alwaysgone in the morning, and the pillow shows no traces of the weed,he thinks he chews it and swallows it in his sleep, though henever knows anything about the process. There is a widow who keeps a lodging-house inOak Street, Boston, Mass., who takes three drachms of morphiasulphate every day, in three one- drachm doses, morning, noon,and night. When it is remembered that an eighth of a grain is theusual dose for an adult, while two grains are sufficient to killa man, the amount she takes seems startling. I asked her why shedid not try and substitute tobacco, or bromide, or chloralhydrate for morphine, and she said they made her stick, so shecould not use them. This woman is sixty years old, very pale andemaciated. Her appetite is poor. She attends to her dutiesfaithfully, however, and is able, with the help of a girl, tocarry on a large lodging-house. I might give scores of instances similar to theabove, but these will do for my purpose. I believe that theperson who takes liquor or tobacco or opium, in regularquantities at stated intervals, is able to withstand their effectafter getting fixed in the habit, and that it is the irregular,spasmodic use of these articles which brings delirium and death.It is the man who goes on a "spree," and then quits fora time, who has the weak stomach and aching head. His neighbor,who takes his regular toddy and his his usual smoke, feels noinconvenience. For the past year or more I have studied thegrowth of the opium-habit in Boston. It is increasing rapidly.Not only are there more Chinese "joints" andrespectable resorts kept by Americans than there were a year ago,but the number of individuals who "hit the pipe" athome and in their offices is growing very fast. A whole opium"lay-out," including pipe, fork, lamp, and spoon, cannow be had for less than five dollars. This affords a chance forthose who have acquired the habit to follow their desires inprivate, without having to reveal their secret to anyone. Howlargely this is practiced I do not know, but, judging from thetelltale pallor of the faces I see, I feel sure the habit isclaiming more slaves every day. In order to approximate to the amount of opiumin its various forms which is used in Boston, I have made athorough scrutiny of the physicians' recipes left at thedrugstores to be filled. As is well known, all recipes given byphysicians are numbered, dated, and kept on file at thedrugstores, so that they may be referred to at any time. To theseI went in search of information. I was surprised to learn how extensively opiumand its alkaloids-- particularly sulphate of morphia--are used byphysicians. I found them prescribed for every ailment which fleshis heir to. They are used for headache, sore eyes, toothache,sore throat, laryngitis, diphtheria, bronchitis, congestion,pneumonia, consumption, gastritis, liver- complaint, stone in thegall-duct, carditis, aneurism, hypertrophy, peritonitis,calculus, kidney trouble, rheumatism, neuralgia, and all generalor special maladies of the body. It is the great panacea andcure-all. During my leisure time I have looked up morethan 10,000 recipes. It has been my practice to go to the files,open the book, or take up a spindle at random, and take 300recipes just as they come. The first store I visited found 42recipes which contained morphine out of the 300 examined. Closeby, a smaller store, patronized by poorer people, had 36. Up inthe aristocratic quarters, where the customers call in carriages,I found 49 morphine recipes in looking over 300. At the NorthEnd, among the poor Italian laborers, the lowest proportion of 32in 300 was discovered. Without detailing all the places visited,I will summarize by saying that, in 10,200 recipes taken in 34drugstores, I found 1,481 recipes which prescribed somepreparation of opium, or an average of fourteen and one halfpercent of the whole. This was surprising enough; but myinvestigations did not end here. Of the prescriptions furnishedby physicians I found that forty-two percent were filled thesecond time, and of those refilled twenty-three percent containedopium in some form. Again, twenty-eight percent of allprescriptions are filled a third time; and of these, sixty-onepercent were for opiates; while of the twenty percent taken forthe fourth filling, seventy-eight percent were for the narcoticdrug, proving, beyond a doubt, that it was the opiate qualitiesof the medicine that afforded relief and caused the renewal. From conversations with the druggists, Ilearned that the proprietary or "patent" medicineswhich have the largest sales were those containing opiates. Oneapothecary told me of an old lady who formerly came to him asoften as four times a week and purchased a fifty-cent bottle of"cough-balsam." She informed him that it "quietedher nerves" and afforded rest when everything else hadfailed. After she had made her regular visits for over a year, hetold her one day that he had sold out of the medicine required,and suggested a substitute, which was a preparation containingabout the same amount of morphine. On trial, the woman found thenew mixture answered every purpose of the old. The druggist thentold her she had acquired the morphine-habit, and from that timeon she was a constant morphine-user. It was hard to learn just what proportion ofthose who began by taking medicines containing opiates becameaddicted to the habit. I should say, from what I learned, thatthe number was fully twenty-five percent-- perhaps more. Theproportion of those who, having taken up the habit in earnest,left it off later on, was very small--not over ten percent. Whena person once becomes an opium-slave, the habit usually holdsthrough life. I was told many stories about the injuriouseffects of morphine and opium upon the morals of those who useit. One peculiarity of a majority is that, whenever a confirmeduser of the narcotic obtains credit at the drugstore, he at oncestops trading at that place and goes elsewhere. All the druggistsknow this habit very well, and take pains to guard against it.Whenever a customer asks for credit for a bottle of morphine, thedruggist informs him that the store never trusts anyone; but ifhe has no money with him the druggist will gladly give him enoughto last a day or two. In this way the druggist keeps hiscustomer, whereas he would have lost his trade if the present hadnot been made at the time credit was refused. Of course, I heard much about the irresistibledesire which confirmed slaves to the habit have for theirdelight. There is nothing too degrading for them to do in orderto obtain the narcotic. Many druggists firmly believe that amajority of the seemingly motiveless crimes which are perpetratedby reputable people are due to this habit. In pursuit of opiumthe slaves will resort to every trick and art which humaningenuity can invent. There is a prisoner now confined in theConcord (Mass.) Reformatory who has his opium smuggled in to himin the shape of English walnuts donated by a friend. The friendbuys the opium and, opening the walnut-shells, extracts the meat,and fills up the spaces with the gum. Then he sticks the shellstogether with glue and sends them to the prison. At present our clergymen, physicians, andreformers are asking for more stringent laws against the sale ofthese narcotics. The law compelling every person who purchasesopium or other poisons to "register," giving his nameand place of residence to the druggist, has been in force inMassachusetts for several years, and all this time the sales haveincreased. No registration law can control the traffic. The parties who are responsible for theincrease of the habit are the physicians who give theprescriptions. In these days of great mental strain, when mentake their business home with them and think of it from waking tosleeping, the nerves are the first to feel the effects ofoverwork. Opium effects immediate relief, and the doctors,knowing this, and wishing to stand well with their patients,prescribe it more and more. Their design is to effect a cure. Theresult is to convert their patients into opium-slaves. Thedoctors are to blame for so large a consumption of opium, andthey are the men who need reforming. Two means of preventing the spread of the habitsuggest themselves to every thoughtful person: 1. Pass a law that no prescriptions containingopium or its preparations can be filled more than once at thedruggist's without having the physician renew it. The extra costof calling on a doctor when the medicine ran out would deter manypoor people from acquiring the habit. Such a law would also makethe doctors more guarded in prescribing opiates for trivialailments. With the law in force, and the druggists guarded bystrict registration laws, we could soon trace the responsibilityto its proper source, and then, if these safeguards were notenough, physicians could be fined for administering opiates savein exceptional cases. 2. The great preventive to the habit is to keepthe body in such a state that it will not require sedatives orstimulants. The young men and women in our cites have too bigheads, too small necks, and too flabby muscles. They shouldforsake medicine, and patronize the gymnasium. Let them developtheir muscles and rest their nerves, and the family doctor, whomeans well, but who cannot resist the tendency of the age, cantake a protracted vacation. Unless something of the kind is donesoon, the residents of our American cities will be allopium-slaves. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-35IA087-000632-B028-80http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/ent_turk.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095733 text/html 4730HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:57:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:59:06 GMTContent-length: 4515 An Enterprising Turk - 1890 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The New York Times July 1, 1890, p. 8 AN ENTERPRISING TURK. HE TRAVELS MANY MILES TO FIND HIS OCCUPATIONGONE. The long-prevalent impression that the peopleof the United States rank first among the nations in the spiritof enterprise must be modified in the light of therecently-discovered fact that the "unspeakable Turk"has unsuspected stores of the article bottled up under his tannedand inexpressive countenance. The fact was revealed by thejourney of a Turk all the way from Smyrna to this city to set upthe business of adulterating opium. Immediately on his arrival he called on amember of the firm of McKesson & Robbins and proposed tostart the business on the co-operative plan, he to furnish theexperience and McKesson & Robbins the capital. It must havebeen a severe shock to his Oriental habits of thought when he waspolitely informed that he was in the wrong house for that kind ofbusiness. But he was not dismayed, and fortune was more thankind. After further search he fell in with a relative, who hadpreceded him to this country, and by the latter's help operationswere immediately begun. The drug was materially increased involume, but correspondingly reduced in strength, by the additionof liberal quantities of fig paste, colored with a decoction ofyellow berries. The product of this new industry was placed uponthe market at a very moderate price by a commission house outsideof the drug trade, but in communication with the retail branch ofit through the furnishing of kindred articles. When the adulterated drug began to attractattention, which it quickly did, little difficulty wasencountered in tracing the manufacture to its source, andalthough there was no law under which the offenders could be madeto discontinue business or be punished, yet a very effectualremedy was found in exposure. This was employed with so muchsuccess that after a few months the adulterated article waspractically unsalable, the new industry was paralyzed, and thegentleman from Smyrna retired in disgust to his native town. Thecollapse of this international venture insures to the people ofthis country the continued use of pure opium, as the precautionsof the United States Government effectually prevent theimportation of the adulterated article. It is said by authoritieson the drug that the adulteration of opium cannot be detectedexcept by analysis, and that special skill is required even inanalyzing it. [NOTE: The article from which this file wasexcerpted may include additional text and accompanyingillustrations.] Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-36IA087-000632-B028-114http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/landopium1896.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095804 text/html 12373HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:57:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:55 GMTContent-length: 12157 In The Land of Opium - 1896 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The New York Times March 29, 1896, p. 28 IN THE LAND OF OPIUM THE IMMENSE AREAS GIVEN TO THE GROWTH OF THEPOPPY. The Drug's History Traced from the Plant to thePipe--The Scenes in the Indian Fields--Processes Through Whichthe Opium Goes--The Monopoly of Finishing for Smoking in theHands of Chinese--View of a Lucknow Smoking Den. Few people have any idea of the vast areasgiven over wholly to the cultivation of opium. The consumptionand the manufacture of this drug, far from being on the decline,are on the increase to an almost incredible extent. The greed forgold is far more predominant in the human make-up than is thephilanthropic spirit which seeks to elevate mankind, though itspurse may suffer in so doing. England, this great moral nation,"ever ready to take the sword, &c., for the oppressedand for the elevation of mankind in general," reaps morebenefit from the cultivation of opium than all other nations puttogether. In the district of Bengal alone there arenearly 1,000,000 acres devoted exclusively to the cultivation ofthe poppy. Its cultivation is legalized and in every wayencouraged by the British Government, which has an absolutemonopoly of this industry in India. The two principal districtsare presided over by and under the direct control of Englishofficials residing at Patna and Ghazipur. The Bahar agencyembraces an opium field of about 500,000 acres, and that ofBenares is a close second with 478,500 devoted to the cultivationof this much-talked-of drug. There is a fierce dispute going on just now asto the relative merits or demerits of opium. Many eminent men inthe scientific world openly declare that opium is a blessing. TheGovernment experts in the country where it grows go so far as tosay that opium is a blessing instead of being a curse to thenatives. However, the vast majority of mankind will long be ofthe undivided opinion that opium is the most all-crushing cursethat afflicts man. The enthusiasts, or, rather, extremists, ofthe International Anti-Opium Society picture the condition ofIndia under the ban of opium in the most dreadful mannerpossible. According to one of these men, all of the 600,000,000of human beings in Asia are exposed to the evils of the opiumtrade as legalized by the British Government. In order to derivea revenue from it the Indian Government issues licenses for thesale and consumption of this poisonous drug in vile places in alllarge cities, like Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Lucknow, andMaulmain, and in all towns and villages of India and Burmah.These licenses are not issued for the purpose of limiting thesale of something that cannot be prohibited, but they are issuedwith the requirement that the holder of the license must sell astipulated quantity or pay a forfeit! The more sold the more revenue the EnglishCrown will receive. As the opium is bought from the Governmentagents, of course it is known how much the holder of the licensesells. A member of the Parliament who was most bitterly opposedto this traffic has been traveling through India gathering factsand seeing for himself what the condition of the natives is underan unrestricted use of opium. One of the opium dens at Lucknow is graphicallydescribed. There is no secrecy about selling or purchasing thedrug: it is handled as would be sugar, flour, or the othernecessities of life. Entering with the customers, you will findyourself in a spacious but very dirty courtyard, around which areranged fifteen or twenty small rooms. This is the establishmentof the Government collector--the opium farmer. The stench issickening, and the swarm of flies intolerable. Enter one of thesmall rooms. It has no windows and is very dark, but in thecentre is a small charcoal fire, the glow of which lights up thefaces of nine or ten human beings--men and women--lying on thefloor like pigs in a sty. A young girl fans the fire, lights theopium pipe, and holds it to the mouth of the last comer till hishead falls heavily on the body of the inert man or woman whohappens to lie near him. In no groggery, in no lunatic or idiotasylum, will one see such utter, helpless depravity as appears inthe countenances of those in the preliminary stages of opiumdrunkenness. Here one may see some handsome young married women,nineteen or twenty years of age, sprawling over the senselessbodies of men. Here is a much younger girl sitting among a groupof newly arrived customers singing lewd songs as they hand aroundthe pipes. At night these dens are all crowded to excess, and itis estimated that there are some 14,000 people in Lucknow abjectslaves of this hideous vice. There are those, however, who have radicallydifferent opinions on the opium question. The use of the drug inAmerica or Europe under vastly different climatic conditions hasnothing in common with the use of it in its native land. TheBishop of Calcutta, on being asked for an opinion on thissubject, said among other things that, "while admitting thatthere are evils arising from the use of opium, we are of theopinion that they are not sufficiently great to justify us inrestricting the liberty which all men should be permitted toexpress in such matters. Medical testimony [illeg.] to show thatopium used in moderation is in this country harmless and undercertain conditions of life distinctly beneficial." One distinguished native, a high official ofthe Indian Museum, was rather sarcastic when asked his opinion onthis subject. He said that the opium habit was much preferable tothe alcoholism of America and Europe, and recommended theintroduction of the drug as a substitute for alcohol. It is worth a long journey to visit the poppyfields when the season begins. In February, as a rule, the plantis in full flower and has attained a height of three or fourfeet. Each stem has from two to five capsules of the size of aduck's egg. This is the time for the all- important operation ofgathering the juice. Before the capsules are pierced the fallenpetals of the flowers are carefully gathered and sorted,according to condition, in three grades, They are heated over aslow fire and formed into thin cakes, to be used for the coveringof the drug when collected. This done, the piercing of the podsbegins. This requires great skill, as the yield greatly dependson the exactness of this operation. The opium farmer and hisassistants to about armed with a small lancet-like affair, whichis provided with three or four short, sharp prongs. With this ahalf dozen perpendicular cuts are made in each capsule or seedpod. The juice begins to flow at once, but quickly congeals. Theday after all the thickened juice is carefully gathered, beingscraped off with a small iron trowel expressly made for thispurpose. The mass thus gathered is put into an earthenvessel and kept carefully stirred for a month or more, great carebeing taken to have it well aired, but not exposed to the sun.This finished, the opium examiner comes along with thisassistant, an expert tester. These two pass upon the gradeproduced, and when this is done the whole is put into a largebox. Now it is worked very much in the same fashion as baker'sdough, to give it the required consistency. After this operationis finished, the opium is put up into balls for exportation. Thisis a very interesting sight. The natives wade about in the largevats containing the pastelike drug and hand out the stuff tohundreds of ballmakers sitting around the room. Every man has aspherical brass cup, lined with the petals mentioned, before him.Into this is pressed the regulation quantity of opium. From thisbrass cup, when properly pressed, the opium ball is transferredto another man who gives it a coating of clay. This gives thedrug, when ready for shipment, the appearance of a fair-sizedcannon ball. When well prepared in this manner, opium will keepits properties for fifteen years or more. In this condition it is as yet raw opium andunfit for smoking. For some unexplained reason the finalpreparation of the drug to make it marketable for smoking isalmost a monopoly in the hands of the Chinese. These people payan enormous bonus for this privilege, but their profits are inproportion. The Chinese seem to be the most successful in givingthis subtle drug the finishing touches. There are largeestablishments devoted to the preparation of the crude opium.Outside of these factories there are pyramids of opium ballswhich at first glance remind one far more of an artillery parkthan of an opium factory. The balls are broken, and after beingremoved are remoistened with a little water and allowed to standabut fourteen hours. They are then put into pans, two and a halfballs with ten pints of water. After this has boiled for aboutten hours it is reduced to a thin paste of uniform consistency.This is then transferred to a larger vessel and allowed to standfor fifteen hours. Then it is put through a great deal offiltering and various other processes and finally put over abrisk fire. At a certain period it is quickly taken away from thefire and vigorously stirred until cold, the cooling beingaccelerated by coolies with large fans. When quite cold it istaken to a special room and kept there for some months before itis considered in prime condition for smoking. Prepared this way,the opium is of the consistency of a very thick syrup. It is putup in small boxes or jars of graduated weights to suit thecustomers. All such boxes have the name of the maker stamped oneach package. In this condition the drug is exceedingly valuable,and all the employees are searched for hidden opium before theyleave the factory. [NOTE: The article from which this file wasexcerpted may include additional text and accompanyingillustrations.] Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-37IA087-000632-B028-139http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/sanfranopium1892.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095823 text/html 7433HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:58:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:59 GMTContent-length: 7218 San Francisco Opium Joints - 1892 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research The Review of Reviews 5 June (1892), p. 604 SAN FRANCISCO OPIUM JOINTS The CALIFORNIA ILLUSTRATED MAGAZINE for Mayprints a valuable article on "Opium and Its Votaries,"by F. J. Masters, who has studied the subject in San Francisco atfirst hand. An added air of authority is given to the paper bythe illustrations of opium dens and smokers in various phases ofdilapidation. These pictures are copies of flash-lightphotographs taken in the underground joints of San Francisco by aparty which the magazine sent out for that purpose, and who,backed up by a crack detective, accomplished their end in spiteof John Chinaman's vigorous remonstrances against being"took" in such circumstances. While the opium evil is a huge one and dreadfulin its consequences, the immediate physical effects of the drug,Dr. Masters tells us, has been greatly exaggerated. "It is amistake to suppose that when a man begins to smoke the drug hebegins to lose strength and waste away. Opium is no doubtresponsible for the widespread misery and destitution seen inmany of the poorer districts of China; but the concomitant evilshave to be distinguished from the direct effects upon theindividual." There are degrees of opium, and the penuriousChinaman can often only afford to smoke a vile adulteration,which is doubly ruinous. Dr. Masters describes in very interestingdetail the manner of carrying on the San Francisco joints, ofwhich there are a great number: "In China the most unbiasedand trustworthy opinions give thirty per cent of those who areaddicted to the habit and ten per cent of confirmed opium sots. Iam inclined to believe that the same figures will hold good forthe Chinese in San Francisco, though Colonel Bee, the ChineseConsul, places the percentage much lower." Nor is it only the Chinese who use thedemoralizing drug. The vice is spreading among Americans to aserious extent. But they do not go to the joints. "If doneat all," says Dr. Masters, "it must be very secretly.The movements of white people about Chinatown are so carefullywatched, and the different hells under almost half-hourlysurveillance, that it would be impossible for them to frequentthese places without soon attracting the attention of the police.There is plenty of smoking done by American people, but it iscarried on in private houses or in rooms secretly kept by whitepeople." Notwithstanding the constant increase of thetax on opium it continues to come into the country in greater andgreater quantities; and last year, under the $12 per pound tax ofthe McKinley tariff, the importations amounted to 63,189 poundsof prepared opium. Crude opium is not imported in such aproportion as formerly, because the heavy duties make itimpossible to manufacture or "cook" the product in thiscountry and compete with the foreign prepared variety. But thisfact fosters numerous illicit establishments, which now and thencome to light. In San Francisco a city ordinance attempts toregulate the selling of smoking opium by a high licenseproportional to the gross business done, and in 1889 anotherordinance made it "illegal to sell any extract of opiumexcept on a written order of a practicing physician, andrequiring that the amounts sold, with the name, sex, color andresidence of the purchaser, and the name of the prescribingphysician, be entered in a book. The City Council thus passes anordinance practically declaring a business illegal which it hasalready legalized, and from which it is not ashamed to draw arevenue." The right way to deal with the problem, Dr.Masters thinks, is to follow the advice of the better class ofChinese, and remove prepared opium from the tariff list, declareit contraband, and confiscate it wherever found. "For the last thirty years," he says,"from pulpit, platform and press, we have been thunderingdenunciations against Great Britain for importing crude opiuminto China and deriving a revenue therefrom, which some havecalled a revenue of blood, and yet during the last eight years wehave been importing, at this port alone, half a million pounds ofopium, prepared only for smoking purposes, and which have broughtto our national treasury a revenue drawn from human viceamounting to five millions of dollars. Yet this is only for thelast eight years, and this a period, it will be observed, markedby the exaction of heavy import duties, and added to this asteadily decreasing Chinese population." The disgusting andhorrible effects of regular opium smoking are too well knownalready, and that part of the article before us which deals withthem scarcely adds to the reputation of the pernicious drug. Butthe thought of the introduction of the habit among Americans mustbe a potent factor in our "Chinese Question," and it isan added reason why that problem must be largely solved by theAmericans of the Pacific Coast. [NOTE: The article from which this file wasexcerpted may include additional text and accompanyingillustrations.] Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-38IA087-000632-B028-163http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/opium_ind1898.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095839 text/html 10731HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:58:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:59:03 GMTContent-length: 10515 The Opium Industry in America - 1898 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Scientific American 1898, p. 147 THE OPIUM INDUSTRY IN AMERICA BY C.F. HOLDER An attempt to raise the opium poppy has been inprogress for several years in California. The hot days seemedaltogether favorable for the production of the plant and drug,but the accompanying cold nights and the absence of cheap laborproved fatal to the project, and it has been given up as afailure. The value of the drug as a means of money making was, ofcourse, the incentive, and the extraordinary and growing demandfor opium in all countries tells a suggestive story of the habitthat has obtained a firm hold among the people of all races. In the very oldest books of the Arabs the poppyis mentioned, showing that the use of the gum is one of the mostancient of practices. The poppy used for the purpose is Papaversomniferum, a plant discovered, in all probability, by the Arabsand carried from Arabia by man over large portions of the globe.At first opium was used as a medicine. Theophrastus was familiarwith it, and Dioscorides, in 77 A.D., wrote a learned paper onits properties. Up to the twelfth century Asia Minor was thesource of supply, and from then on it was gradually distributedover the globe. The Chinese first obtained the drug in thethirteenth century, it being used purely as medicine; butgradually its insidious effects were realized and it became soimportant a drug in a commercial sense that in 1757 the greatmonopoly was secured in India by the East India Company. Thebusiness rapidly increased from one thousand chests in 1776 tonearly five thousand in 1790. At this time the emperor Kea Kingfully realized the effect the drug was having upon his people,and in 1786 its importation was forbidden. Chinese caught smokingwere flogged and severely punished. This not having the desiredeffect, those who were found using it were transported orbeheaded. Even this did not affect the sale, and in 1825 theimportation of opium into China had increased to 16,877 chests. In 1839 the Chinese government made a desperateeffort to drive off the English opium sellers by ordering off theEnglish opium ships. This not being complied with, nearly thirtythousand chests of opium were destroyed, entailing a loss of tenmillion dollars. This led to the war and final treaty of Nankinin 1842. The Chinese government appreciates thedangerous nature of the drug and its effect upon the nation, andhas never ceased its endeavors to stamp it out; but withoutavail, and today China is probably the largest poppy producingnation. The provinces famous for it are Chekeang, Yunnan, Whilesouthwestern China produces 224,000 peculs, against 100,000peculs from India. Today over half the provinces of China produceopium, and the habit of opium smoking seems confirmed. Turkey isnoted for its production, and the best opium used in the UnitedStates by druggists comes from there. Some idea of the importance of the trade andthe amount used can be obtained from the following: In Macedoniathe crop is estimated at 140,000 pounds per annum. In Bengal,where it is a government monopoly, the output is equal to about90,000 chests, valued at $55,000,000. Persia produces about10,000 chests: Egypt about $10,000 worth annually, and Mozambiquehas 60,000 acres under cultivation. Opium has been raised inVirginia and Tennessee, as well as California, but owing to thelack of cheap labor and the uncertainty of the crops, due tofrosts, the business is unprofitable. Nearly all the opium smoked by the Chinese inthis country comes from the Fook Hing Company, of Hong-Kong,which pays the government $300,000 per year for the privilege ofcarrying on the business. The opium is packed in five-tael tins,which bring in San Francisco $8 each. Some excessive smokers usefrom four to eight dollars' worth a week. It has been estimated that in San Franciscothirty per cent of the Chinese are addicted to smoking and thatten per cent of the entire population of Chinatown are habitual"opium drunkards." The drug is smoked as freely astobacco. First, there are the opium dens. There are scores ofthese dens in the Chinese quarter of every large city. There theChinaman can buy his pipe and smoke in peace. In San Franciscowhite people are forbidden to visit these dens, but they havesuch places of their own, which are well known to the police, andthe vice is ever spreading and increasing. It is somewhat difficult to determine theamount of opium received in San Francisco, but during the pastdecade about 600,000 pounds has been taken into that port. In oneyear the importations for smoking purposes amounted to 100,000pounds. Previous to 1883 the duty was but $6 per pound. At thattime it was increased to $10 per pound on the smoking extract and$1 per pound for crude opium. This had little or no effect uponthe trade, as consumers were obliged to have the drug at anyprice. In 1889 the McKinley bill raised the duty to $12 per poundon opium of all kinds which contained less than nine per cent ofmorphia. Even under this restriction, and despite the fact thatthe exclusion bill was in full force, over 63,000 pounds of opiumwere legitimately introduced in that year, and probably twice asmuch more smuggled in, the government receiving nearly a milliondollars from the duties. At the present time the importation of crudeopium is decreasing. This is due to the law of 1889, which statesthat only native Americans can legally manufacture the extract,and the law also demands a tax of $10 per pound. The duty on thebest Patna opium is $12 per pound, and as it requires two andone-half pounds of this to equal one of the extract, this wouldmake the latter cost about $30 per pound. To this would have tobe added $10 per pound revenue tax, which makes a total of $40per pound on American made opium extract. It need not be saidthat very little is made, as the Chinese preparation can be hadfor $18 per pound. The great demand for the extract has inducedsmuggling, and illicit stills were started everywhere. Opium wasand is still smuggled in at the Canada and Mexican lines. It islanded at the islands off shore and brought in by Chinesefishermen, smuggled in on steamers, dropped into the bay and thelaw evaded in numerous ways familiar to the "heathenChinee." In San Francisco hundreds of "opiumkitchens" were started. These were extremely difficult tofind. Some were established in boats, others in dark cellars,others in the rear of private dwellings. Scores have been closedup by the police, yet some undoubtedly thrive, just as the whisky[sic] distillers escape the law in the wilds of Kentucky andTennessee. The city of San Francisco has aided the government inrestricting the sale. In 1881 the city passed a bill declaring itunlawful for any one to sell opium for smoking purposes without alicense, the amount of the license being gagged by the amount ofbusiness. Thus if a den did a business of $5,000, the owner wascharged $150 for the privilege. In 1889, at the earnest requestof reformers, an ordinance was passed making it illegal to sellopium without a physician's prescription. There is also a lawwhich makes it illegal for any one to keep or even visit an opiumhouse. Three months' imprisonment is the punishment, but this hasno effect. The dens are crowded, as every tourist who goesthrough Chinatown knows, and the only result is that whites arenot found in the Chinese dens; they start dens of their own. The difficulty of conviction lies in theuniversality of the habit, as it pervades the home and business.Wherever the Chinese are found there will be the odor of opium.They smoke it as Americans do tobacco. Nearly every wellregulated Chinese home has its opium smoking outfit, where theguest is invited to smoke. Many of the merchants have such aretreat in the rear of their shops, into which a customer may beasked to smoke as an American merchant is invited to take acigar. The difficulty, then, lies in the impossibility of drawingthe line between professional and private opium dens. [NOTE: The article from which this file wasexcerpted may include additional text and accompanyingillustrations.] Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B22-39IA031-000652-B037-21http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/szasz1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125112 text/html 7317HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:51:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:33 GMTContent-length: 7100 Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? A Historical Perspective From _Our Right To Drugs_ by Thomas Szasz, PraegerPublishers, NY (1992): *The Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906* Before 1907, all drugs could be sold and bought like anyother consumer good. The manufacturer did not even have todisclose the contents of his concoction. Hence the name patentmedicine, the adjective alluding to the fact that the compositionwas a trade secret, protected by a patented name. Although there is no evidence that the American consumer evercomplained about the free market in drugs, there is plenty ofevidence that his self appointed protectors complained bitterlyand loudly. The first landmark event in the federal regulation ofdrugs (and foods) was the Food and Drugs Act of 1906. What didCongress intend to achieve with this seemingly laudablelegislation? To protect people from the sale of"adulterated" or "misbranded" foods or drugs,that is, "assur[ing] the customer of the identity of thearticle purchased, not of its usefulness." I say Congress's aim in enacting this legislation wasseemingly laudable because, while it is desirable that peopleknow what drugs they buy, forcing manufacturers by law to listthe ingredients of their products is an unnecessary infringementon the free market -- the foot in the door ofpaternalistic-statist protectionism. If Great American Drugs,Inc., wants to market a mystery product, there is no reason whythe government should prevent it from doing so. And if I want tobuy such a pig in a poke, why should the government prevent mefrom making that choice? People who want to be informed about thedrugs they buy and use would abstain from purchasing mysteryproducts, and market forces would then create a supply oftruthfully labeled drugs. In short, there would be no need toprohibit the non-disclosure of the contents of medicinal (orother) products. It is enough to prohibit false disclosure and topunish it, as fraud, by both criminal and civil penalities. Asfor nondisclosure, it would be "punished" by theinvisible hand of the market. The truth is that behind Congress'sostensible aim of combating drug misbranding lay its growingantagonism to the habit of pharmacological self-pleasuring,manifested by the act's specifically mandating the listing on thelabel of what were then the main ingredients of Americans'favorite nostrums: alcohol, hypnotics, and sedatives. Therelevant lines of the Food and Drugs Act read as follows: That for purposes of this Act an article shall also be deemedmisbranded: ... if the package fails to bear a statement on thelabel of the quantity or proportion of any alcohol, morphine,opium, cocaine, heroin, alpha or beta eucaine, chloroform,cannabis, chloral hydrate, or acetanilide. It is implicit in this sentence that, back then, Congresstook for granted the legality of a free market in drugs,including cannabis, cocaine, heroin, and morphine. [...] *The Harrison Act (1914) and It's Aftermath* In 1914, Congress enacted another landmark piece of anti-druglegislation: the Harrison Narcotic Act. Originally passed as arecord-keeping law, it quickly became a prohibition statute. Inthe course of the next seven years, by a curious coincidence ofhistory -- if, indeed, it is a coincidence -- in Russia theSoviet Union replaced the czarist empire, while in the UnitedStates the free market in drugs was replaced by federal drugprohibition possessing unchallengeable authority. Excerpts fromtwo key Supreme Court decisions quickly tell the story. In 1915, in a test of the Harrision Act, the Court upheld itbut expressed doubts about its constitutionality: "While theOpium Registration Act of December 17, 1914, may have a moralend, as well as revenue, in view, this court, in view of thegrave doubt as to its constitutionality except as a revenuemeasure, construes it as such." Yet, only six years later the Court considered objection tofederal drug prohibition a taboo. In Whipple v. Martinson thejustices declared, "There can be no question of the authority of the Statein the exercise of its police power to regulate theadministration, sale, prescription, and use of dangerous andhabit-forming drugs.... The right to exercise this power is so manifest in theinterest of public health and welfare, that it is unnecessary toenter upon a discussion of it beyond saying that it is too firmlyestablished to be successfully called in question. In 1914, trading in and using drugs was a right. In 1915,limited federal drug controls were a constitutionallyquestionable tax revenue measure. By 1921, the federal governmenthad gained not only complete control over so-called dangerousdrugs, but also a quasi-papal immunity to legal challenge of itsauthority. Thus has the rejection of one of our most basicconstitutional rights become transformed into reverence for oneof our most baneful therapeutic-religious dogmas. Once ignited,the fire of "progressive" drug protectionism spread andsoon enveloped the whole contry, transforming the Harrison Actinto the legislative embodiment of the "moral principle thattaking narcotics for other than medicinal purposes was harmfuland should be prevented." That threw the monkey wrenchmedicinal purpose into the machinery of the trade in drugs; thisundefined and undefinable concept has haunted us ever since. In1920, drug prohibitionists won another major victory: Americawas, at last, alcohol-free -- if not de facto, then at least dejure. Since 1924, when Congress made it illegal to manufacture,possess, or sell heroin, America has been free from heroin aswell -- if not in practice, then at least in theory. [...] In retelling this tale, it is impossible to overemphasizethat, although initially the drug laws were intended to protectpeople from being "abused" by drugs others wanted tosell them, this aim was soon replaced by that of protecting themfrom "abusing" drugs they wanted to buy. The governmentthus succeeded in depriving us not only of our basic right toingest whatever we choose, but also of our right to grow,manufacture, sell, and buy agricultural products used by mansince antiquity. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-40IA031-000652-B037-43http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/1600BC.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125121 text/html 3184HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:51:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:12 GMTContent-length: 2967 Evidence Found of Ancient Marijuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research EVIDENCE FOUND OF ANCIENT MARIJUANA USE Albany (NY) Times Union, 20 May 1993 (attributed to Newsday) The first physical evidence that marijuana was used as amedicine in the ancient Mideast was reported Wednesday by Israeliscientists who found residue of the drug with the skeleton of agirl who apparently died in childbirth 1,600 years ago. The researchers said the marijuana probably was used by amid-wife trying to speed the birth, as well as ease the pain.Until now, the researchers wrote in a letter to the journalNature, "physical evidence of cannabis (marijuana) use inthe ancient Middle East has not yet been obtained." The seven researchers -- from Hebrew University, the IsraelAntiquities Authority and the National Police Headquartersforensic division -- said references to marijuana as a medicineare seen as far back as 1,600 B.C. in Egyptian, Assyrian, Greekand Roman writings. But physical evidence that the hemp weed,cannabis sativa, was used for that purpose has been missing. The researchers' examination of an undisturbed family tombnear Jerusalem dating to the fourth century AD indicated thegirl, about 14, died because her pelvis was too small to permitnormal birth. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B22-41IA031-000652-B037-69http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/mrsin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125144 text/html 10634HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:51:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:53 GMTContent-length: 10416 From Mr Sin to Mr Big From Mr Sin to Mr Big Auth: Desmond Manderson Published: 1993 Publisher: Oxford University Press Australia ISBN: 0 19 553531 6 Background to the Book. (From back cover) From Mr Sin to Mr Big is a compelling legal and socialhistory of the origins and development of drug laws in Australia.It argues that the selective enactment of 'drug' laws has beendriven by fear, racism, powerful international pressures, and thevested interests of the medical profession, bureaucrats andpoliticians, rather than by genuine concerns about the welfare ofusers. Behind the emotion and contoversy that surround the use ofillegal drugs lie previously unexamined assumptions about how andwhy certain substances - such as opium, herion and cannabis -have been prohibited, while others - such as alcolhol and tobacco- have not. This book challenges these assumptions, while alsoexamining the power and efficacy of law as a means of achievingsocial change. Desmond Manderson traces the legislative developments, fromthe anti-opium laws directed against the Chinese in thenineteenth century, to the complex web of our present drug laws,and illustrates the gradual politicisation of the drugs debate.From Mr Sin to Mr Big argues that Australia's current drug lawsare a product of the past, and it is only by understanding thispast that we can begin a rational debate about reform in thefuture. [note] Desmond Manderson is a lawyer and historian who has writtenextensively on drug history and policy. After studying andteaching at the Australian National University in Canberra forseveral years, he is currently engaged in research at the Centrefor Medicine, Ethics, and Law at McGill University in Montreal, Canada. [accurate at 1993 : PH] [summary of the research programs] As part of his Honours thesis in History, Mandersonresearched for a small publication funded by the Research intoDrug Abuse Program (RIDAP) of the National Campaign Against DrugAbuse (NCADA). Following his Honours thesis, it was suggested that he workon a larger project into the history of drug laws in Australia,again supported by RIDAP, under the Commonwealth (Federal, forour world audience) Department of Community Services and Health. Interesting quotes from the book. (page 7) In nineteenth-century Australia, opium was the preserve ofneither the creative few nor the urban poor. It was freelyavailable and freely used. Furthermore, perhaps partly as aconsequence of the weakness of the medical profession, the linewhich is now seen to divide medical 'use' form non-medical'abuse' was not yet apparent. Many people who consumed opiumundoubtedly did so out of habit. Indeed, temperance activists whowould rather forfiet their lives than drink a nip of whiskey, butwho were addicted to opium, were the butt of many jokes. 'Ibelieve the teetotalers have too little pleasure in this world,whatever they may hope for in the next,' said Godfrey Carter, amember of the Victorian Legislative Assembly well known for hisopposition to the temperance movement, in 1898, "and when Ithink what little joy they have here at present is derived, to agreat extent, from the use of morphine, chlorodyne, painkiller,and a variety of other preparations of opium, why should weprevent them from going to their chemists and getting thesethings?" (page 19) As the "Bulletin", whose masthead proudlyproclaimed 'Australia for the White Man', stated in 1889: "The badness of the Chinaman, socially and morally, isthe outcome of his low wages ... If Chinamen will tomorrow refuseto work for less wages, man for man, than Britons, and willrefuse to work longer hours, the head and front of the objectionsto their presence will disappear." For the "Bulletin", the Chinese were'jaundice-coloured apostles of unlimited competition'. The proponents of a 'White Australia', however, slid withease from arguments of economic protectionism to visceral racism.The Chinese were painted as living squalidly and in filth, theirhabits depraved and their lives degraded. The absence of Chinesewomen was seen as a threat to the honor and chastity of innocentEuropean women and girls (and prostitution certainly flourishedin the Chinatowns of large communities). That the Chinese menworked on Sundays was portrayed as an indication of theinfiltration of paganism and devil-worshipping into god-fearingAustralian society. In the slandering of the Chinese, almostanything went, as this extract from a tract written by someonewho went by the ironic pseudonym 'Humanity' shows: "The Chinese amidst their evil surroundings, and theirfilthy and sinful abodes of sin and swinish devilry [will be]entered into by the servants of the Most High God! May thewayside scattering of the seed of holiness and truth take root inthe hotbed of all unholy and unclean vices! ... It would never bebelieved that our Saxon and Norman girls could have sunk so lowin crime as to consort with such a herd of GorillaDevils..." (page 23-24) Opium was seen as a pollutant, moral as well as physical; itwas tainted by the environment of its consumption and by itsconnections with the Chinese themselves. The potency of theseseparate aesthetic revulsions-against dirtiness, the Chinese, andthe smell of opium-was compounded by their mutual association, ascan be seen from the description of an opium den contained in the'Bulletin's" 1886 feature on 'The Chinese in Australia': "Down from the fan-tan den are stairs leading to lowerand dirtier abodes: rooms darker than and more greasy thananything on the ground floor: rooms where the legions ofaggressive stinks peculiar to Chinamen seems to linger ... Yetthe rooms are not naturally repulsive, nor would they be so whenoccupied by other tenants; but the Chinaman has defiled theirwalls with his filthy touch; he has vitiated what was once areasonably pure atmosphere with his presence, and he has pollutedthe premises with his disgusting habits; and so it is that noughtsave suggestions of evil, incentives of disgust and associationsof vice, now seems to move in the fetid atmosphere ... The veryair of the alley is impregnated with the heavy odour of thedrug." From being seen as a dirty habit in dirty people, opiumsmoking came to be seen as an immoral habit in hated people. Itwas a small step readily taken: from a symbol of depravity, opiumbecame a cause of it; from a sign of evil, it became an activeagent of it. (page 32) Sub-title: 'They all go to the Chinaman': Aboriginal OpiumLaws and the Chinese In fact, the first laws specifically toprohibit opium did not seem to deal with the Chinese use of it atall. The Queensland "Sale and Use of Poison Act 1891"penalised "any person who supplies, or permits to besupplied, any opium to any aboriginal native of Australia orhalf-caste of that race ... except for medicinal purposes..." (page 36) A man named Corbett, 'speaking for all other farmers',complained that 'they could not get the blacks to work when theywanted them, while the Chinese', who farmed half of thesurrounding land, could always get them, a fact which heaccounted for by saying that the Celestial paid their Aboriginalemployees in opium'. The solution seemed simple. As the localcarpenter argued, 'the blacks should be taken from the Chineseand compelled to work for any European who might require theirservices'. Opium was, as ever, a scapegoat. The local Whitefarmers, wanting cheap Black labour, could not understand whythey would rather work for the Chinese. The use of opium wasfastened upon as the only possible explanation for such aperverse choice. The more likely truth was that the Chinese treated theAboriginal with a modicum of respect. Roth reported the localpolice as saying that is the White population ceased starving andmistreating its Black employees, it could get as many workers asit wanted. But even the crudest kind of decency appears to havebeen beyond some of the locals. A man named Putt expressed hisgrievance with incredulity: "I have shot thirteen or fourteen niggers in thisDistrict and this is all the Government has done for me:-I can'tget a _____ nigger when I want one. They all go to theChinaman." (page 204-205) Senator Peter Baume, amongst others, has spoken with more andmore conviction as the years have passed. In one of his lastparliamentary speeches on the subject, before retiring to take upan appointment as Professor of Community Medicine at theUniversity of New South Wales, he said: "Our strategies seekto prevent the production of certain designated illegalsubstances, and fail to do so; they seek to prevent theimportation of substances, and fail to do so; they seek toprevent the distribution of substances, and fail to do so; theyseek to prevent the sale and use of substances, and fail to doso." (page 207) One thing is apparent. 'Drugs' is a subject which peopleapproach with many erroneous preconceptions, and a littleknowledge can change people's opinions profoundly. Both PeterBaume and Peter Cleeland, chairmen of influential parliamentarycommittees on the subject, have stressed to me how much theirthinking began to change when they first started to read and tolisten. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B22-42IA088-000636-B009-9http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/guns1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095937 text/html 23034HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:59:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:36 GMTContent-length: 22816 A Brief History of Federal Firearms Enforcement Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications A BRIEF HISTORY OF FEDERAL FIREARMS ENFORCEMENT Frederick S. Calhoun. Ph.D. Historian Federal Law Enforcement Training Center This is Appendix G from the David Koresh Investigation. It isincluded because it contains interesting information on thebackground of Federal law enforcement. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) is arelatively young law enforcement organization, having beencreated formally in 1972. Yet, measured by the federal lawsrelated to the regulation and taxing of alcohol, tobacco, andfirearms-the laws ATF now enforces-the history of the bureau'sduties and responsibilities stretches across the full twocenturies of American history. As early as 1791, revenue actstaxed both alcohol and tobacco and created the offices of taxinspector, collector, and supervisor. During the next century,the offices changed names as frequently as the tax rates changed,but the federal interest in raising revenues from alcohol andtobacco remained strong. Indeed, the formal organization of anindependent bureau within the Department of Treasury specializingin alcohol, tobacco, and firearms law enforcement belatedlyrecognized the distinct need for such an agency. After the Civil War, revenue agents battled moonshinersthroughout the South in some of the bloodiest opposition ever tofederal law enforcement. Revenue agents and deputy U.S. marshalsby the score were killed as they roamed the hills and hollowssearching out illicit stills. Prohibition changed thegovernment's focus from taxing whiskey to banning it, yet therevenue agent's job remained as dangerous. After experimenting insocial adjustment a dozen years, Prohibition was rescinded.Spawned by the 1933 repeal of Prohibition, the Alcohol Tax Unitwas established as a tax-collecting branch within the InternalRevenue Service (IRS). Continued concern over the violent,organized mobs that plagued the major cities compelled thefederal government to try to curb the gangsters' ability to armthemselves. Rather than ban outright the purchase of machine gunsand sawed-off shotguns-the weapons of choice for themobsters-Congress in 1934 simply imposed a tax those weapons.Paying the tax required registering the weapon. The registrationrequirement was intended to discourage ownership of such weaponswithout outlawing them. No self-respecting gangster would want toregister, much less pay the tax, on his Tommygun. Their evasionof the tax gave the government another legal tool to use inarresting the gangsters and breaking up the mobs. Because it was a tax rather than a prohibition, it fell toTreasury to enforce the law as part of Treasury's role incollecting all funds due the government. Within Treasury, theAlcohol Tax Unit seemed the logical branch to enforce the newlaw. Registering and taxing stills required many of the sameprocedures and investigatory talents that would be needed toregister and tax weapons. In the end, the new assignment provedcomparatively easy. The unit was not overwhelmed withregistrations nor by the 1940s were the investigations intoevasions of the tax very time-consuming. As the gangstersdeclined in number and power, so did their use of machine gunsand sawed-off shotguns. Enforcing the alcohol taxes againoccupied most of the unit's attention. In 1951, the Alcohol Tax Unit began enforcing federal taxes ontobacco, thus prompting a name change in 1952 to the Alcohol andTobacco Tax Division. Once again, the logic seemed to be thatcollecting the tax on tobacco closely resembled the worknecessary to collect the tax on alcohol, machine guns, andsawed-off shotguns. The 1968 passage of the Omnibus Crime Controland Safe Streets Act and the Gun Control Act expanded the IRSunit's jurisdiction to the criminal use of explosives and bombs.The new laws also defined specific federal offenses involvingfirearms, including transportation across state lines and use inorganized crimes. In recognition of this new enforcementresponsibility, the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division changed itsname to the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Division (ATFD). Twoyears later, Congress passed the Explosives Control Act definingcertain bombings and acts of arson as federal crimes. It assignedjurisdiction for enforcing this new law to ATFD. With theseexpanded responsibilities. the Treasury Department on July 1,1972 created the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms underthe general oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Treasuryfor Enforcement, Tariffs and Trade, and Operations. For the pasttwenty-one years, ATF has enforced the collection of federaltaxes on alcohol and tobacco and the federal controls andregulations on firearms, with particular attention to their useby criminals. Although on its face the bureau seems a discordant collectionof separate duties, the techniques for enforcing the taxes andferreting out the illicit products, whether cases of whiskey,cartons of cigarettes, crates of automatic weapons, or containersof bombs, are strikingly similar. Subsequent laws have expanded ATF's jurisdiction. The 1976Arms Export Control Act focused the Bureau's attention oninternational gun smuggling. The 1982 Anti-Arson Act gave ATFauthority to investigate the destruction of property by fire aswell as by explosives. Increased taxes on cigarettes and alcohol,and enhanced regulatory measures such as the 1978 ContrabandCigarette Act, have also enhanced the bureau's responsibility toensure the government receives its lawful taxes. The bureau has been an effective force in law enforcement.Supplies of illicit alcohol and smuggled tobacco have steadilydecreased, and tax revenues have risen. During 1991, for example,ATF collected $7.7 billion in alcohol taxes and $4.8 billion intobacco taxes. ATF agents have also focused on tracking downarmed career criminals and criminal gang members. Investigationsin Florida resulted in the arrest of 45 Warlock motorcycle gangmembers in 1991. Members of the Gullymen Posse, a gang ofJamaican drug dealers known for its propensity to commit murder,were arrested in New York by ATF agents in January 1991.Similarly, an ATF investigation into the activities of the Bornto Kill gang culminated in the arrest of a dozen gang members inAugust 1991. Sixteen members of the San Diego chapter of theHells Angels were convicted in 1992. As a result of these andsimilar investigations, ATF has become the nation's principalrepository for gang-related information and intelligence. The bureau has also earned an excellent reputation for workingwell with federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies. ATFagents also specialize in identifying anonymous bombers by their"signature" habits in making bombs. For example, in1990, the assassin of Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals JudgeRobert Vance was ultimately identified by ATF agents whorecognized the way the bomb was constructed. Similarly, in themidst of the tragedy in Waco, Texas, ATF agents investigating theWorld Trade Center bombing helped to identify the van that wasused to hold the bomb. This early identification led FBI agentsto the rental car company and thereafter to arrests of theterrorists before they could escape the country. The bureau has developed considerable expertise in arsoninvestigations. At the request of the National Fire ProtectionAgency, ATF began developing nationwide standards for fireinvestigators. The State Department's Diplomatic Security Serviceinvited ATF to develop a protocol establishing an InternationalResponse Team of investigators trained to search blast scenesinvolving U.S. property abroad. Despite a rather eclectic arrayof duties, ATF has succeeded in developing considerable expertisein each area of its enforcement responsibilities. The raid by ATF agents on the Branch Davidian compoundresulted from its enforcement of contemporary federal firearmslaws. In a larger sense, however, the raid fit within anhistoric, well-established and well-defended government interestin prohibiting and breaking up all organized groups that soughtto arm or fortify themselves. The 1934 law taxing weapons wasonly the first time the federal government addressed privateownership of weapons; it was not the first federal effort tocontrol firearms. From its earliest formation, the federalgovernment has actively suppressed any effort by disgruntled orrebellious citizens to coalesce into an armed group, howeversmall the group, petty its complaint, or grandiose its ambition.The collection of large arsenals by organized groups lent itself,ultimately, to the violent use of those weapons against thegovernment itself or portions of its citizenry. Indeed, federalagents who tried to disband the groups frequently became thetargets. The discomfort over armed organizations predated theConstitution. The outbreak of what became known as Shays' Rebellion in 1786gave added urgency to the establishment of a strong nationalgovernment. During the rebellion, hundreds of angry Massachusettsfarmers, most veterans of the Revolution and facing foreclosureson their farms, banded together to keep the courts from issuingany executions. Calling themselves Regulators, the farmersquickly organized into a small army. Significantly, their firstforay was to capture the arsenal at Springfield. Although theRegulators failed, the specter survived. Five months, delegatesfrom each of the thirteen states met in Philadelphia to design anew experiment in government. The lesson of Shays' Rebellion was not forgotten, even afterthe new government was formed. In 1792, Congress passed a lawempowering the president to call out the state militias tosuppress insurrections if either an associate justice of theSupreme Court or a local district court judge certified thatopposition to the laws was beyond the powers of the civilauthority to suppress. Ironically, the first occasion to resortto that law grew out of the violent, organized, and armedresistance to the federal government's whiskey tax. Thus, two ofthe duties that ATF would later inherent-enforcing alcohol taxesand controlling firearms-combusted in 1794 into the WhiskeyRebellion, the first violent opposition to the new federalgovernment.[1] Across the next century, succeeding presidents had sporadic,though no less fearsome, occasion to dispatch the Army and thestate militias to suppress various outbreaks of armed oppositionto federal laws, taxes. and interests. In 1799, Fries Rebellionagainst a federal tax on houses forced President John Adams tomuster the militia. Fugitive slave rescues during the 1850sprompted the government to call out the military. Organizedresistance in Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, New York, Ohio, andWisconsin raised a troublesome specter. "The mainopposition," President Millard Fillmore warned Congress inDecember 1851, "is aimed against the Constitutionitself." At the end of the decade, John Brown's ill-fatedraid on Harper's Ferry,. Virginia, sparked the government todecisive action. Brown chose Harper's Ferry because of thefederal arsenal there. His intent was to distribute the weaponsamong Southern slaves and lead them in revolt for their freedom.Federal troops, however, thwarted the plan.[2] After the Civil War, the federal government battledunrepentant Southerners to protect the rights of the freedmen.Nonetheless. federal officials acted only after the innumerableKlan-style attacks were finally perceived as organized."Outrages of various descriptions." Attorney GeneralGeorge Williams advised southern U.S. Attorneys and Marshals in1874. "and in some cases atrocious murders have beencommitted in your district by bodies of armed men. sometimes indisguise and with the view it is believed of overawing andintimidating peaceable and law abiding citizens and deprivingthem of the rights guaranteed to them by the Constitution andlaws of the United States." The attorney general ordered hisattorneys and marshals "to detect, expose. arrest, andpunish the perpetrators of these crimes."[3] Throughout the western territories and along the Mexicanborder, the federal government found occasional need to suppressarmed bands of outlaws, ganged together to steal cattle or robthe mails. General William Tecumseh Sherman. sent to the Arizonaborder in April 1882 to investigate the outlaw troubles there,advised President Chester A. Arthur that "the Civil Officershave not sufficient forces to make arrests, to hold prisoners fortrial or punish when convicted." The President promptlyproclaimed on May 31 that the areas plagued by the outlaws werein a state of rebellion.[4] The federal government looked no more kindly on the laborstrikes that broke out in the closing years of the nineteenthcentury and the opening years of the twentieth. What seemed sodangerous about events such as the 1894 Pullman strike was notjust the disruption of he mails, which was the legal basis onwhich the government relied to break the strike, but the factthat the mails were being violently disrupted by organizedgroups. "We have been brought to the ragged edge ofanarchy," Attorney General Richard Olney franticallyexplained when he ordered that the trains be kept running.Eventually, Eugene Debs and his colleagues in the AmericanRailway Union, which took the lead in the strike, were indictedand convicted. Once again, it was the volatile mixture ofviolence and organization-combinations determined difficult tosuppress-that evoked the full power of the federal government.[5] The passage of the National Firearms Act of 1934, the firstfederal effort to control private ownership of firearms, grew outof this historic fear of armed organizations. The variouscollections of gangsters that proliferated during Prohibitionwere the true targets of the law, which required a tax andregistration on the sale of their weapons of choice-machine gunsand sawed-off shotguns. Subsequent federal firearms laws havebeen of a piece. Oher than the 1968 ban on mail-order sales,which was in direct, though delayed, response to theassassination of President Kennedy, federal gun laws havetypically been concerned with the weapons of considerabledestructive power generally preferred by organized groups-bombs,machine guns, and automatic weapons. In recent times, the federal government has shown itself evenless patient with armed groups than it had historically. Radicalextremists of both the Right and the Left have been pursuedaggressively once they began breaking the law. For instance,after the Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA) launched itsself-styled "people's war" by kidnapping newspaperheiress Patty Hearst and committing a number of daring bankrobberies, the federal government dedicated its full resources totracking the group down. Within approximately three months, FBIagents and Los Angeles police closed in on the group at a housejust outside what was then known as Watts. During an intense gunbattle and fire, every member of the SLA in the house waskilled.[6] Gordon Kahl, who stood at the opposite end of the politicalspectrum from the SLA, met a similar end. Kahl belonged to thePosse Comitatus which refused to recognize the authority of anygovernment above the county level. Accordingly, Kahl consistentlyrefused to pay his federal taxes, even after he served time inprison for not doing so. When U.S. Marshals attempted to arresthim for violating the terms of his probation, Kahl killed two ofthem. For the next five months, Kahl hid among his friends andsympathizers until FBI agents located him in a farmhouse justoutside Smithville, Arkansas. After refusing to surrender, Kahlwas killed, and the farmhouse was burned down.[7] Robert Matthews, the head of a group of right-wing fanaticsknown as the Order, embraced many of Kahl's beliefs. Unlike Kahl,whose resistance was essentially passive until the marshals triedto arrest him, Matthews and the Order launched an aggressiveprivate war against the country. Like the SLA, the Ordercommitted a series of bank and armored car robberies, netting$3.6 million in one heist alone. The Order also assassinated AlanBerg, a radio talk show host in Denver, Colorado. The FBI began an equally aggressive pursuit. After a brief,violent skirmish in Idaho and another in Portland, Oregon, FBIagents finally closed in on Matthews hiding out among threeadjoining houses on Whidbey Island, some fifty miles north ofSeattle. After ngotiating his surrender for two days, Matthewsbegan firing on an FBI Hostage Response Team that attempted toenter the house. Protected by a full suit( of body armor,Matthews ran from the first floor to the second floor firingautomatic weapons. The FBI dropped a magnesium flare from ahelicopter. The flare landed on the roof of the house and burnedthrough it to the room where Matthews had stored his ammunitionand explosives. These ignited, setting off a roaring, explodingfire that consumed Matthews.[8] A year later, in the spring of 1985. ATF collectedconsiderable evidence that an 80-member group styling itself theCovenant of the Sword and the Arm of the Lord (CSA) hadstockpiled a large arsenal at its fortified compound in Arkansas.The group had collected over 150 firearms, (including 35 machineguns), two anti-personnel mines, three anti-aircraft rockets, 50pounds of military plastic explosives, 300 blasting caps, 2,000feet of detonating cord, and around 100 explosive devices. CSAhad also stockpiled food, water, and supplies. TF led the assaulton the CSA compound on April 20, 1985. CSA members retreatedfarther into the compound, barricading themselves behind theirdefenses. The agents set up a siege perimeter and settled in towait. The group used the wait to destroy many of the weapons (andhence evidence) illegally obtained. Negotiators from the FBIarrived and began the tedious, frustrating process of talking thegroup out. Three days later, on April 22, 1985, James D. Ellisonand the 75 members of the CSA surrendered.[9] As both history and recent events clearly show, the UnitedStates has never tolerated armed groups residing within itsborders. The intent of the particular organization, whetherideological or criminal, mattered little. If the group wasbuilding an illegal arsenal, the group was subject to a federalenforcement action. To this day, ATF's enforcement focus retainsthe flavor of that historic concern with armed organizations. Theagency has developed considerable expertise and success ininvestigating the activities of motorcycle, street, and druggangs, all of which share in common a proclivity to amass largearsenals of powerful weapons. The raid on the Branch Davidiancompound occurred in the context of that historical background. [1] Bowen, Miracle at Philadelphia, p. 287; Frederick S.Calhoun, The Lawmen: United Slates Marshals and Their Deputies,1789-1989, (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press,1990), p. 32. [2] Fillmore quoted in W.U. Hensel, The Christiana Rio and theTreason Trials of 1851: An Historical Sketch. (New York: NegroUniversities Press, 1911), pp. 92-3; Calhoun, The Lawmen. pp.82-93. [3] Attorney General George Williams, circular letter to U.S.Attorneys and Marshals, September 3, 1874, Attorney GeneralInstruction Book E, Record Group 60, Records of the Department ofJustice, National Archives. [4] General William Tecumseh Sherman to Attorney GeneralBenjamin Brewster, April 12, 1882, Source-Chronological Files,Record Group 60, National Archives; Calhoun, The Lawmen, p. 196;Larry Ball, United States Marshals of Arizona and New Mexico,1846-1912. (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press,1978), pp. 125-6. [5] Almont Lindsey, The Pullman Strike, (Chicago: Universityof Chicago Press, 1967), p. 245, 274-92; Calhoun, The Lawmen,209, 214. [6] Los Angeles Times, May 18, 1974. [7] James Corcoran, Bitter Harvest Gordon Kahl and the PosseComitatus: Murder in The Heartland. (New York: Viking Press,1990). [8] James Coates, Armed and Dangerous: The Rise of theSurvivalist Right, (New York: Hill and Wang, 1987), pp. 41-76. [9] James Coates, Armed and Dangerous: The Rise of theSurvivalist Right, (New York: Hill and Wang, 1987), pp. 1424. (Scanned in from: *US Government Printing Office:1993-358-365) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B22-43IA031-000652-B037-97http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/ommenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125202 text/html 3264HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:51:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:33 GMTContent-length: 3047 The Opium Monopoly - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE AUTHOR OF " BACKWASH OF WAR...... PEKING DUST,CIVILIZATION," ETC. THE MACMILLAN COMPANY - 1920 " If this was our battle, if these were our ends, Which were our enemies, which were our friends?" Witter Bynner, in The Nation. CONTENTS INTRODUCTION I. GREAT BRITAIN'S OPIUM MONOPOLY II. THE INDIAN OPIUM MONOPOLY III. JAPAN AS AN Opium DISTRIBUTOR IV. SINGAPORE V. THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS OPIUM COMMISSION VI. OPIUM IN SIAM VII. HONG KONG VIII. SARAWAK IX. SHANGHAI X. INDIA XI. TURKEY AND PERSIA XII MAURETIUS XIII. BRITISH NORTH BORNEO XIV. BRITISH GUIANA XV. HISTORY OF THE Opium TRADE IN CHINA.. XVI --CONCLUSION Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B22-44IA087-000627-B012-176http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/fiscal.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050207 text/html 6274HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:02:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:00 GMTContent-length: 6057 A Fiscal Analysis of Marijuana Decriminalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information A Fiscal Analysis of Marijuana Decriminalization Fiscal Analysis of the Effects of MarijuanaDecriminalization on the Criminal Justice System in California Still under Construction. Myapologies, but I thought this was interesting stuff, even beforeall the bugs are worked out. I know, the tables need work, andthere are a few graphs that aren't in there yet. If anyone wantsto help out and format those tables properly and then send me theHTML file as a result, I thank you in advance. E-mail them to: schaffer@smartlink.net Savings in California Marijuana LawEnforcement Costs Attributable to the Moscone Act of 1976-ASummary - by MICHAEL R. ALDRICH, PH.D.* & TOD MIKURIYA,M.D.** PRELIMINARY REPORT: FISCAL COSTS OF CALIFORNIA MARIJUANALAW ENFORCEMENT 1960 - 1984 by Michael R. Aldrich, Ph.D., TodH. Mikuriya, M.D., Gordon S. Brownell, J.D., Copyright 1986,MEDI-COMP PRESS, 1168 Sterling Avenue, Berkeley, California 94708 CONTENTS - PRELIMINARY REPORT SUMMARY REASONS for Escalating Enforcement Costs: California Drug and Marijuana Arrests, 1960--67 FISCAL COSTS of California Marijuana Law Enforcement, 1960-72 (Summary Of Previous Studies Through 1974) LEGISLATIVE CHANGES in California Marijuana Laws, 1970s MARIJUANA ARREST COSTS 1972 - 1984 ADULT FELONY MARIJUANA DISPOSITIONS MARIJUANA PRISON AND PAROLE COSTS GRAPHS DAD67 - California Drug Arrests 1960-67 DRMJ6067 - Drug and Marijuana Arrests 1960-67 %AMJAD67 - Percent Marijuana of Drug Arrests 1960-67 DAD672 - Marijuana and Non-Marijuana Drug Arrests 60-67 MJFM67 - Felony and Misdemeanor Marijuana Arrests 60-67 MJ6067 - Adult and Juvenile Marijuana Arrests 60-67 %AJMJ67 Per-cent Adult-Juvenile of Marijuana Arrests MJPNP67 Possession and Non-Possession MJ Arrests 60-67 %MJPNP67 Percent Possession, Non-Possn MJ Arrests 60-67 DRMJ6072 California Drug and Marijuana Arrests, 1960-72 COST6072 Marijuana Law Enforcement Costs 1960-72 MJFM6084 Felony-Misdemeanor Marijuana Arrests 1960-1984 ARRCOSTS Actual Marijuana Arrest Expenditures 1973-1984 INFARRCO - Inflation-Adjusted MJ Arrest Expends 1973-1984 DISP-2 - Adult Felony Marijuana Dispositions, 1976-1984 PRISPOP - Marijuana Felons in Prison, 1972-1984 PRISPOPI Marijuana Felon, Total Prison Population 72-84 PRISCOST Marijuana Felon Prison Costs, 1977-1984 PROLCOST Marijuana Felon Parole Costs, 1977-1984 APPENDICES RACE67 Drug Arrest Distributions by Race, 1960-67 CALOF Lawrence Calof's Cost Study, 1968 ARRCOST Marijuana Arrest Costs (Post Method), 1972-84 INFLATE Adjusting Arrest Costs for Inflation, 1972-84 TABLES Tables I, 4, 2, 3, 5, 6. (7 & 8 are in Text) DRUGMJ Table of Drug and Marijuana Arrests, 1960-84 MJSPRD Drug and Marijuana Arrest Spreadsheet, 1960-84 With Comparisons 64-74-84, 68-78-84, 60-72-84. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B22-45IA087-000625-B020-216http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hempfaq1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045532 text/html 32116HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:55:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:03 GMTContent-length: 31898 Frequently Asked Questions about Cannabis Hemp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information Frequently Asked Questions about Cannabis Hemp This document contains straight answers to tough questionsabout hemp and marijuana. Every effort has been made to ensuretheir accuracy, and sources, if not provided, are available byrequest. BE WARNED -- this text has changed minds. The author andcontributers do not take responsibility for any change inoutlook, new ideas, or re-evaluation of one's relationship withcurrent political parties which may result from allowing photonsto travel into your eyeballs, even when said photons originatefrom a cathode ray tube, backlit LCD screen, microfiche reader orilluminated sheet of paper on which this document is beingdisplayed. Unless of course you feel like showering us with fanmail and candy-grams. In that case we'll take the blame. Copyright (c) 1994 by Brian S. Julin The following persons have contributed to this document atsome point in it's evolution: Laura Kriho<cohip@darkstar.cygnus.com> (original list of questions), Marc Anderson (fact finding), Paul L. Allen (LaTeX formatting),plus some others who haven't said they want their name put in. This material is maintained and written by Brian S. Julin,with help from several other individuals. It is copyrightedmaterial. The copyright is only there to prevent anyone fromediting or selling this material. Feel free to redistribute thematerial in any form as long as it is unaltered in content, andno credit or money is taken for the contents themselves.Comments, questions, contributions or ideas should be mailed toverdant@twain.ucs.umass.edu or c/o Brian S. Julin at UMACRC,S.A.O. Mailbox #2, Student Union Building, UMASS, 01003 More information on the document is at the end -- wouldn'twant to bore you... So without further ado: ---------------------- C O N T E N T S ---------------------- Part1: What's all this fuss about hemp? 1a) What is hemp? 1b) What is cannabis? 1c) Where did the word `marijuana' come from? 2a) How can hemp be used as a food? 2b) What are the benefits of hemp compared to other foodcrops? 2c) How about soy? Is hemp competitive as a world source of protein? 3a) How can hemp be used for cloth? 3b) Why is it better than cotton? 4a) How can hemp be used to make paper? 4b) Why can't we just keep using trees? 5a) How can hemp be used as a fuel? 5b) Why is it better than petroleum? 6a) How can hemp be used as a medicine? 6b) What's wrong with all the prescription drugs we have? 7) What other uses for hemp are there? Part 2: So why aren't we using hemp, then? 1) How and why was hemp made illegal? 2) OK, so what the heck does all this other stuff have to dowith hemp? 3) Now wait, just hold on. You expect me to believe that theywouldn't have thought to pass a better law, one that bannedmarijuana and allowed commercial hemp, instead of throwing thebaby out with the bath water? 4) Is there a lesson to be learned from all this? Part 3: Does it? Doesn't it? Is it true that? 1) Doesn't marijuana stay in your fat cells and keep you high for months? 2) But ... isn't today's marijuana much more potent than it was in the Sixties? (Or, more often ... Marijuana is 10 times more powerful than it was in the Sixties!) 3a) Doesn't Marijuana cause brain damage? 3b) If it doesn't kill brain cells, how does it get you`high'? 4) Don't people die from smoking pot? 5) I forgot, does marijuana cause short-term memoryimpairment? 6a) Is marijuana going to make my boyfriend go psycho? 6b) Don't users of marijuana withdraw from society? 7) Is it true that marijuana makes you lazy and unmotivated? 8) Isn't marijuana a gateway drug? Doesn't it lead to use of harder drugs? 9a) I don't want children (minors) to be able to smokemarijuana. How can I stop this? 9b) Won't children be able to steal marijuana plants that people are growing? 10a) Hey, don't you know that marijuana drops testosterone levels in teenage boys causing [various physical and developmental problems]? 10b) Doesn't heavy marijuana use lower the sperm count inmales? 10c) I heard marijuana use by teenage girls may impair hormone production, menstrual cycles, and fertility. Is this true? 11) Go away. 12) Isn't smoking marijuana worse for you than smokingcigarettes? 13) Don't children born to pot-smoking mothers suffer from ``Fetal Marijuana Syndrome?'' 14) Doesn't marijuana cause a lot of automobile accidents? 15) Aren't you afraid everyone will get hooked? 16a) Is urine testing for marijuana use as a terms of employment a good idea? I want to make sure my business is run safely. 16b) Isn't all this worth the trouble, though, in order to reduce accident risks and health care costs? 17) Wouldn't it be best to just lock the users all up? 18) I heard that there are over 400 chemicals in marijuana... Wellllll...? 19) Doesn't that stuff mess up your immune system and make it easier for you catch colds? Part 4: Why is it still illegal? 1) Why is it STILL illegal?: 2) What can I do to bring some sense into our marijuana laws? 3a) Where can I get more information? 3b) Umm, I'm computer illiterate, so that just went way over my head. Are there any good books I could go get instead? 4) Do you have any advice for people who want to organize their own group? Part 5: Sources by question number Part 6: About the alt.hemp FAQ. ---------------------- P A R T O N E ---------------------- WHAT'S ALL THIS FUSS ABOUT HEMP? 1a) What is hemp? For our purposes, hemp is the plant called `cannabis sativa.'There are other plants that are called hemp, but cannabis hemp isthe most useful of these plants. In fact, `cannabis sativa' means`useful (sativa) hemp (cannabis)'. `Hemp' is any durable plant that has been used sincepre-history for many purposes. Fiber is the most well knownproduct, and the word `hemp' can mean the rope or twine which ismade from the hemp plant, as well as just the stalk of the plantwhich produced it. 1b) What is cannabis? Cannabis is the most durable of the hemp plants, and itproduces the toughest cloth, called `canvass.' (Canvass waswidely used as sails in the early shipping industry, as it wasthe only cloth which would not rot on contact with sea spray.)The cannabis plant also produces three other very importantproducts which the other hemp plants do not (in usable form, thatis): seed, pulp, and medicine. The pulp is used as fuel, and to make paper. The seed issuitable for both human and animal foods. The oil from the seedcan be used in as a base for paints and varnishes. The medicineis a tincture or admixture of the sticky resin in the blossomsand leaves of the hemp plant, and is used for a variety ofpurposes. 1c) Where did the word `marijuana' come from? The word `marijuana' is a Mexican slang term which becamepopular in the late 1930's in America, during a series of mediaand government programs which we now refer to as the `ReeferMadness Movement.' It refers specifically to the medicine part ofcannabis, which Mexican soldiers used to smoke. Today in the U.S., hemp (meaning the roots, stalk, and stemsof the cannabis plant) is legal to possess. No one can arrest youfor wearing a hemp shirt, or using hemp paper. Marijuana (The flowers, buds, or leaves of the cannabis plant)is not legal to possess, and there are stiff fines and possiblejail terms for having any marijuana in your possession. The seedsare legal to possess and eat, but only if they are sterilized(will not grow to maturity.) Since it is not possible to grow the hemp plant without beingin possession of marijuana, the United States does not produceany industrial hemp products, and must import them or, moreoften, substitute others. (There is a way to grow hemp legally,but it involves filing an application with the Drug EnforcementAdministration and the DEA very rarely ever gives itspermission.) This does not seem to have stopped people fromproducing and using marijuana, though. In many of the UnitedStates, marijuana is the number one cash crop, mostly because itfetches a very high price on the black market. 2a) How can hemp be used as a food? Hemp seed is a highly nutritious source of protein andessential fatty oils. Many populations have grown hemp for itsseed -- most of them eat it as `gruel' which is a lot likeoatmeal. The leaves can be used as roughage, but not withoutslight psycho-active side-effects. Hemp seeds do not contain anymarijuana and they do not get you `high.' Hemp seed protein closely resembles protein as it is found inthe human blood. It is fantastically easy to digest, and manypatients who have trouble digesting food are given hemp seed bytheir doctors. Hemp seed was once called `edestine' and was usedby scientists as the model for vegetable protein. Hemp seed oil provides the human body with essential fattyacids. Hemp seed is the only seed which contains these oils withalmost no saturated fat. As a supplement to the diet, these oilscan reduce the risk of heart disease. It is because of these oilsthat birds will live much longer if they eat hemp seed. With hemp seed, a vegan or vegetarian can survive and eatvirtually no saturated fats. One handful of hemp seed per daywill supply adequate protein and essential oils for an adult. 2b) What are the benefits of hemp compared to other foodcrops? Hemp requires little fertilizer, and grows well almosteverywhere. It also resists pests, so it uses little pesticides.Hemp puts down deep roots, which is good for the soil, and whenthe leaves drop off the hemp plant, minerals and nitrogen arereturned to the soil. Hemp has been grown on the same soil fortwenty years in a row without any noticeable depletion of thesoil. Using less fertilizer and agricultural chemicals is good fortwo reasons. First, it costs less and requires less effort. Second, many agricultural chemicals are dangerous andcontaminate the environment -- the less we have to use, thebetter. 2c) How about soy? Is hemp competitive as a world source of protein? Hemp does not produce quite as much protein as soy, but hempseed protein is of a higher quality than soy. Agriculturalconsiderations may make hemp the food crop of the future. Inaddition to the fact that hemp is an easy crop to grow, it alsoresists UV-B light, which is a kind of sunlight blocked by theozone layer. Soy beans do not take UV-B light very well. If theozone layer were to deplete by 16%, which by some estimates isvery possible, soy production would fall by 25-30%. We may have to grow hemp or starve -- and it won't be thefirst time that this has happened. Hemp has been used to `bailout' many populations in time of famine. Unfortunately, because of various political factors, starvingpeople in today's underdeveloped countries are not takingadvantage of this crop. In some places, this is becausegovernment officials would call it `marijuana' and pull up thecrop. In other countries, it is because the farmers are busygrowing coca and poppies to produce cocaine and heroin for thelocal Drug Lord. This is truly a sad state of affairs. Hopefullysomeday the Peace Corps will be able to teach modern hemp seedfarming techniques and end the world's protein shortage. 3a) How can hemp be used for cloth? The stalk of the hemp plant has two parts, called the bast andthe hurd. The fiber (bast) of the hemp plant can be woven intoalmost any kind of cloth. It is very durable. In fact, the first Levi's blue jeans were made out of hemp forjust this reason. Compared to all the other natural fibersavailable, hemp is more suitable for a large number ofapplications. Here is how hemp is harvested for fiber: A field of closelyspaced hemp is allowed to grow until the leaves fall off. Thehemp is then cut down and it lies in the field for some timewashed by the rain. It is turned over once to expose both sidesof the stalk evenly. During this time, the hurd softens up andmany minerals are returned to the soil. This is called `retting,'and after this step is complete, the stalks are brought to amachine which separates the bast and the hurd. We are lucky tohave machines today -- men used to do this last part by hand withhours of back-breaking labor. 3b) Why is it better than cotton? The cloth that hemp makes may be a little less soft thancotton, (though there are also special kinds of hemp, or ways togrow or treat hemp, that can produce a soft cloth) but it is muchstronger and longer lasting. (It does not stretch out.)Environmentally, hemp is a better crop to grow than cotton,especially the way cotton is grown nowadays. In the UnitedStates, the cotton crop uses half of the total pesticides. (Yes,you heard right, one half of the pesticides used in the entireU.S. are used on cotton.) Cotton is a soil damaging crop and needs a lot of fertilizer. 4a) How can hemp be used to make paper? Both the fiber (bast) and pulp (hurd) of the hemp plant can beused to make paper. Fiber paper was the first kind of paper, andthe first batch was made out of hemp in ancient China. Fiberpaper is thin, tough, brittle, and a bit rough. Pulp paper is notas strong as fiber paper, but it is easier to make, softer,thicker, and preferable for most everyday purposes. The paper weuse most today is a `chemical pulp' paper made from trees. Hemppulp paper can be made without chemicals from the hemp hurd. Mosthemp paper made today uses the entire hemp stalk, bast and hurd.High-strength fiber paper can be made from the hemp baste, alsowithout chemicals. The problem with today's paper is that so many chemicals areused to make it. High strength acids are needed to make quality(smooth, strong, and white) paper out of trees. These acidsproduce chemicals which are very dangerous to the environment.Paper companies do their best to clean these chemicals up (wehope.) Hemp offers us an opportunity to make affordable andenvironmentally safe paper for all of our needs, since it doesnot need much chemical treatment. It is up to consumers, though, to make the right choice --these dangerous chemicals can also be used on hemp to make aslightly more attractive product. Instead of buying the whiter,brighter role of toilet paper, we will need to think about whatwe are doing to the planet. Because of the chemicals in today's paper, it will turn yellowand fall apart as acids eat away at the pulp. This takes severaldecades, but because of this publishers, libraries and archiveshave to order specially processed acid free paper, which is muchmore expensive, in order to keep records. Paper made naturallyfrom hemp is acid free and will last for centuries. 4b) Why can't we just keep using trees? The chemicals used to make wood chemical pulp paper todaycould cause us a lot of trouble tomorrow. Environmentalists havelong been concerned about the effects of dioxin and othercompounds on wildlife and even people. Beyond the chemicalpollution, there are agricultural reasons why we should usecannabis hemp instead. When trees are harvested, minerals aretaken with them. Hemp is much less damaging to the land where itis grown because it leaves these minerals behind. A simpler answer to the above question is: Because we arerunning out! It was once said that a squirrel could climb fromNew England to the banks of the Mississippi River withouttouching the ground once. The European settler's appetite forfirewood and farmland put an end to this. When the first woodpaper became a huge industry, the United States Department ofAgriculture began to worry about the `tree supply.' That is whythey went in search of plant pulp to replace wood. Today some`conservatives' argue that there are more forests now than thereever were. This is neither true, realistic nor conservative:these statistics do not reflect the real world. Once trees havebeen removed from a plot of land, it takes many decades beforebiological diversity and natural cycles return to the forest, andcommercial tree farms simply do not count as forest -- they arefarm land. As just mentioned, many plant fibers were investigatedby the USDA -- some, like kenaf, were even better suited thancannabis hemp for making some qualities of paper, but hemp hadone huge advantage: robust vitality. Hemp generates immenseamounts of plant matter in a three month growing season. When itcame down to producing the deluge of paper used by Americans,only hemp could compete with trees. In fact, according to the1916 calculations of the USDA, one acre of hemp would replace anentire four acres of forest. And, at the same time, this acrewould be producing textiles and rope. Today, only 4% of America's old-growth forest remains standing-- and there is talk about building roads into that for loggingpurposes! Will our policy makers realize in time how easy itwould be to save them? 5a) How can hemp be used as a fuel? The pulp (hurd) of the hemp plant can be burned as is orprocessed into charcoal, methanol, methane, or gasoline. Theprocess for doing this is called destructive distillation, or`pyrolysis.' Fuels made out of plants like this are called`biomass' fuels. This charcoal may be burned in today'scoal-powered electric generators. Methanol makes a good automobile fuel, in fact it is used inprofessional automobile races. It may someday replace gasoline. Hemp may also be used to produce ethanol (grain alcohol.) TheUnited States government has developed a way to make thisautomobile fuel additive from cellulosic biomass. Hemp is anexcellent source of high quality cellulosic biomass. One other way to use hemp as fuel is to use the oil from thehemp seed -- some diesel engines can run on pure pressed hempseed oil. However, the oil is more useful for other purposes,even if we could produce and press enough hemp seed to power manymillions of cars. 5b) Why is it better than petroleum? Biomass fuels are clean and virtually free from metals andsulfur, so they do not cause nearly as much air pollution asfossil fuels. Even more importantly, burning biomass fuels doesnot increase the total amount of carbon dioxide in the Earth'satmosphere. When petroleum products are burned, carbon that hasbeen stored underground for millions of years is added to theair; this may contribute to global warming through the`Greenhouse Effect', (a popular theory which says that certaingases will act like a wool blanket over the entire Earth,preventing heat from escaping into space.) In order to makebiomass fuels, this carbon dioxide has to be taken out of the airto begin with -- when they are burned it is just being put backwhere it started. Another advantage over fossil fuels is that biomass fuels canbe made right here in the United States, instead of buying themfrom other countries. Instead of paying oil drillers,super-tanker captains, and soldiers to get our fuel to us, wecould pay local farmers and delivery drivers instead. Of course,it is possible to chop down trees and use them as biomass. Thiswould not be as beneficial to the environment as using hemp,especially since trees that are cut down for burning are `wholetree harvested.' This means the entire tree is ripped up andburned, not just the wood. Since most of the minerals which trees use are in the leaves,this practice could ruin the soil where the trees are grown. Inseveral places in the United States, power companies are startingto do this -- burning the trees in order to produce electricity,because that is cheaper than using coal. They should be usinghemp, like researchers in Australia started doing a few yearsago. (Besides, hemp provides a higher quality and quantity ofbiomass than trees do.) 6a) How can hemp be used as a medicine? Marijuana has thousands of possible uses in medicine.Marijuana (actually cannabis extract) was available as a medicinelegally in this country until 1937, and was sold as a nerve tonic-- but mankind has been using cannabis medicines much longer thanthat. Marijuana appears in almost every known book of medicinewritten by ancient scholars and wise men. It is usually rankedamong the top medicines, called `panaceas', a word which means`cure-all'. The list of diseases which cannabis can be used for includes:multiple sclerosis, cancer treatment, AIDS (and AIDS treatment),glaucoma, depression, epilepsy, migraine headaches, asthma,pruritis, sclerodoma, severe pain, and dystonia. This list doesnot even consider the other medicines which can be made out ofmarijuana -- these are just some of the illnesses for whichpeople smoke or eat whole marijuana today. There are over 60 chemicals in marijuana which may havemedical uses. It is relatively easy to extract these into food orbeverage, or into some sort of lotion, using butter, fat, oil, oralcohol. One chemical, cannabinol, may be useful to help peoplewho cannot sleep. Another is taken from premature buds and iscalled cannabidiolic acid. It is a powerful disinfectant.Marijuana dissolved in rubbing alcohol helps people with the skindisease herpes control their sores, and a salve like this was oneof the earliest medical uses for cannabis. The leaves were onceused in bandages and a relaxing non-psychoactive herbal tea canbe made from small cannabis stems. The most well known use of marijuana today is to controlnausea and vomiting. One of the most important things whentreating cancer with chemotherapy or when treating AIDS with AZTor Foscavir, being able to eat well, makes the difference betweenlife or death. Patients have found marijuana to be extremelyeffective in fighting nausea; in fact so many patients use it forthis purpose even though it is illegal that they have formed`buyers clubs' to help them find a steady supply. In California,some city governments have decided to look the other way andallow these clubs to operate openly. Marijuana is also useful for fighting two other very seriousand wide-spread disabilities. Glaucoma is the second leadingcause of blindness, caused by uncontrollable eye pressure.Marijuana can control the eye pressure and keep glaucoma fromcausing blindness. Multiple Sclerosis is a disease where thebody's immune system attacks nerve cells. Spasms and many other problems result from this. Marijuana notonly helps stop these spasms, but it may also keep multiplesclerosis from getting worse. 6b) What's wrong with all the prescription drugs we have? They cost money and are hard to make. In many cases, they donot work as well, either. Some prescription drugs which marijuanacan replace have very bad, even downright dangerous,side-effects. Cannabis medicines are cheap, safe, and easy tomake. Many people think that the drug dronabinol should be usedinstead of marijuana. Dronabinol is an exact imitation of one ofthe chemicals found in marijuana, and it may actually work on alot of the above diseases, but there are some big problems withdronabinol, and most patients who have used both dronabinol andmarijuana say that marijuana works better. The first problem with Dronabinol is that it is even harder toget than marijuana. Many doctors do not like to prescribedronabinol, and many drug stores do not want to supply it,because a lot of paperwork has to be filed with the DrugEnforcement Administration. Secondly, dronabinol comes in pillswhich are virtually useless to anyone who is throwing up, and itis hard to take just the right amount of dronabinol since itcannot be smoked. Finally, because dronabinol is only one of themany chemicals in cannabis, it just does not work for somediseases. Many patients do not like the effects of dronabinolbecause it does not contain some of the more calming chemicalswhich are present in marijuana. 7) What other uses for hemp are there? One of the newest uses of hemp is in construction materials.Hemp can be used in the manufacture of `press board' or`composite board.' This involves gluing fibrous hemp stalkstogether under pressure to produce a board which is many timesmore elastic and durable than hardwood. Because hemp produces along, tough fiber it is the perfect source for press-board.Another interesting application of hemp in industry is makingplastic. Many plastics can be made from the high-cellulose hemphurd. Hemp seed oil has a multitude of uses in products such asvarnishes and lubricants. Using hemp to build is by no means a new idea. Frencharcheologists have discovered bridges built with a process thatmineralizes hemp stalks into a long-lasting cement. The process involves no synthetic chemicals and produces amaterial which works as a filler in building construction. CalledIsochanvre, it is gaining popularity in France. Isochanvre can beused as drywall, insulates against heat and noise, and is verylong lasting. `Bio-plastics' are not a new idea, either -- wayback in the 1930's Henry Ford had already made a whole car bodyout of them -- but the processes for making them do need moreresearch and development. Bio-plastics can be made without muchpollution. Unfortunately, companies are not likely to explorebio-plastics if they have to either import the raw materials orbreak the law. (Not to mention compete with the alreadyestablished petrochemical products.) ----------------------- P A R T T W O ----------------------- WELL WHY AREN'T WE USING HEMP, THEN? 1) How and why was hemp made illegal? Tough question! In order to explain why hemp, the most usefulplant known to mankind, became illegal, we have to understand thereasons why marijuana, the drug, became illegal. In fact, ithelps to go way back to the beginning of the century and talkabout two other drugs, opium (the grandfather of heroin) andcocaine. Opium, a very addictive drug (but relatively harmless bytoday's standards) was once widely used by the Chinese. Thereasons for this are a whole other story, but suffice to say thatwhen Chinese started to immigrate to the United States, theybrought opium with them. Chinese workers used opium to induce atrance-like state which helped make boring, repetitive tasks moreinteresting. It also numbs the mind to pain and exhaustion. Byusing opium, the Chinese were able to pull very long hours in thesweat shops of the Industrial Revolution. During this period oftime, there was no such thing as fair wages, and the only way aworker could make a living was to produce as much as humanlypossible. Since they were such good workers, the Chinese held a lot ofjobs in the highly competitive industrial work-place. Even beforethe Great Depression, when millions of jobs disappearedovernight, the White Americans began to resent this, and Chinesebecame hated among the White working class. Even more than today,White Americans had a very big political advantage over theChinese -- they spoke English and had a few relatives in thegovernment, so it was easy for them to come up with a plan toforce Chinese immigrants to leave the country (or at least keepthem from inviting all their relatives to come and live inAmerica.) This plan depended on stirring up racist feelings, andone of the easiest things to focus these feelings on was theforeign and mysterious practice of using opium. We can see this pattern again with cocaine, except withcocaine it was Black Americans who were the target. Cocaineprobably was not especially useful in the work-place, but thestrategy against Chinese immigrants (picking on their drug ofchoice) had been so successful that it was used again. In thecase of Blacks, though, the racist feelings ran deeper, and themain thrust of the propaganda campaign was to control the Blackcommunity and keep Blacks from becoming successful. Articlesappeared in newspapers which blamed cocaine for violent crime byBlacks. Black Americans were painted as savage, uncontrollablebeasts when under the influence of cocaine -- it was said to makea single Black man as strong as four or five police officers. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information WT01-B22-46IA087-000625-B020-275http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mref1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045609 text/html 5222HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:55:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:54 GMTContent-length: 5005 Cannabis 1988 Old Drug, New Dangers, The Potency Debate Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information Cannabis 1988 Old Drug, New Dangers, The Potency Debate Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Vol 20(1), Jan-Mar, 1988 pg47. Mikuriya, Tod H. and Aldrich, Michael., Summary and Conclusions: Observation of the real world of social and marijuana use,where autotitration is the norm, renders the scare tactics of thenew marijuana proponents not only inaccurate butirrelevant (*). There is much published evidence about theavailability of highly potent varieties of cannabis from thenineteenth century through the present day. The effectsattributed to the new marijuana are the same ones debatedfor centuries in many different cultures. The assertion that"all marijuana research to date has been done on 1 or 2percent THC material" (Cohen 1968) ignores several thousandyears of human experience with the drug. The old medical cannabisextracts were stronger than most of the forms now available,though the potency of illicit hash oils by the mid-1970's wasapproaching the level of medicinal preparations available beforetheir removal from the USP. While it may be true that sinsemilla is more widely availablethan 10 or 15 years ago, its potency has not changedsignificantly from the 2.4 to 9.5 percent THC materials availablein 1973-1974 (see Table I), or the five to 14 percent sinsemillaof 1975 (Perry 1977). The range of potencies available then(marijuana at 0.1% to 7.8% THC, averaging 2.0% to 5.0% THC by1975) was approximately the same as that reported now. With sucha range, the evidence simply cannot support the argument by Cohen(1986) that marijuana is "ten or more times more potent thanthe product smoked ten years ago." And to say that marijuanapotency has increased 1,400 percent since any date inhistory is patent nonsense. It is not legitimate to imply that average lowpotencies represent the full range of potencies availablein reality. Neither is it valid to cite the low end of the range thenas a baseline to compare with the high end of the range now. The claimed baseline for THC content in the early 1970's wouldappear to be too low, probably because confiscated, stored policesamples were utilized; and this low baseline makes the claimeddifference in potency appear to be greater than it has been inreality. In sum, the new marijuana is not new and neither is thehyperbole surrounding this issue. The implications of the newdisinformation campaign are serious. Many people, particularlythe experienced users of the 1960's and their children, will onceagain shrug off the warnings of drug experts and not heed morereasonable admonishments about more dangerous drugs. This is notonly abusive to those who look to science, the medicalprofession, and government for intelligent leadership, but willsully the reputations of drug educators who wittingly cry wolf,and will inevitably diminish the credibility of drug abusetreatment professionals who pass on such flawed reports. (* end quote *) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B22-47IA031-000652-B040-80http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/mjfaq1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130200 text/html 39650HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:01:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:14 GMTContent-length: 39432 Answers To Frequently Asked Questions About Marijuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation ANSWERS TO FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT MARIJUANA USE What is DEP? The Drug Education Project (DEP) is an attempt to clear up themisinformation being propagated in the U.S. by organizations andindividuals more interested in creating works of propaganda andfear than objective pieces of education. DEP is founded upon thesame two basic principles Andrew Weil bases his book, FromChocolate to Morphine, upon: (1) "People make decisions onthe basis of information available to them. The more accurate theinformation, the better their decisions will be" [68, p.179]; and (2) "There are no good or bad drugs; there areonly good and bad relationships with drugs" [68, p. 27].This leaflet is the first in a series of sixteen that willattempt to summarize for everyone what science has to say aboutdrug use. The grunt work has been done for you. DEP only requestsof you an open mind and the time required to read these leaflets. What is this leaflet all about? This leaflet is intended for informational purposes only. DEPdoes not encourage or discourage the use of any intoxicant.Although we have tried to include as much information aspossible, this pamphlet may not be comprehensive because of spaceconstraints. To receive all of the DEP leaflets for free, send aself-addressed stamped envelope (preferably business-sized) toDEP, c/o Christopher B. Reeve, Box #2038, 1000 Morewood Ave.,Pittsburgh, PA 15213. To provide DEP with suggestions and/orcomments, write to the above address or email via internetcr39@andrew.cmu.edu. DEP urges you to photocopy, post, anddistribute this paper in an unaltered form as much as possible.Our nation's strength is in knowledge, not fear. DEP is yourobjective source of information. "There is an outright propaganda campaign being presentedthrough the informational media, and there is no challenge beingbrought by those who know the facts and should be insisting onadherence to the truth." - Alexander and Ann Shulgin, PiHKAL: A Chemical Love Story, p.442 Health Risk Myths and Realities MarijuanaOverdose No evidence exists that anyone has ever died of a marijuanaoverdose [61, p. 53 - 54]. Tests performed on mice have shownthat the ratio of cannabinoids (the chemicals in marijuana thatmake you stoned) necessary for overdose to the amount necessaryfor intoxication is 40,000:1 [1]. For comparison's sake, thatratio for alcohol is generally between 4:1 and 10:1 [61, p.227-228]. Alcohol overdoses kill about 5,000 yearly [3] butmarijuana overdoses kill no one as far as anyone can tell. BrainDamage Marijuana is psychoactive because it stimulates certain brainreceptors, but it does not produce toxins that kill them [7](like alcohol), and it does not wear them out as other drugs may[57]. There is no evidence that marijuana use is a cause of braindamage. Studies by Dr. Robert Heath claimed the contrary inexperiments on monkeys [4], but Heath's work has been sharplycriticized by the Institute of Medicine and the National Academyof Sciences on three primary counts: its insufficient sample size (only four monkeys), its failure to control experimental bias, and its misidentification of normal monkey brain structure as "damaged" [5]. A far superior experiment by the National Center forToxicological Research (NCTR) involving 64 rhesus monkeys thatwere exposed to daily or weekly doses of marijuana smoke for ayear found no evidence of structural or neurochemical changes inthe brains of rhesus monkeys [6, 58]. Studies performed on actualhuman populations will confirm these results, even for chronicmarijuana users (up to 18 joints per day) after many years of use[8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In fact, following the publication of two1977 JAMA studies, the American Medical Association (AMA)officially announced its support for the decriminalization ofmarijuana. Contrary to a 1987 television commercial sponsored by thePartnership for a Drug-Free America (PDFA), marijuana does not"flatten" brain waves either. In the commercial, anormal human brain wave was compared to what was supposedly the(much flatter) brain wave of a 14-year-old high on marijuana. Itwas actually the brain wave of a coma patient [2]. PDFA liedabout the data, and had to pull the commercial off of the airwhen researchers complained to the television networks [62, p.74]. In reality, marijuana has the effect of slightly increasingalpha-wave activity. Alpha waves are generally associated withmeditative and relaxed states which are, in turn, oftenassociated with human creativity [13]. Memory Marijuana does impair short-term memory, but only duringintoxication. Although the authoritative studies on marijuana useseem to agree that there is no residual impairment followingintoxication [5, 6, 13], persistent impairment of short-termmemory has been noted in chronic marijuana smokers up to 6 and 12weeks following abstinence [70]. HeartProblems It is accepted in medical circles today that marijuana usecauses no evident long-term cardiovascular problems for normalpersons. However, marijuana-smoking does cause changes in theheart and body's circulation characteristic of stress, which maycomplicate preexisting cardiovascular problems like hypertension,cerebrovascular disease, and coronary atherosclerosis [5, p. 72].Marijuana's effects upon blood pressure are complex andinconsistent [5, p. 66 - 67]. Hormones Chronic marijuana use has not been found to alter testosteroneor other sex hormone levels, despite the conclusions of Dr. R.C.Kolodony's 1974 study. Seven similar studies have been performedsince then, the most recent by a Dr. Robert Block at theUniversity of Iowa [14], and none have reproduced Kolodony'sresults. In contrast, heavy alcohol use is known to lower thesesame testosterone levels [65]. ReproductiveDamage No trustworthy study has ever shown that marijuana use damagesthe reproductive system, or causes chromosome breakage. Dr.Gabriel Nahas reached the opposite conclusion in his experimentsperformed in the early 1980s, but did so in part using the invitro (i.e., in test tubes and petrii dishes) cells of rhesusmonkeys. His rather unjustified claim that these changes wouldalso occur in human bodies in vivo (in the body) was criticizedby his colleagues and, in 1983, he renounced his own results. Studies of actual human populations have failed to demonstratethat marijuana adversely affects the reproductive system [61, 5].Wu et al. found in 1988 a correlation between marijuana use andlow sperm counts in human males. But this is misleading because(1) a decrease in sperm count has not been shown to have anegative effect on fertility, and (2) the sperm count returned tonormal levels after marijuana use had ceased [5]. Claims that marijuana use may impair hormone production,menstrual cycles, or fertility in females are both unproven andunfounded [43]. TheImmune System Studies in which lab rats were injected with extremely largequantities of THC have found that marijuana (in suchunrealistically huge quantities) does have an"immunosuppressive effect" in those lab rats, in thatit temporarily shuts off certain cells in the liver calledlymphocytes and macrophages. These macrophages are useful infighting off bacterial, not viral, infections. But this is onlyfor the duration of intoxication [46]. There also exists someevidence that marijuana metabolites stay in the lungs for up toseven months after smoking has ceased, possibly affecting theimmune system of the lungs (but not by turning the cells off)[47]. This said, doctors and researchers are still not sure thatthe immune system is actually negatively affected in realisticsituations since there are no numbers to support the idea [15].In fact, three studies showed that THC may have actuallystimulated the immune system in the people studied [16, 17, 18]. BirthDefects Unlike alcohol, cocaine, and tobacco, studies show that thereexists no evident link between prenatal use of marijuana andbirth defects [5, p. 99] or fetal alcohol syndrome [72] inhumans. In fact, marijuana use during the third trimester hasbeen found to have a positive impact on birthweight [73]. It isknown that Delta-9-THC does enter the placenta [45], so mothersare advised against consuming large quantities. Cancer Smoking marijuana has the potential to cause both bronchitisand cancer of the lungs, throat, and neck, but this is generallyno different than inhaling any other burnt carbon-containingmatter since they all increase the number of lesions (andtherefore possible infections) in your airways. There are acouple of studies that claim on the basis of carcinogens thatsmoking marijuana is worse for your body than smoking a cigarette[44], but these are rather simplified. There are actually somevery convincing reasons to believe that smoking cigarettes isrelatively more dangerous to the body than smoking marijuana onmore than one count: (1) It is accepted by a growing number ofscientists today that all American cigarettes contain significantlevels of polonium-210 [22], the same sort of radiation given offby the plutonium of atom bombs (ionizing alpha radiation). Itjust so happens that the tobacco plant's roots and leaves areespecially good at absorbing radioactive elements fromuranium-containing phosphate fertilizers that are required byU.S. law, and from naturally occurring radiation in the soil,air, and water [48]. It is the opinion of C. Everette Koop thatthis radioactivity, not tar, accounts for at least 90% of allsmoking-related lung cancer [29]. Other estimates that have beenmade are, about 50% according to Dr. Joseph R. DiFranza of theUniv. of Mass. Medical Center [48] and according to Dr. EdwardMartell, a radiochemist with the National Center for AtmosphericResearch, 95% [35]. Dr. R.T. Ravenholt, former director of WorldHealth Surveys at the Centers for Disease Control, agrees withthe risk, asserting that "Americans are exposed to far moreradiation from tobacco smoke than from any other source"[49]. Supporting the radioactivity notion is the finding that (a)Relatively high levels of polonium-210 have been found in bothcigarette smoke [59] and the lungs of both smokers and nonsmokersalike [60]; (b) Smokers of low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes die oflung cancer just as much as smokers of other cigarettes [39]; andalso, (c) Even the most potent carcinogen that has been found incigarettes, benzopyrene, is only present in quantities sufficientto account for about 1% of the lung cancer cases that occur fromsmoking[49]. Whydon't you know any of this? Because the tobacco industry is suppressing the information.(2) Tobacco smoke is theorized to work as a kind of"magnet" for airborne radioactive particles such asradon, causing them to deposit in your lungs instead of on walls,rugs, or draperies [48]. (3) Tobacco, unlike marijuana, containsnicotine, which may harden arteries and cause many of the casesof heart disease associated with tobacco use. It also breaks downinto cancer-promoting chemicals called N Nitrosamines whenburned, and perhaps even when it is inside the body [37]. (4) THCis a bronchial dilator, which means it works like a cough drop byopening up your lungs and therefore aiding in the clearance ofsmoke and dirt. Nicotine has the exact opposite effect. (5)Unlike the chemicals in marijuana, nicotine has a paralyzingeffect on the tiny hairs along the body's air passages. Thesehairs normally work to keep foreign matter out of the lungs. Thismeans that carcinogenic tar from cigarette smoke is relativelymuch harder to purge from your lungs than is that from marijuana.And finally, (6) Marijuana users smoke significantly less thancigarette smokers do because of both marijuana's psychoactiveproperties (this is called "auto-titration") andnicotine's high potential for physical addiction [21]. It isimportant to note that the NCTR study found no signs of lungcancer in its autopsied rhesus monkeys who had smoked marijuanafor one year [6]. Smoking cigarettes and smoking marijuana negatively affectdifferent areas of the body, and therefore cause differentproblems. But everything considered, marijuana-only smokers whoaverage 3 - 4 joints per day show similar symptoms to cigarettesmokers who polish off 20 in a day [74]. Although one well-donestudy tells us that frequent marijuana smokers have a 19% greaterrisk of respiratory diseases than people who smoke nothing at all[66], it seems that neck and throat cancers are much more likelyto result than lung cancer or emphysema. This is because, unliketobacco, marijuana does not penetrate deeply into the lung. Inorder to minimize the risk of acquiring neck or throat cancerfrom marijuana smoke, it is best to (1) avoid as much as possiblecigarette-smoking and heavy drinking while smoking marijuana, and(2) eat plenty of vegetables (such as carrots, broccoli, squash,and sprouts) or vitamin supplements of beta carotene, vitamins A,C and E, and selenium [65]. These are believed to impede cancer'sprogress. In addition, there are actually things that can be done toreduce and even entirely eliminate the bodily harm that maypotentially result from smoking marijuana. This is possiblebecause all of the principle psychoactive ingredients ofmarijuana (THC and the cannabinoids) are neither mutagenic(gene-mutating) nor carcinogenic (cancer-causing) [65]. Legalizing marijuana would make (better) water bongs andmarijuana foods, drinks, and pills both less expensive and moreaccessible. Smoking marijuana through a water-filled bong willcool the smoke and there is reason to believe that it will filtersome of the carcinogens [69, 36]. Eating or drinking marijuanaeffectively eliminates all negative effects. In addition, it isconceivable that an aerosol contraption or vaporizer, commonlycalled a tilt pipe, could easily be constructed that wouldsurpass joints in efficiency, match them in onset and control ofeffects, and yet would be effectively harmless to the body. FatCells One of the more ridiculous myths being circulated is thatmarijuana stays in your fat cells and can keep you high formonths. Even though they may have similar names, the psychoactiveTHC (Delta-9-THC) is different from the metabolites (forinstance, 11-OH-THC and 11-nor) that your body breaks it downinto in that the latter will not get you stoned. It is themetabolites that stay in your fatty cells and show up on drugtests. Your body is depleted of Delta-9-THC only hours afteringestion [40, 41]. Other MJ Myths and Realities AmotivationalSyndrome Amotivational syndrome is defined as a condition in which aperson loses ambition or motivation to complete tasks that hewould normally like to have completed. Claims made in the 60'sthat marijuana use resulted in amotivational syndrome werepredominantly founded on stereotypes. But more recently, thecarefully-designed NCTR study has actually confirmed thesesuspicions under certain conditions. It found that marijuana usemay consistently produce something akin to amotivational syndromein adolescent monkeys. It did not however prove that marijuanamakes adolescents apathetic or depressed. A full recovery tonormal motivation levels was typically observed to occur betweentwo to three months following cessation of exposure. For unknownreasons, one monkey was observed to never fully recover.Surprisingly, the willingness to work appeared to be equallyaffected in both the daily and weekend rhesus smokers in thestudy [6]. Other studies have failed to prove amotivationalsyndrome in adults [42], so there is much reason to believe thatthis effect only occurs during adolescent use. MarijuanaPotency Marijuana is not significantly more potent today than it hasbeen in the past [23]. It is generally agreed that this myth wasthe result of bad data. The researchers making the claims used astheir baseline the THC content of marijuana seized by police inthe early 1970's, which had deteriorated since then because ofpoor storage conditions [23]. In reality, it seems that domesticmarijuana's average potency probably doubled in the 70's with theadvent of sinsemilla, but has remained more or less constantsince then [65]. Scare tactics claiming that marijuana potencyhas increased are rather irrelevant anyways since marijuana userstypically stop smoking when the desired effect is achieved (onceagain, "auto-titration"). Contrary to one of DARE'sallegations [28], it is generally agreed that marijuana does notcreate a tolerance, withdrawal symptoms, or physical dependencein the user. Lester Grinspoon adds, "there are many whoassert that there is nevertheless drug dependence because of[marijuana's] capacity to generate psychic dependency. However itis not at all clear that this type of dependency is essentiallyany different from that which a man may develop with respect tohis trousers, his automobile, or his wife" [61, p. 234]. Driving Driving in any inebriated state is adding complication to whatalready amounts to a constant life-threatening situation. Thatsaid, the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration(NHTSA) summarized all of its studies by saying that there was"no indication that marijuana by itself was a cause of fatalaccidents," and that alcohol was by far the "dominantproblem" in drug-related accidents [32]. The VictorianInstitute of Forensic Pathology and Monash University'sDepartment of Forensic Medicine in Melbourne, Australia havefound that drivers who use cannabis are actually less likely tocause fatal accidents than drug-free drivers, and are no morelikely than other drivers to be killed or seriously injured inroad accidents [33]. One experiment tested marijuana-intoxicateddrivers on both a closed course and on a crowded city street. Itfound that the elements of driving most affected wereconcentration and judgment [52]. An experiment involving adriving simulator that tested actual driving ability according tohow many mistakes are incurred by sober, drunk, and high subjectsfound that marijuana, unlike alcohol, does not significantlyaffect driving ability. It was found that these results hold truefor even higher doses (within reason) and inexperienced marijuanausers. In fact, the only significant difference reported by thestoned subjects was an altered perception of time, whicheffectively made them drive relatively slower [50]. A similarstudy found that marijuana additionally impairs the driver'sability to attend to peripheral stimuli [71]. One theoryattempting to explain these surprising findings states thatmarijuana users, in instances requiring seriousness, are in factable to willingly "bring themselves down," such thatthey are no longer high [51]. Studies that in the past have shownthat marjuana-intoxicated drivers cause significantly moreaccidents than sober drivers are typically unreliable on one ormore of the following counts: (1) They use drug tests todetermine whether or not a person is high, and drug tests in useonly indicate use over the past 30 days; (2) Some studies havenot corrected for alcohol use, or do not provide a control group;and (3) In many studies there were relatively more stoned driverskilled, but it was not their fault. And when the police"culpability scores" were tallied and factored in,marijuana was generally not to blame for the accidents. It mustbe emphasized however that one study shows that daily marijuanasmokers tend to have a 30% higher risk of injuries than non-users[66]. In fact, accidents resulting from intoxication are thoughtto be "the number one hazard of marijuana use" [67]. TheGateway Effect Marijuana use has not been found to act as a gateway drug tothe use of harder drugs. Studies show that when the Dutchpartially legalized marijuana in the 70's, heroin and cocaine usesubstantially declined, despite a slight increase in marijuanause [24]. If the stepping stone theory were true, use should havegone up rather than down. In reality, it appears that marijuanause tends to substitute for the use of relatively more dangeroushard drugs like cocaine and heroin, rather than lead to theiruse. Thus, oftentimes strict marijuana laws themselves are themost significant factor involved in moving on to harder drugslike cocaine. Such is the case in Nevada and Arizona, the statestoughest on marijuana use [65]. A recent study by ColumbiaUniversity's Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse attempts toshow, like many past studies have, that marijuana users are morelikely to use heroin or cocaine. But what the study actually doesshow is that a large number of heroin or cocaine users have usedmarijuana, not the reverse. What is not mentioned is that just asmany or even more had probably also drank alcohol, smokedcigarettes, had sex, or eaten sandwiches prior to their hard druguse. In fact, a National High School survey tells us that in1990, 40.7% of all high school students had tried marijuana orhashish at least once, whereas only 9.4% and 1.3% had ever usedcocaine and heroin, respectively [25]. Thus, at maximum, only 23%of marijuana users go on to use cocaine, and only 3% go on to useheroin. Thus, the stepping stone theory fails on even empiricalgrounds. Marijuanaand Crime DARE literature would have you believe that there exists astrong correlation between marijuana use and juvenile and youngadult crime [28]. And a recent study attempts to present a linkbetween marijuana use and violence by stating that 2/3 of allstudents who admit to taking a gun to school at least once hadsmoked marijuana. In fact, DEA head Thomas Constantine recentlystated in a Washington Times interview that "Many timespeople talk about the nonviolent drug offender. That is a rarespecies. There is not some sterile drug type not involved inviolence who is contributing some good to the community; that isridiculous. They are contributing nothing but evil." Butthese allegations are unsupported by research because testresults show that changes in personality resulting from marijuanause, even though they are not relatively significant, includeamong other things a lessening of aggressive trends [34]. Andlarge population studies such as the La Guardia report [10] havefound that, if anything, marijuana use inhibits antisocialactivity such as violence [20]. The drug-inspired violence myth,including a comprehensive history of its conception, is discussedat great length in Lester Grinspoon's book, where it is shown tobe based largely on a distorted Persian story that is hundreds ofyears old [61]. The problem inherent in drawing conclusions basedon correlations such as the 2/3 statistic above is that causalitycannot be inferred from correlation. In other words, there is noway of determining whether marijuana use contributed in some wayto the existence of certain traits of marijuana users, i.e.bringing a gun to school, or, as seems entirely more likely,people with such traits are drawn to marijuana use. One studyfound that chronic marijuana users had significantly higher WAISIQ scores (113.08) than both moderate users (102.15) and nonusers(103.26) [30]. It is simply impossible to make sense of suchstatistics as presented. References [1] Mikuriya, T.H. "Historical Aspects of Cannabis Sativain Western Medicine," New Physician, 1969, p. 905. [2] Cotts, Cynthia, "Hard Sell in the Drug War." TheNation. March 9, 1992. p 300 - 302. [3] Nadelmann, Ethan A. "Drug Prohibition in the UnitedStates: Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives," Science, Vol245: 943, 1 September 1989. [4] Heath, R.G., A.T. Fitzjarrell, C.J. Fontana, and R.E.Garey. "Cannabis sativa: Effects on brain function andultrastructure in Rhesus monkeys," Biological Psychiatry.15:657-690, 1980. [5] Marijuana and Health, Institute of Medicine, NationalAcademy of Sciences, 1982. [6] Slikker, William Jr. et al. "Behavioral,Neurochemical, and Neurohistological Effects of Chronic MarijuanaSmoke Exposure in the Nonhuman Primate" in "MarijuanaCannabinoids Neurobiology and Neurophysiology,'' Laura Murphy,Andrzej Bartke ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1992. [7] Matsuda, L.A., S.J. Lolait, M.J. Brownstein, A.C. Young,and T.I. Bonner. "Structure of a Cannabinoid Receptor,"Nature, 346 (issue 6824): 561-564. August, 1990. [8] Co, B.T., D.W. Goodwin, M. Gado, M. Mikhael, and S.Y.Hill. "Absence of cerebral atrophy in chronic cannabisusers," Journal of the American Medical Association, 237:1229-1230, 1977. [9] Kuehnle, J., J.H. Mendelson, K.R. Davis, and P.F.J. New."Computed topographic examination of heavy marijuanasmokers," Journal of the American Medical Association, 237:1231-1232, 1977. [10] Lancaster, Cattell. Mayor's Committee on Marijuana. TheMarijuana Problem in the City of New York. 1944. [11] Freedman and Rockmore, "Marihuana: A Factor inPersonality Evaluation," 7: 765-781, 1946. [12] Siler et al., "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"The Military Surgeon, 73: 269-280, 1933. [13] R. L. Dornbush, M.D., M. Fink, M.D., and A. M. Freedman,M.D. "Marijuana, Memory, and Perception," presented atthe 124th annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association,May 3-7, 1971. [14] Block, Robert, M.D. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 28:121-8, 1991. [15] Hollister, Leo E. "Marijuana and Immunity",Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 24 (issue 2):159-164, April, June,1992. pub. Haight-Ashbury Publications in association with theHaight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic, San Francisco, CA. [16] Kaklamani, et al. "Hashish smoking and T-lymphocytes," 1978. [17] Kalofoutis et al. "The significance of lymphocytelipid changes after smoking hashish," 1978. [18] Wallace, J.M., D.P. Tashkin, J.S. Oishi, R.G. Barbers."Peripheral Blood Lymphocyte Subpopulations and MitogenResponsiveness in Tobacco and Marijuana Smokers," Journal ofPsychoactive Drugs, 1988. [20] Kaplan, John. Marijuana, The New Prohibition, New York,World Publishing Co., 1969. [21] Health Consequences of Smoking: Nicotine Addiction,Surgeon General's Report, 1988. [22] Winters, T.H., and J.R. Franza. "Radioactivity inCigarette Smoke." New England Journal of Medicine, 1982: 306(6): 364-365. [23] Mikuriya, Tod H., M.D., and Michael R. Aldrich, Ph.D."Cannabis 1988, Old Drug New Dangers, The PotencyQuestion" , Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. Vol. 20, Issue 1:47-55. pub. Haight-Ashbury Publications in association with theHaight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic San Francisco, Calif.: JanuaryMarch, 1988. [24] Dennis, Richard J. "The Economics of LegalizingDrugs," The Atlantic Monthly, Vol. 266, No. 5, Nov 1990, p.130. [25] Data supplied by the U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration. Revised January, 1991. For moreinformation contact the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol andDrug Info., P.O. Box 2345, Rockville, Maryland 20847 / (800)729-6686. [28] the name of the DARE pamphlet is "Facts AboutMarijuana; Marijuana: Drug of Deception" [29] Nationally-televised speech in 1990 [30] Singer, Jerome L. "Ongoing Thought: The NormativeBaseline for Alternate States of Consciousness," AlternateStates of Consciousness. [32] The NHTSA report, "The Incidence and Role of Drugsin Fatally Injured Drivers," by K.W. Terhune, et al. of theCalspan Corp. Accident Research Group in Buffalo, NY (Report #DOT-HS-808-065) is available from the National TechnicalInformation Service, Springfield VA 22161. [33] Bruer, Mark. Age, March 23, 1994, p. 3 [Melbourne,Australia; this report is also published in the university's Business Victoria]. [34] Halpern. "Emotional Reactions and GeneralPersonality Structure," The Marihuana Problem, pp. 130 -131. [35] Martell, Edward. Proceedings of the National Academy ofScience, Biophysics, and Biological Science, March 1983. [36] Hoffmann, Dietrich, Gunter Rathkamp, and Ernest L.Wynder. "Comparison of the Yields of Several SelectedComponents in the Smoke From Different Tobacco Products,"Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 31, No. 3, 1963,p. 627-635 [37] Hofmann, D., J.D. Adams, K.D. Brunnemann, and D.D. Hecht."Formation, occurrence and carcinogenesity of N-nitrosaminesin tobacco products," Am. Chem. Soc. Symp. Ser.,174:247-273, 1981. [39] Hammond, E.C., L. Garfinkel, H. Seidman, and E.A. Lew."Some Recent findings concerning cigarette smoking,"In: Origins of Human Cancer. New York: Cold Spring HarborLaboratory, 1977. p. 101-112. [40] Starks, Michael, "Marijuana Chemistry Genetics,Processing, and Potency'," Ronin Inc., 1990. [41] Murphy, Laura, and Andrzej Bartke. "MarijuanaCannabinoid Neurobiology and Neurophysiology," CRC PressBoca Raton, FL, 1992. [42] Mendelson, Dr. Jack H., "Behavioral and BiologicalConcomitants of Chronic Marijuana Use," 1974. [43] "Marihuana A Signal of Misunderstanding," U.S.Government Printing Office Washington, 1972. [44] Wu, Tzu Chin, Donald P. Tashkin, Behnam Djahed, and JedE. Rose. "Pulmonary Hazards of Smoking Marijuana as Comparedwith Tobacco," New England Journal of Medicine, 318 (issue6): 347-351, 1988. [45] Slikker, William Jr, H.C. Cunny, J.R. Bailey, and M.G.Paule. "Placental Transfer and Fetal Disposition ofDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) During Late Pregnancy in theRhesus Monkey," pp. 97-102. [46] Lyman, W.D., J.R. Sonett, C.F. Brosnan, R. Elkin, andM.B. Bornstein. "Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol A NovelTreatment for Experimental Autoimmune Encephalitis" by inJournal of Neuroimmunology, 23: 73-81. 1989. [47] Cabral, Guy A., Amy L. Stinnet, John Bailey, Syed F. Ali,Merle G. Paul, Andrew C. Scallet, and William Slikker, Jr."Chronic Marijuana Smoke Alters Alveolar MacrophageMorphology and Protein Expression," 1991. [48] Ponte, Lowell. "Radioactivity: The New-Found Dangerin Cigarettes," Reader's Digest, March 1986, pp. 123-127. [49] Litwak, Mark. "Would You Still Rather Fight ThanSwitch?" Whole Life Times, Mid-April/May, 1985, p. 11. [50] Crancer, A., et al. "Comparison of the Effects ofMarihuana and Alcohol on Simulated Driving Performance,"Science, 164:851-854, 1969. [51] Caldwell, D.F., et al. "Auditory and VisualThreshold Effects of Marihuana in Man," Perceptive and MotorSkills, 29:758-759, 1969. [52] Klonoff, H. (1974). "Effects of marihuana on drivingin a restricted area and on city streets: Driving performance andphysiological changes." In L. L. Miller (Ed.), Marijuana,Effects on human behavior (pp. 359-397). New York: AcademicPress. [57] Westlake, Tracy M., Allyn C. Howlett, Syed F. Ali, MerleG. Paule, Andrew C. Scallet, William Slikker, Jr. "ChronicExposure to Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol Fails to IrreversiblyAlter Brain Cannabinoid Receptors," Brain Research, 544:145-149, 1991. [58] Ali, Syed F., Glenn D. Newport, Andrew C. Scallet, MerleG. Paule, John R. Bailey, William Slikker, Jr. "ChronicMarijuana Smoke Exposure in the Rhesus Monkey IV NeurochemicalEffects and Comparison to Acute and Chronic Exposure toDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in Rats" Pharmacology,Biochemistry & Behavior, 40: 677-682. 1991. [59] Radford EP Jr, and V.R. Hunt. "Polonium-210: avolatile radioelement in cigarettes." Science. 1964;143:247-9. [60] Little JB, E.P. Radford Jr, H.L. McCombs, V.R. Hunt."Distribution of polonium-210 in pulmonary tissues ofcigarette smokers." New England Journal of Medicine. 1965,273:1343-51. [66] Polen, Michael. "Health Care Use by FrequentMarijuana Smokers Who Do Not Smoke Tobacco," West J Med1993: 158. [67] Gieringer, Dale. "Marijuana, Driving and AccidentSafety," Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Jan-Mar, 1988. [68] Weil, Andrew, and Winifred Rosen, From Chocolate toMorphine: Everything You Need to Know About Mind-Altering Drugs.Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1993. [69] Cozzi, Nicholas. "Effects of Water Filtration onMarijuana Smoke: A Literature Review." MAPS Newsletter IV #2(Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, 1993).Reprints available from California NORML. [70] "Cannabis and Memory Loss," (editorial) BritishJournal of Addiction, 86:249-252 (1991). [71] Muskowitz, H., Hulbert, S., & McGlothlin, W.H.(1976). "Marihuana: Effects on simulated drivingperformance." Accident Analysis and Prevention, 8(1), p. 45- 50. [72] Astley, Susan, Dr. "Analysis of Facial Shape inChildren Gestationally Exposed to Marijuana, Alcohol, and/orCocaine," Pediatrics, 89 #1: 67 - 77 (June 1992). [73] Day, Nancy, et. al. "Prenatal Marijuana Use andNeonatal Outcome," Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 13:329-334 (1992). [74] Tashkin, Donald, et. al. "Effects of Habitual Use ofMarijuana and/or Cocaine on the Lung," in C. Nora Chiang andRichard L. Hawks, ed., Research findings on Smoking of AbusedSubstances, NIDA Research Monograph 99 (US Dept of Health andHuman Services, 1990). Suggested Reading [61] Grinspoon, Lester. Marihuana Reconsidered. Cambridge:Harvard University Press, 1971. [62] Herer, Jack. The Emperor Wears No Clothes. Van Nuys, CA:Hemp Publishing, 1990. [63] Hendin, Herbert. Living High: Daily Marijuana Use AmongAdults. New York: Human Sciences Press, 1987. [64] Himmelstein, Jerome L. The Strange Career of Marihuana:Politics and Ideology of Drug Control in America. Westport,Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1983. [65] Dale Gieringer, Ph.D from California's NORML."Health Tips for Marijuana Smokers," Feb. 1994 edition.To receive this very comprehensive 32-page compilation ofreports, send a $5 donation to California NORML, 2215-R MarketSt. #278, San Francisco, CA 94114 or call (415) 563-5858 and askfor the paper by name. The packet includes detailed instructionson how to construct a vaporizer. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation WT01-B22-48IA031-000652-B040-53http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/mjgate.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130143 text/html 8477HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:01:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:03 GMTContent-length: 8260 The Myth of Marijuana's Gateway Effect Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation The Myth of Marijuana's Gateway Effect by John P. Morgan, M.D. and Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. The Partnership for a Drug-Free America, in cooperation withthe National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the White HouseOffice of Drug Control Policy, recently announced a new anti-drugcampaign that specifically targets marijuana. Instead offeaturing horror tales of marijuana-induced insanity, violenceand birth detects, this campaign is built upon the premise thatreducing marijuana use is a practical strategy for reducing theuse of more dangerous drugs. The primary basis for this "gateway hypothesis" is arecent report by the center on Addiction and Substance Abuse(CASA), claiming that marijuana users are 85 times more likelythan non-marijuana users to try cocaine. This figure, using datafrom NIDA's 1991 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, isclose to being meaningless. It was calculated by dividing theproportion of marijuana users who have ever used cocaine (17%) bythe proportion of cocaine users who have never used marijuana(.2%). The high risk-factor obtained is a product not of the factthat so many marijuana users use cocaine but that so many cocaineusers used marijuana previously. It is hardly a revelation that people who use one of the leastpopular drugs are likely to use the more popular ones -- not onlymarijuana, but also alcohol and tobacco cigarettes. The obviousstatistic not publicized by CASA is that most marijuana users --83 percent -- never use cocaine. Indeed, for the nearly 70million Americans who have tried marijuana, it is clearly a"terminus" rather than a "gateway" drug. During the last few years, after a decade of decline, therehas been a slight increase in marijuana use, particularly amongyouth. In 1994, 38 percent of high school seniors reported havingever tried the drug, compared to about 35 percent in 1993 and 33percent in 1992. This increase does not constitute a crisis. Noone knows whether marijuana use-rates will continue to rise. Buteven if they do, it will not necessarily lead to increased use ofcocaine. Since the 1970s, when NIDA first began gathering data, ratesof marijuana and cocaine use have displayed divergent patterns.Marijuana prevalence increased throughout the 1970s, peaking in1979, when about 60 percent of high school seniors reportedhaving used it at least once. During the 1980s, cocaine useincreased while marijuana use was declining. Since 1991, whendata for the CASA analysis were gathered, marijuana use-rateshave increased while cocaine use-rates have remained fairlysteady. The over-changing nature of the statistical relationshipbetween use-rate for marijuana and cocaine indicates the absenceof a causal link between the use of these two drugs. Therefore,even if the proposed Partnership campaign were to be effective inreducing marijuana use it would not guarantee a proportionalreduction in the number of people who use cocaine. To the extentanti-drug campaigns are effective, they seem to be most effectivein deterring those people who would have been fairly low-levelusers. There is no reason to believe that anti-marijuana messagesof any sort would deter many of those marijuana users --currently 17 percent of the total -- who also develop an interestin cocaine. Nor is there reason to believe that the Partnership's newcampaign will actually reduce the overall number of marijuanausers. For a decade now, American youth have been subjected to anunparalleled assault of anti-drug messages. They have seenhundreds of Partnership advertisements, on television and in theprint media. They have been urged to "just say no" byrock stars, sports heroes, presidents and first-ladies. They havebeen exposed to anti-drug educational programs in the schools.Yet this is the same generation of young people that recentlybegan increasing its use of marijuana. It seems unlikely thatmany of them will be deterred by hyperbolic claims of marijuana'sgateway effect, particularly when it contradicts the reality ofdrug use they see around them. If the creators of American drug policy are truly interestedin reducing the risk of marijuana users using other drugs, theyshould take a closer look at Holland, where drug policy since the1970s has been guided by a commitment to diminishing anypotential gateway effect. Wanting to keep young marijuana usersaway from cocaine and other "hard drugs," the Dutchdecided to separate the retail markets by allowing anyone 18years of age or older to purchase marijuana openly ingovernment-controlled "coffee shops" which strictlyprohibit the use and sale of other drugs. Despite easy availability, marijuana prevalence among 12 to 18year olds in Holland is only 13.6 percent -- well below the 38percent use-rate for American high school seniors. More Dutchteenagers use marijuana now than in the past; indeed, lifetimeprevalence increased nearly three-fold between 1984 and 1992,from 4.8 to 13.6 percent. However, Dutch officials consider theirpolicy a success because the increase in marijuana use has notbeen accompanied by an increase in the use of other drugs. Forthe last decade, the rate of cocaine use among Dutch youth hasremained stable, with about .3 percent of 12-18 year oldsreporting having used it in the past month. In the United States, the claim that marijuana acts as agateway to the use of other drugs serves mainly as a rhetoricaltool for frightening Americans into believing that winning thewar against heroin and cocaine requires waging & battleagainst the casual use of marijuana. Not only is the claimintellectually indefensible, but the battle is wasteful ofresources and fated to failure. Received by Iowa NORML from the National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), 1001 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.,Suite 1010, Washington, D.C. 20036, on Tuesday, February 7, 1995.For more information, call Allen St. Pierre, NORML AssistantDirector, at (202) 483-5500, or e-mail NORML at natlnorml@aol.com Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation WT01-B22-49IA086-000615-B002-151http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/marij.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024751 text/html 29145HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:46:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:29 GMTContent-length: 28927 Pharmacology of Marijuana: Just Another Sedative Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy Pharmacology of Marijuana: Just Another Sedative FREDERICK H. MEYERS, M.D. Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, SanFrancisco, Ca. The Drug Policy Foundation's CME Seminar Washington, D.C. November 13, 1992 Introduction Change in the laws regulating the use of marijuana-certainly aprimary goal of this group-has been effectively blocked by thesuccessful efforts of the enforcement industry to convince thecitizenry that the use of marijuana presents a terrible danger tothe user and to society. Efforts to rebut the claims of theprohibitionists have been enfeebled by the confusion that some ofus feel. Proselytizers insist not on an absence of significantdanger but on some positive, mystic and generally ineffablebenefit from the use of marijuana. Observers with less subjectiveoverlay also appear at a loss in formulating the pharmacology ofCannabis, and both groups thus play into the hand of those whoencoded marijuana as an hallucinogen or who plead for delayingaction pending further research. Even the technical or scientific reviews of the drug bynominal experts are little more than catalogues suffused withuncertainty, timidity and even error generated by the confusionimposed by law and street lore. The defects in the literature arenot due to a lack of data from research but to a failure orinability to apply any unifying or organizing concept to thefragments of information. It will not be difficult to supply youwith that key: cannabis in its several forms and essences is justanother member of a large group of drugs, call them for themoment general anesthetic-sedative-hypnotics, all of whichare used (and abused) at some time and in some form by sometechnique by some individuals to relieve anxiety, to providesurcease from memory and to cross the borders of consciousnessand sometimes even of life. Members of this group of drugs, exemplified by alcohol,Valium, and the other agents in the incomplete list in Figure 1,all have characteristic, identifying effects in common, Theydiffer one from another largely in their duration of action andspeed of onset of effect. Some of them, especially alcohol, haveimportant organic toxicity not seen in others. It will also benecessary to discuss the differences in the slope of thedose-response relationship, that is the margin of safety.However, the most important preliminary matter is the effect ofthe route of administration on the manifest actions of a drug. SMOKE AS A DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEM Many people, including those smokers of marijuana who use wineor beer to reinforce and prolong the effect, will resist theconclusion, established below, that marijuana and alcohol arecomparable pharmacologically. Their intuitive feeling that therecan be no relation between the instantaneous, transient euphoriafrom a joint and the more slowly developing and persistent goodfeeling after a drink is understandable but mistaken. Before thesimilarity of effects can be convincingly presented, however, theinfluence of the route of administration on the temporalrelations of the response must be clarified by as brief aspossible a discussion of the distribution and transformation ofTHC, the active ingredient of cannabis, after it enters the bodywhether swallowed or inhaled. The differences claimed to exist between marijuana and alcohol(or Valium or whatever) virtually disappear if the reference drugis given by mouth and is compared with THC also orallyadministered. (Careful metabolic studies of crude drug usingspecial chocolate cookies are also available.) THC, it turns out,is actually much more slowly metabolized and excreted thanalcohol (Figure 3 and 6). THC, like phenobarbital orchlordiazepoxide (Librium), is best given as a cumulative drug,and the amount in the body at equilibration is enormous comparedto the amount provided by one cigarette. Why then does thecigarette provide such an immediate and intense effect? First of all, realize that the particles in the smoke thatcarry the drug are colloidal in size; so small that they arecarried by the inspired air to the depths of the lung where thedrug can be instantaneously absorbed across the alveolarmembrane. The efficiency of this process is already apparent toyou by analogy with the two common methods of cocaine delivery.Smoked free-based (crack) is absorbed with a velocity resultingin levels comparable to those seen after intravenous injection.In contrast, the particles of inhaled cocaine salt are relativelylarge, are deposited on the mucosa of the upper respiratory tractand absorption is not much more rapid than after swallowing thedrug. The THC in smoke is rapidly transferred to the essentiallyaqueous blood and carried immediately to the left heart and intothe arteries, that is, the liver is not included in this firstpass and the absorbed THC is diluted by a relatively small volumeof arterial blood that is pumped to the tissues. Differencevascular beds have differing blood flows. The cerebral blood flowis relatively large and the brain is a fatty organ in thechemical sense. THC is partitioned from the blood into the lipidsof the brain tissue. Immediately after inhalation, then, a highconcentration of THC is built up in the brain and the subjectiveexperience begins. The THC remaining in the blood undergoes two additionalprocesses. Some reaches the liver and a fraction is alteredchemically- some accumulates in other fatty organs especiallyordinary adipose tissue. This accumulation slowly removes THCfrom the blood. :The accumulation is slow because blood flow tothese depots is low. However, as THC is removed from the blood,the concentration in the blood falls below that in the brain andthe THC passes from the brain back into the blood and thebehavioral effects at least rapidly diminish (Figure 5). It is this rapid accumulation of agent in the brain and itssubsequent redistribution rather than its chemical transformationthat explains the brevity and intensity of the effect. The effectbegins before the subject exhales. As an illustration of theefficiency of smoking consider that in one trial 10-15 mg ofSmoked THC resulted in a peak concentration about eight times asgreat as followed 20 mg by mouth (Figure 3). There are some correlates of THC metabolism unrelated to ourimmediate discussion but worth mentioning in passing. THCaccumulates in fat to a concentration at least twenty fold thatin any other organ, and the slow release of the stored substanceexplains the persistent appearance of THC and its metabolite inthe urine for weeks. (Figures 4 and 6.) Unlike the blood levelsof the very water soluble alcohol, THC levels do not correlatewith its biological effects. Now that we are able to adjust to the different routes of theadministration, we can examine the effects of marijuana andcompare them with the effects of other sedatives. THE SEDATIVE -HYPNOTIC -GENERAL ANESTHETIC GROUP Physicians are conditioned at great expense by the drugindustry to think of available therapeutic agents as thousands ofindividual cases properly identified only by a euphonioustradename. However, the vast amount of information available canbe managed only if drugs are put into classes or categories. Thesame properties that make for a useful therapeutic agent may makefor an enticing social drug, and it is not surprising then thatmost social drugs fit into known categories. There are a very large number of drugs that have similareffects and are fairly included in the categorysedative-hypnotics or anxiolytics although sedative-hypnotic-generalanesthetics would be more accurate. Gases and volatileliquids are often selected for use as general anesthetics becausetheir use can be by inhalation and allow minute to minute controlof dosage and rapid recovery. Solids are more easily dispensedand administered as tablets or capsules and are chosen for use intreating anxiety or inducing sleep, but pharmacologicaly all aresimilar. Figure 1 lists some common drugs from this group. This exercise will now examine the pharmacology of marijuanaand establish that all of the properties of sedatives arepresent. Remember, please, throughout the discussion that effectsare described to establish the drug type. It does not follow thatthese effects are induced regularly or even at all as marijuanais used in our culture, but they are established by quantitativeexperiments in the animal laboratory and by controlled clinicalobservations. EFFECTS OF GRADED DOSE: The simplest way to characterize marijuana and equate theeffects with those of all other sedatives and general anestheticsis to study the effects of doses of increasing size. It isimportant to study the drug over a range of doses because theeffects manifested at a single dose level may mislead. Alcoholeven today is regarded as a stimulant by many people because theysee only the excitement and acting out; with larger or smallerdoses it becomes apparent that alcohol is a depressant and thatthe excitement is actually disinhibition. The sequence of changesare those still conveniently described as the stages ofanesthesia. These changes reflect a diffuse depression of theneuraxis that begins at the highest level of the cortex and atthe caudal segments of the cord. The depression descends andascends until it meets at the medulla and even vegetativefunction stops. Stage 1 was long called the stage of analgesia. With smalldoses, the subject experiences relief of anxiety or euphoria (apositively good feeling) and possibly a slight drowsiness.Psychomotor performance, concentration, short term memory areprogressively impaired in the laboratory situation. Actualperformance (driving on a test course) deteriorates if the doseis adequate and the timing consonant. The flight simulator is auseful tool and shows the same prolonged (24 hours) decrement inperformance seen after the acute effects of the barbiturates.Judgment is obviously difficult to test, but most observersconsider as evidence the inappropriate high humor and confidencein a fumbling, discursive subject. The one generalization that ishard for users of marijuana or of other sedatives to accept is thatusers, whose function and ability to judge their function areboth impaired, are the persons least competent to analyze theeffects of a downer. Stage 2 begins with the appearance of excitement. The degreeof excitement depends not alone on the dose but also on theexpectation of the subject and the setting, that is, on theamount and nature of stimuli from the surroundings. In a calmenvironment the subject may show only an intensification of thechanges listed for Stage 1. In another situation, the patient mayrespond to stimuli in an uncontrolled, exaggerated way. Thisexcitement must not be confused with stimulation. These"drunks" from whatever drug are disinhibited, that is,the highest cortical centers are depressed and lower centers andmore primitive behaviors are released from the inhibition fromabove that ordinarily controls them. The stage ends with the lossof consciousness. The flat dose response curve mentioned above now becomes ofcrucial importance in understanding why marijuana does not cause,as a direct drug effect, the same disinhibited criminal andantisocial activity as does alcohol. Marijuana is in part benignin this regard because the brief effect after smoking is achievedwith a small absolute dose. However, even if the subject isswallowing hashish or THC (which is now marketed), the dangerous(to self or others) dose is many multiples of the threshold doseand, so far as I can establish, never achieved in humans in thiscountry. (There never was any basis for the picture of thehash-crazed assassin. The assassins were a sect in Islam activeat the time of the crusades who were given to religio-politicalmurder but not under the influence of hashish. Theirassassinations were carefully planned and sometimes requiredyears of preparation while, for example, the designatedhit man learned a language and a trade and insinuated himselfinto the court of the victim.) Stage 3, the stage of surgical anesthesia, is easily reachedwith cannabis in the animal laboratory, but the dose-effect curveis so flat that is, so much is required, that it is doubtful ifanyone in the U.S. has ever been anesthetized by cannabis resinin any form. For our purpose, classification, however, the animaldata are enough. Stage 4, the stage of medullary paralysis, is demonstrablewith difficulty even in animals. The oral LD50 of THC in rats isin excess of 600 mg/kg. ANOTHER ACUTE EFFECT Dreamy, Fantasizing State The law thinks that marijuana is an hallucinogen, and anynumber of groups and individuals refer to marijuana as a"mild hallucinogen" and thus terribly confuse theperception of the drug by many citizens. What marijuana does is induce the same state that has beendescribed in association with every sedative-hypnotic that hashad wide use. The effect is most easily and commonly defined inhospitals or offices where sedated patients can make known todoctors and nurses their difficulty in distinguishing dreams andwaking fantasies from reality. The patient may complain bitterlyof the frightening nightmares or may accuse a staff member ofmolesting her. At home the nightmares may be equally frightening,but the erotic dreams cannot be projected onto an attendant andthe dreamy float may actually be pleasurable. The absence of anexact statement about the associated level of consciousness isnot accidental. The process appears separate from the developingconcept of lucid dreaming. This effect is also totally different than that of the nominalhallucinogens such as acid. I say "nominal" because thedreams of the sedated patient are by definition closer tohallucinations than the distortions of perception experiencedwith what, it appears, we will soon have to call rave drugs.These magic agents all have the properties of the sympathomimeticstimulants to a greater (MDA, MDMA) or lesser (LSD) degree. Where the misconceived labeling of marijuana as hallucinatoryoriginated, and how it is maintained is a question of interest tothose of us who hope to see the laws regulating marijuanarationalized. The 1937 enactment, designed to criminalizemarijuana use and thus provide continued federal employment forredundant prohibition agents and a fiefdom for Anslinger,classified marijuana as a narcotic. This irrationality, togetherwith the ruling by the Supreme Court that applying for a taxstamp to handle an illegal substance constituted selfincrimination and would not fly, forced some revisions at justabout the time the early proselytizers for LSD were active. Whenthe hallucinogens were added to the index, marijuana wastransferred to that category. The enforcement industry is, ofcourse, still happy to have it separated from anything familiar.Unfortunately several groups of professionals and marijuanaadvocates are as responsible for maintaining the fallacy as thosefrom the criminal justice system. EFFECTS DURING CONTINUOUS USE Tolerance and Withdrawal The tolerance and withdrawal expected of a sedative doesdevelop with the use of cannabis in concentrated forms. Tolerancestrictly defined has been demonstrated only with the use ofconcentrated forms of cannabis or of THC and an analogue.However, a learning process that is fairly called behavioraltolerance explains some otherwise puzzling observations that aremade on people who smoke grass. Behavioral Tolerance - The manifest expression ofsedative effect depends not alone on the pharmacological effectin the strict sense but also on the expectation of the user andon his reaction to the physiological and behavioral changesperceived. Taken at bedtime, a downer will shorten sleep latency;the same dose at five in the afternoon in a situation thatprovides stimulation and the need to continue to function maylead to excitement. An inexperienced user, notably a first timeuser or someone unexpectedly experiencing a larger than usualdose or someone using in an anxiety laden situation, may beseized by panic. We have no time for case histories, but thehypomania and paranoia that accompanies the disinhibition andanxiety can be alarming to all. If the episode is followed byfeelings of guilt or fear of consequences, the anxiety or paniccan be prolonged or recurrent. Possibly these incidents and thewithdrawal state to be described were the origin of the nowdiscredited claim of a marijuana psychosis. The experienced drinker or marijuana user will not show theseexaggerated reactions, indeed, he will be able to hide some minoreffects consistently. The effects on psychomotor function andcognition will not, however, be lessened, that is the toleranceis more apparent than real. Metabolic Tolerance.- Behavioral tolerance is usuallycontrasted with "real" or metabolic tolerance. However,it seems to me that, in this day of disproportionate interest inbiotransformation and P450, "real" tolerance should bedivided into the metabolic and physiologic. As we shall see, some kind of tolerance to marijuana clearlymust develop since its correlate, withdrawal, is easilydemonstrable. Tolerance, however, is quantitatively minor, and itis not necessary to use larger and larger doses to maintain thesame effect, nor do fixed doses lose their effect with continuedadministration. The point at this moment is that enzyme inductioncannot be important in this situation since frequent users ofmarijuana achieve higher plasma levels after a test dose andexcrete the dose over a longer period than do infrequent users(Figure 6). Physiologic Tolerance - Small but statisticallysignificant degrees of tolerance to the effects on cardiovascular function, amount of REM sleep,psychomotor performance, intraocular pressure, subjectivejudgment of intensity of effect and others developed rapidlywhen, to cite one specific paper, 210 mg per day of THC or theequivalent in the form of crude extract was given for 11-21 days. During the above period of drug administration, physicaldependence developed, for, to anticipate the next paragraph, theabrupt replacement of the drug with a placebo led to signs ofhyperexcitability or stimulation, that is, to withdrawal. Theconstant presence in the body of a depressant had led to theactivation of antagonizing, stimulant or excitatory physiologicsystems. Withdrawal - The signs of withdrawal or physicaldependence appear when the stimulant or excitatory adaptationspersist beyond the e effect of the depressant. In the abovetrial, weight loss, irritability and an increase in time spent inREM sleep were prominent and persisted for 96 hours. Anotherapparently well executed trial gave large doses of a syntheticanalogue of THC for a month. The withdrawal state described upondiscontinuing the drug was more in the expected pattern in thatit developed on the third day and was characterized byrestlessness and disturbed sleep although one subject did develophypomania. Under the same experimental conditions, subjects wereallowed free access to the drug as cigarettes; the averagepatient smoked seventeen cigarettes per day, but no withdrawalstate could be demonstrated. Insofar as our needs for classifying cannabis are concerned,there remains the question of whether withdrawal from strongcannabis could be as intense as the delirium tremens of alcoholwithdrawal and explain some of the "psychotic" episodesalleged to occur. Controlled trials, of course, are not going tobecome available. The clinical reports, notably those fromBritish physicians serving colonial troops, seem convincing tome. Potential for Abuse There is no drug of this category that has not been misusedeither episodically or compulsively. Relief of anxiety is aseductive pharmacological reward, and countless patients andnon-patients are unable to resist using a little more than isprescribed, a little oftener than is necessary. If one looksoutside of our culture to the Muslim world, it appears that acompulsive pattern of use is possible, but in this country themode is the "responsible use" that the consensusapplauds in the case of alcohol. The responsible use of the lessdangerous cannabis is not countenanced because some agency orforcehas convinced our legislators. that marijuana is somehowdifferent from all of its congeners. Other Effects There are a few other minor drug effects common to cannabisand all other sedatives. In the animal laboratory thetetrahydrocannabinols are anticonvulsant and comparable toPhenobarbital. Presumably THC could be used in the human as anantiepileptic, but also presumably the rapid down and up ofsmoked marijuana could destabilize a seizure prone patient. As is necessary to validate our thesis, marijuana depressespolysynaptic spinal cord reflexes. In the laboratory this effectcan be demonstrated independent of the behavioral sedation, butclinically the voluntary muscle relaxant effect of the sedativescannot be shown to be useful beyond or independent of theanxiolytic effect. A discussion of the therapeutic applications of marijuana orof THC, which is available on prescription, would contribute toour argument to the extent that the drug can be shown to act as asedative or anxiety relieving agent. The use of synhexyl as anantidepressant is often mention. Review of the paper by Stockingsusually cited in this regard will establish that he actually usedthe drug for the relief of anxiety. He clearly characterizes hisambulant patients as neurotic and describes the development afterthe administration of the analogue of THC of mild intoxication,euphoria, and dreamy apathy. Given a patient whose vision andocular structure has been destroyed by glaucoma no one wouldwithhold whatever subjective relief a joint would provide, but itwould be misleading to say that marijuana is acting on theglaucomatous process. Whether marijuana has important therapeuticapplications is an emotional issue that can be settled only bycontrolled clinical trials of each proposed application as isrequired for any other new drug or new application. In any case,the questions associated with the use of marijuana as a socialdrug are unrelated. MECHANISM OF ACTION The mechanism of action of this large group of drugs is, ashas been mentioned, a diffuse depression of the entire centralnervous system. However, one action is more specific and isuseful in developing our analogy. The ability of a sedative oranesthetic to cause loss of consciousness is due to thesensitivity of the reticular activating system to theirdepressant effects. When electrodes are implanted into thereticular formation and several functionally related areas in thebrain,, the effect of synhexyl cannot be distinguished from thatof thiopental (Pentothal), that is, the barbiturate and thecannabinoid have a similar mechanism of action. (Synhexyl is aclose analogue of THC that was available in pure form before THC.Careful, controlled double blind studies have shown that humansubjects are unable to distinguish between the two.) In summary then marijuana is a drug which is pharmacologiclysimilar to all other sedatives. There are differences between thevarious sedatives, but these are largely matters of onset andduration of action. The exception is alcohol which must beingested in grams rather than milligrams and which provides emptycalories that replace food that contains protein and vitamins.and in some people the thiamin deficiency can lead to atrophy ofthe brain. Alcohol also has direct toxic effects on the liver,upper GI and respiratory tracts and brain As a direct effect ofits persistent action and the ease with which a grosslydisinhibiting action can be reached, it is responsible formassive social and criminal problems. Having provided you with an outline or framework upon whichyou can hang your further studies and experience with marijuana,I have reached the boundary of my province as a Pharmacologist.In considering the social problems presented by our societalreaction to the use of marijuana, I am a citizen with one vote.However, I believe that the objective pharmacology that I havepresented suggests a well advised direction for change. People who prefer marijuana to alcohol as a social drug canfairly point out that the disinhibitory effect is brief, adangerously intense effect difficult to achieve and the organictoxicity infinitely less than is the case with alcohol. From whatI regard as an objective pharmacologic point of view, I do notsee how we can with any hope of useful outcome acknowledge thatprohibition failed in the case of alcohol and at the same timeapply the discredited remedy to marijuana. It would also beuseful to eliminate the market that bleeds dollars into othereconomies, and undeniably the criminal justice system wouldbecome more useful if relieved of the burden posed by the hugenumber of people who do not feel guilty. Yet I do not wish to encourage the use of marijuana; wecertainly must not reduce regulation to the point that anothercigarette or liquor industry develops. My suggestion is tolegalize cultivation for personal use. References For Figures 1. Huestis, et. al., Characterization of the absorption phaseof marijuana smoking Clin Pharmacol Therap 1992;52:31 2. Kreuz and Axelrod, Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol:Localization in body fat Science 1973;179:391 3. Ohlsson et. al. Plasma delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinolconcentrations and clinical effects after oral and intravenousadministration and smoking Clin Pharmacol Therap 1980; 28:409 4. Peat, Jones, et. al., The disposition ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol... in frequent and infrequent marijuana users J Pharmacol Exp Therap 1987(Preprint) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B22-50IA086-000615-B002-171http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/slikker.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024806 text/html 5623HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:47:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:40:58 GMTContent-length: 5406 The Marijuana Amotivational Syndrome Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation The Marijuana Amotivational Syndrome A Review of The Research of William Slikker, Jr. "Amotivational Syndrome" was hypothesized as a longterm effect of marijuana use -- that is, it was supposed to be aneffect which occured among people who smoke pot, not when theywere stoned, but all the time. Various studies were done to tryto find "Amotivational Syndrome." Some claimed success.Others claimed that there was no such animal. But there was onetrend: the more successful studies were done on young persons. Slikker, Paule, et al. set out to find the effects ofmarijuana smoke on the brain, memory, learning, and motivation.They found that monkees who smoked even just on weekends did notdevelop normal clinical motivation -- defined by the willingnessto work for reward. The studies concentrated on adolescensespecifically for this reason, and were extremely well controlled. Does this mean that kids who smoke marijuana are lazy?Probably not. Rhesus monkees are very similar to humans, though,and it is very likely, especially given the previous empiricalevidence, that smoking marijuana during adolescense willtemporarily impair specific types of motivational development.The effect is permanantly reversible and normal motivationaldevelopment can be obtained by a 3-12 month period of abstinance(in monkeys -- no time period for humans is available.) Slikker did not find "amotivational syndrome" butsomething less severe which may be at the root of the commonperception that marijuana smokers are lazy. This is a good thingbecause it gives us a better argument *against* the existance offull blown amotivational syndrome. Among the other things Slikkerfound which we can be very excited about was no brain or cellulardamage, an actual stimulation of brain cell development bymarijuana smoking (which would fit with the current knowlege ofincreased alpha wave activity and blood flow while stoned), nopermanant effects on memory or mental capacity, and lots of goodreasons why marijuana should be more thoroughly researched ratherthan feared. So instead of being so defensive, read the study -- it is veryuseful. Cites: ``Chronic Marijuana Smoke Exposure in the Rhesus Monkey IVNeurochemical Effects and Comparison to Acute and ChronicExposure to Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in Rats'' by SyedF. Ali, Glenn D. Newport, Andrew C. Scallet, Merle G. Paule, JohnR. Bailey, William Slikker Jr in ``Pharmacology, Biochemistry& Behavior'' Vol. 40 pp. 677-682. 1991. ``Behavioral, Neurochemical, and Neurohistological Effects ofChronic Marijuana Smoke Exposure in the Nonhuman Primate'' byWilliam Slikker Jr. et al. in ``Marijuana CannabinoidsNeurobiology and Neurophysiology'' Laura Murphy, Andrzej Bartkeed. pub. CRC Press Boca Raton, FL, 1992. ``Chronic Marijuana Smoke Exposure in the Rhesus Monkey IIEffects on Progressive Ratio and Conditioned Position Responding'' by Merle G. Paule, Richard R. Allen, John R. Bailey, Andrew C.Scallet, Syed F. Ali, Roger M. Brown, William Slikker Jr. in``The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.''Vol. 260 pp. 210-222. ed. pub. ``Up in Smoke Arkansas Study Raises Doubts About MarijuanaRisks '' by Mara Leveritt in ``Arkansas Times'' pp. 11-12.September 16, 1993. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation WT01-B22-51IA087-000625-B020-316http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/amot1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045742 text/html 7994HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:56:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:51 GMTContent-length: 7777 Notes on Marijuana and the Amotivational Syndrome Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information Notes on Marijuana and the Amotivational Syndrome Copied from p.229-230 of 'Drugs and Behavior' by William A.McKim. All portions copyright the author. Amotivational Syndrome It has sometimes been observed that when a young person startssmoking marijuana there are systematic changes in that person'slifestyle, ambitions, motivation, and possibly personality. Thesechanges have been collectively referred to as the _amotivationalsyndrome_, whose symptoms are: "... apathy, loss of effectiveness, and diminishedcapacity or willingness to carry out complex, long-term plans,endure frustration, concentrate for long periods, followroutines, or successfully master new material. Verbal facility isoften impaired both in speaking and writing. Some individualsexhibit greater introversion, become totally involved with thepresent at the expense of future goals and demonstrate a strongtendency toward regressive, childlike, magical thinking[1]." There is no doubt that many young individuals have changedfrom clean, aggressive, upwardly mobile achievers into the sortof person just described at about the same time as they startedsmoking marijuana. What is not clear, however, is a causalrelationship between the loss of middle class motivations andcannabis. Which comes first, the marijuana or the loss ofmotivations? This is not easy to answer. In fact, there may be noclearcut answer. To begin with, all we know about theamotivational syndrome is a result of a few case histories. Thesedata cannot answer questions about: a) how common the syndromeis; b) whether the marijuana actually caused the change inbehavior; or c) if the change is caused by marijuana, if it isbest described as a change in all motivations, specificmotivations, or something other than motivation, like ability orpersonality. It does not appear as though the amotivational syndrome is allthat common among marijuana smokers. In one survey[2] a sample ofalmost 2000 college students was studied. There was no differencein grade point average and achievement between marijuana usersand nonusers, but the users had more difficulty deciding oncareer goals, and a smaller number were seeking advancedprofessional degrees. On the other hand, other studies have shownlower school averages and higher dropout rates among users thannonusers. In any case these differences are not great. If thereis such a thing as amotivational syndrome, its affects appear tobe restricted to a few individuals, probably the small percentagewho become heavy users. Laboratory studies provide additional information on thecausal relationship between motivation and marijuana. TheMendelson[3] experiment, where hospitalised volunteers worked onan operant task to earn money and marijuana for 26 days, foundthat the dose of marijuana smoked did not influence the amount ofwork done by either the casual-user group or the heavy-usergroup; all remained motivated to earn and take home a significantamount of money in addition to the work they did for themarijuana. It seems clear that marijuana does not cause a loss ofmotivation. While marijuana does not specifically diminish motivation, itis clear that cannabis affects attention and memory, and theseare intellectual capacities usually considered necessary forsuccess in educational institutions. We know that a significanttolerance develops to these effects and they can be suppressedvoluntarily at low doses, but consistent smoking of high doses ofmarijuana must impede a successful academic career. In fact,achievement motivation must be high indeed in any individual whocombines high levels of cannabis use with a successful academiccareer. Since most reports of the amotivational syndrome originated inthe sixties in North America, what they seem to describe is atendency for college students to 'drop out' and assume alifestyle that rejects traditional achievement motivations oftheir parents' generation. In an effort to understand thisrejection it was very easy to believe that it was pharmacologicaland to dismiss it as 'amotivational syndrome.' [1] McGlothin, W.H., & West, L.J. (1968). The marihuanaproblem: An overview. _American Journal of Psychiatry_, vol. 125,370-378. [2] Brill, N.Q., & Christie, R.L. (1974).Marihuana andpsychosocial adjustment. _Archives of General Psychiatry_, 31,713-719. [3] Mendelson, H.H., Kuehnle, J.C., Greenberg, I., &Mello, N.K. (1976). The effects of marihuana use on human operantbehavior: Individual data. In M.C. Broude & S. Szara (eds.),_Pharmacology of marihuana_, vol. 2(pp. 643-653). New York:Academic Press. From: THE NATURAL MIND by Andrew Weil. p. 60: When I was a freshman at Harvard, long before many peoplethought of smoking marihuana, there was plenty of amotivation. Ittook such forms as sleeping till dinner time and then playingMonopoly all night instead of working and was indistinguishablefrom amotivation now associated with heavy marihuana use. Heavymarihuana use is a convenient symptom for an amotivated person toadd to his list: it is fun, can be done with other people, angersgrownups, and so on. If it is not too late to find a ruralcollege where marihuana is still unknown, I would predict thatthe amotivated people there would become the heavy marihuanasmokers once the drug appeared on campus. If marihuana were thecause of amotivation, one would expect that amotivation could becured by taking away the marihuana, but this is not the case.Therefore, it makes more sense to see amotivation as a cause ofheavy marihuana smoking rather than the reverse. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information WT01-B22-52IA087-000625-B020-347http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/potstab.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045834 text/html 17496HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:58:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:46 GMTContent-length: 17278 Pot's Tab in the War on Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information POT'S TAB IN THE WAR ON DRUGS The Arkansas Times, September 16, 1993 REEFER MADNESS While courts send users to prison, scientists at NCTR findlittle to support dangers of pot. The investment: * Federal matching funds for the "war on drugs" inArkansas totaled $4.6 million in 1992. * State and local agencies kicked in another $1.8 million. * The Arkansas National Guard received $1.3 million to assistin marijuana eradication. * An unknown additional amount of money was generated for druginvestigations by the sale of confiscated property. * No figures are available for the cost of prosecuting drugcases and incarcerating offenders. The return: * 42 percent of all arrests for the sale and manufacture ofdrugs in 1992 were for selling or growing marijuana. * And 62 percent of all arrests for possession of drugs werefor possession of marijuana. By Mara Leveritt The monkeys smoked a joint a day. Actually, they didn'trecline in their cages, puffing a hand-rolled reefer. This beinga scientific experiment, funded by the powerful NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, the process was more carefullycontrolled. The monkeys were fitted with masks through whichmarijuana smoke, machine-puffed in carefully measured doses, waspassed into their nostrils. The experiment, performed at the National Center forToxicological Research near Pine Bluff, was designed to testwhether chronic marijuana use caused brain damage. It lasted forseveral years, with the most intensive phase, during whichmonkeys were exposed to heavy doses of marijuana smoke, occurringfrom 1984 to 1985. Reports on the study's findings continue to be published inpharmacology and toxicology journals. But beyond those tightscientific circles, the results of the NCTR experiment, the mostextensive of its kind yet conducted, have gone almost entirelyunnoticed. That's not surprising, perhaps. In a world where the politicalmajority has shown little tolerance for marijuana, the testresults are explosive. The experiment discovered no adverse impact from marijuana onmonkeys' general health, no sign that heavy exposure to marijuanasmoke caused lung cancer, and, with one exception, no long-termeffects on the animals' behavior from exposure to marijuana. Before the NCTR study, the largest experiment examining theeffects of marijuana on primates was one conducted at theStanford Research Institute. That experiment, focusing on thebrain's electrical activity under the influence of marijuana,involved 16 monkeys. By contrast, the experiment at NCTR used 62 monkeys, allrhesus males. In 1983, the animals were all approximately two tothree years old, the monkey equivalent of teen-agers. For one year before the start of the experiment, the monkeyswere trained to play "games" designed to test theirperception of the passage of time and their ability to discernleft from right. Only after they were proficient did the exposureto marijuana begin. Toxicologists divided the monkeys into four groups. Every dayfor a year, 16 monkeys each received what Dr. Merle Paule, headof NCTR's Behavioral Toxicology Laboratory and Primate ResearchFacility, called "a pretty heavy exposure" tomarijuana, the human equivalent, Paule said, of "four orfive joints a day." Another group of 16 smoked the same amount of marijuana, butonly two days per week. Staffers called them the "weekendsmokers." A third group was administered smoke from cigarettes identicalto the others, except that the psychoactive component of THC hadbeen removed. And a fourth group received no smoke exposure atall. The monkeys smoked for a year, then they were monitored andtested for another year. Dr. William Slikker, acting director of NCTR's Division ofNeurotoxicology, explained that the study generated so much data,it has taken time to compile it and the results have beenreleased gradually, in several reports since the experiment wasended. In 1991, the journal Fundamental and Applied Toxicologypublished a report on the effects of marijuana on the monkeys'general health. Slikker was the lead writer, with Paule(pronounced Paul) and other NCTR researchers listed ascollaborators. That report concluded, "The general health of the monkeyswas not compromised by a year of marijuana smoke exposure asindicated by weight gain, carboxyhemoglobin and clinicalchemistry/hematology values. "Most clinical parameters ... did not show anytreatment-related changes, and those few that did were of smallmagnitude, transient in nature, and were not different at the endof the five-month postdosing period." Last week, in his office at NCTR, Paule explained the healthstudy's results in more casual terms. "There's just nothingthere," he said. "They were all fine." Last year, the journal Toxicology Letters published a reportby another group of NCTR researchers on the effects of marijuanaon the lungs of the monkeys who smoked. Seven months after thelast exposure to marijuana smoke, some of the monkeys were killedand their bodies autopsied. Scientists examined the lungs forsigns of disturbances called "carcinogen-DNA adducts,"considered to be one of the early indications of cancer. The writers of that study reported that although theirfindings were not conclusive, they were "at variance withearlier work suggesting that fractions of marijuana smoke arehighly genotoxic." The seven authors noted that, "It has been suggested thatmarijuana smoking is a proximal cause of respiratory cancer.However, these intimations have not been borne out byepidemiological investigations, which is surprising consideringthe widespread use of marijuana." Moreover, the journal article noted: "The data presentedhere suggest that seven months after the last smoke exposure,there is not evidence of increased marijuana smoke-inducedcarcinogen-DNA adducts in the lungs of exposed monkeys." Paule's informal interpretation: "If it's not there, it'sprobably not too terrible." (The researchers discount the claim that as marijuana hasbecome increasingly potent, due to refined horticulturaltechniques, it has also become more dangerous. Other studies,they say, have demonstrated that smokers inhale only to the pointof inebriation, so that persons smoking stronger marijuana smokeconsiderably less of it.) Late last year, Paule himself was the lead author of a reportpublished in The Journal of Pharmacology and ExperimentalTherapeutics. It dealt with marijuana's effect on behavior. This report's findings were more complex. Before the monkeys were started on their year-long smokeexposure, Slikker, Paule and other scientists, conducted ashort-term study to determine the immediate effect of THC on theanimals; in other words, how they reacted when they were"high." They found two areas of apparent impact. One was the monkey'sshort-term memory. "That's a function that's verysensitive," Paule explained, "but only on an acutebasis. If you test them the next day, you see no residual effecton those behaviors." The monkeys sense of time also appeared disrupted. Monkeys, itturns out, are as good as humans at estimating the passage oftime. Members of both species to equally well at a test thatrequires them, for instance, to press down on a lever for morethan 10 seconds but not longer than 14 seconds. Marijuana has been shown to affect human's ability to performthe test at normal levels, and the monkeys were no different."That time-estimation behavior is exquisitely sensitive tomarijuana," Paule said, "even at very low doses." The NCTR study corroborated human studies showing that timeseems to stretch out for many subjects under the influence ofmarijuana. In the monkeys' response to the time-perception test,Paule explained, "what they said was that eight secondsfeels like ten." That phenomenon too, however, quickly dissipated. Testing thenext day showed the monkeys' time perception restored to itsnormal acuity. The main thrust of the study, however, concerned the long-termeffects of exposure to marijuana. To study that, the animals weretested for cognitive function and motivation 23 hours after eachmarijuana exposure. The cognitive test involved four lights and two levers. Themonkeys were taught that when they saw a red or a yellow light,they were to hit a lever on their left in order to receive a foodpellet. If a blue or a green light came on, they would get thepellet by hitting a lever on their right. The researchers wanted to see if the animals scored anydifferently 23 hours after exposure to marijuana than they hadbefore receiving the drug. "On that test," Paule said,"their performance was unaffected." The test of motivation, however, showed a definite pattern ofchange. This test required the monkeys to put forth an increasingamount of effort to get food. Since a decrease in motivation or"work ethic" has been described as one of the effectsof smoking marijuana, the researchers wanted to see "howmuch effort the monkeys were willing to put out," ascompared to the nonsmoking control group. Their paychecks were banana-flavored food pellets. For thefirst pellet, the monkeys had only to depress a lever once. Theyhad to hit it twice to get the second pellet. And for a thirdpellet, they had to pump the lever three times. Here, the group exposed to THC showed a clear unwillingness toget worked up about work. Paule pointed out that during the yearthe test was being conducted, the monkeys were passing fromadolescence into adulthood, a time for them, as for humans, hesaid, when "the work ethic normally goes way up." But that improvement didn't show up in the marijuana-smokers.While the nonsmoking monkeys showed a willingness to work harderand harder as the year progressed, the marijuana groups stayed atadolescent levels. "Our interpretation of this is that marijuana smoking inmonkeys does produce something akin to an amotivationalsyndrome," Paule said. He added, however, that thephenomenon may have occurred precisely because the monkeys wereat the critical and deliberately chosen stage of adolescence whenthe NCTR test was conducted. Because marijuana use is high among teenagers, depressedmotivation at that stage in life can have serious effects. Butmarijuana may not have the same effect on adults. "We did a search of the literature," Paule said,"and we found that those studies that tried to findamotivational syndrome in adults could not find one. It onlyappears in adolescence. Chances are, if we'd done these studiesin adults, we wouldn't have seen this effect. And the good newsis that, even among adolescents, when the exposure to marijuanawas stopped, their motivation jumped right back up to normallevels." "It took two to three months for them to recover to fullvalues, but they did recover and they recovered fully." Paule noted two other findings related to the motivationaltest. One was that the willingness to work appeared to be equallyaffected in both the daily and weekend smokers. "Thattotally surprised us," he said. Another finding worthy of note was that, as in most areas oflife, one monkey proved to be an exception. As Paule put it, heseemed to go "blooey" under the influence of marijuana. "Unlike the others, we found that this one particularanimal was severely disrupted by chronic marijuana exposure onthe discrimination task. And he never recovered full from theamotivational syndrome. We have no understanding of why.Everything else about him tested normal." That one monkey represents a warning. As Paule cautioned,"There appears to be tremendous individual variation insusceptibility to marijuana." Also of interest in the NCTR study, in light of U.S. criminalsanctions against marijuana, is the researchers' observation thatthe animals exposed to marijuana never posed a threat to theirhandlers. "I've never seen anything that suggests marijuana isresponsible for an increase in any violent behavior," Paulesaid, adding, "I would say that the perceived risk tomarijuana is probably overstated." That's the scientist speaking. Here's the father. Asked whathe would tell his 9-year-old son about the risks of smokingmarijuana, this was Paule's answer: "I'd tell him heprobably shouldn't smoke dope before he becomes an adult." POT RESEARCH LID ABOUT TO BLOW OPEN Dr. Don McMillan, chairman of the Department of Pharmacologyat the University of Arkansas at Little Rock, is also theschool's Wilbur D. Mills professor of Alcoholism and Drug AbusePrevention. He led a major study into human tolerance ofmarijuana in the early part of his career, and more recentlyserved as an advisor to the researchers at NCTR in planning oftheir study of marijuana's effects on monkeys. After years during which he said marijuana research was"stalled," McMillan is once again excited aboutdevelopments in the field. "It looks like the whole lid on marijuana research isabout to blow wide open," he said in a recent interview."I think we're going to know a tremendous amount more aboutthe mechanism of action and how it works on the brain in the nexttwo years." As marijuana is studied further, its effects, especiallyrelative to other, legal drugs, will also become betterunderstood. For example, marijuana is ranked with heroin and LSDas a Schedule I drug. The federal government rates its potentialfor abuse higher than the risk of abusing cocaine, morphine, PCP,or methadone. Asked about that, McMillan said, "The thing you have toremember is that that schedule is a legal classification, not amedical one." He said the medical understanding of marijuana is that itposes a lower risk to society and individual health than that oftwo legal drugs -- alcohol and tobacco. "Marijuana is probably less harmful than either of those-- but of course, there's still a lot we don't know aboutit." The Arkansas Times, September 16, 1993, pp. 11-12 From The Iowa NORML News Letter, Fall 1994, pages 2-4(reprinted with permission from The Arkansas Times). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B22-53IA087-000625-B021-19http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mjleg1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045859 text/html 14417HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:58:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:41 GMTContent-length: 14199 The Legalization of Marijuana - By Dennis Yates Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information The Legalization Of Marijuana: Part I Ole Miss Is The Center For Growing Legal Marijuana In The U.S. by Dennis M. Yates Every person in the United States has heard of the illicitsubstance called marijuana. Yet, unknown to most people, there isone place in the United States where marijuana is grown legally.That place is the Medicinal Plant Garden, right here at theUniversity of Mississippi. The Medicinal Plant Garden, a part of the Research Instituteof Pharmaceutical Sciences (RIPS) is part of the Marijuana PlantFacility The garden is over 20 years old, but the laboratory wascreated only four years ago. According to Dr. Mahmoud Elsohly, research scientist for RIPS,the laboratory of the Medicinal Plant Facility is used to studyvarious applications of marijuana. For example, the scientistsgrow marijuana to test its physical makeup, analyze marijuanaconfiscated by the DEA, law enforcement agencies, and variousnarcotics groups, to find the potency ratings of the drugs, andextract THC (the active ingredient in marijuana) from plants theyharvested. One project that the Medicinal Plant Facility is currentlyworking on is a medicine made from THC for use in a suppositoryform to replace Marinol, a capsule made of 95 percent THC andused for nausea and vomiting problems in cancer patients as wellas fighting the wasting sickness, or anorexia-cachexia, sufferedby 70 to 90 percent of AIDS patients. Another practice done by the lab is to send marijuana to theResearch Triangle Institute in North Carolina for use in theCompassionate IND program. This program gives marijuana to peoplewho use it to allieviate symptoms of their diseases, such asglaucoma, cancer, and AIDS victims. However, there are only asmall handfull (about eight people) receiving the marijuana, outof several thousand who have applied. Marijuana has been used by many cultures for various ailments.Israeli scientists, for example, found the skeleton of a fourthcentury woman who they believed died in childbirth. Ashes nearbywere found to be the burned remains of the cannabis, ormarijuana, plant. The scientists say this suggests that ancientMiddle Eastern women used inhaled marijuana smoke to reduce laborpains. These days, the medical profession have found severalapplications for the marijuana plant. In medicine, THC (theactive ingredient in marijuana) has been found again and again tohelp patients battling the life-threatening diseases of cancerand AIDS to fight the intense nausea that causes their wastingsickness. Marijuana also helps glaucoma (an eye disease thatcauses blindness) victims by reducing the interocular pressure.It reduces, sometimes eliminating altogether, the seizures ofepileptic patients, along with reducing nerve disorders ofmultiple sclerosis patients. As a final interesting note, arecent discovery by a South Florida doctor concerns the fact thatif THC is placed in a test tube with the herpes virus, the THCwill kill the herpes virus. The Legalization Of Marijuana: Part II Many Opposed, But Some Support Making Marijuana A Legal Crop by Dennis M. Yates On April 6, 1995, ABC News ran a special titled"America's War On Drugs: Searching For Solutions" inwhich an alternative to the currently failing War On Drugs wasgiven: legalization. It showed the American public a new way tolook at the situation. New for most of America, at least. Severalpeople have been saying for years that marijuana should be alegal crop and that possession should no more be a crime thanalcohol. Take for example the case of Judge James P. Gray, a Californiastate superior court judge with what most people would considerconservative views. His proposal to legalize marijuana, alongwith heroin and cocaine, has generally been well received fromthe people that have heard him speak on the subject. In aninterview, Gray recalled one person in particular. "I got one letter recently from a man who started outdisagreeing with me but by the time he finished his letter he wasvolunteering to go out and speak publicly in favor oflegalization. He basically convinced himself just by going overit." Several other people, both famous and not, agree thatlegalization is an answer that deserves consideration. The Boardof Directors of NORML (the National Organization to ReformMarijuana Laws) reads like a "Who's Who" of science.The board consists of Dr. Kary Mullis, winner of the 1993 NobelPrize in chemistry; Dr. Lester Grinspoon, Harvard Medical Schoolprofessor and author of Marijuana: The Forbidden Medicine; Dr.Louis Lasagna, chairman of the National Academy of Sciencescommittee that studied marijuana and dean of the Sackler Schoolof Biomedical Sciences at Tufts University; Ann Druyan, secretaryof the Federation of Scientists and, along with husband CarlSagan, co-producer of the PBS series Cosmos; Dr. John Morgan,author of the drug abuse section in the Merck Manual of Diagnosisand Therapy; David Boaz of the Cato Institute; Dr. BarbaraEhrenreich, columnist for The Guardian in London and essayist forTime; Richard Evans, Esq.; New York State Senator Joseph Galiber;Dr. Dale Gieringer of the California NORML chapter; Dr. AnsleyHamid of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice; Dr. JohnMorgan from the City University of New York Medical School; DanViets, Esq., of the Missouri NORML chapter; Dr. Lynn Zimmerman ofQueens College; and Keith Stroup, Esq., founder of NORML. Three other people who feel marijuana should be legalized areRobert Randall from Washington and Kenny and Barbra Jenks ofPanama City, Florida. All three receive marijuana cigarettes fromthe medical marijuana fields right here in Oxford, Mississippi.For Randall, the marijuana keeps his glaucoma, a degenerative eyedisease that is the leading cause of blindness, at bay, somethingconventional medications failed to do. In 1988, the Jenkses beganAZT treatment for AIDS, a treatment that causes extreme nausea inits users. It caused Barbra to lose 40 pounds within a month,one-third of her body weight. With marijuana, the nausea bothsuffered from disappeared. Another person suggesting legalization comes from the DrugEnforcement Agency's own organization. Francis L. Young,administrative judge for the DEA, recommended that marijuana bemoved from a Schedule I substance (no therapeudic uses) toSchedule II (a useful drug that can be prescribed by a doctor).In his report, he stated that "In layman's terms...in orderto induce death a marijuana smoker would have to consume 20,000to 40,000 times as much cannabis as is contained in one marijuanacigarette... A smoker would theoretically have to consume nearly1,500 pounds of cannabis to induce a lethal response..." andconcluded with "The administrative law judge recommends thatthe Administrator conclude that the cannabis plant considered asa whole has a currently accepted medical use in treatment in theUnited States, that there is no lack of accepted safety for useof it under medical supervision and that it may be lawfully betransferred from Schedule I to Schedule II." Unfortunately,in docket number 90-1020 in April 1991, the DEA made theirposition clear: "The DEA Administrator exercised with avengeance his prerogative to reject the recommendeddecision." The Legalization Of Marijuana: Part III When Prosecuted, Violators Face Harsh Penalties by Dennis M. Yates There is one overriding danger to today's average marijuanaconsumer. It isn't brain damage, it isn't lung cancer, it isn'tgoing crazy and shooting every thing that moves. No, the largestdanger is the fact that, if they are caught, they will bearrested. Marijuana is illegal for one simple reason: marijuana isillegal. Currently, it is considered by many health officials tobe one of the safest therapudic substances known to man. In anationwide survey of cancer therapists, 50 percent of them saidthey would prescribe marijuana if it were legal, while 44 percentadmitted they did recommend marijuana to patients. Francis L.Young, the administrative judge for the Drug Enforcement Agency,said "Marijuana, in its natural form, is one of the safesttherapeudically active substances known to man." Mississippi is a state that has decriminalized marijuanapossession, meaning that a first offense for possession forpersonal useage cannot include prison time or a criminal record.Instead, it is treated much like a traffic violation. Forpossession of marijuana with a total weight of less than or equalto an ounce, the fine is $100 to $250. From one ounce up to akilogram, however, the fine goes to $1,000 and jail time for ayear can be served. A kilogram or over can give the possessor upto 20 years and a fine from $1,000 to $1,000,000. For sale ordelivery of less than one ounce of marijuana, the criminal can bejailed for up to three years and face fines for $3,000. Foramounts greater than or equal to an ounce, the jail time jumps toup to 20 years and the fines to $30,000. Amounts greater than or equal to a kilogram entail jail timefor up to 30 years and fines from $100,000 to $1,000,000. If thepossessor has over ten pounds, the punishment is life in prisonwithout parole. In addition, the punishment for any sale to aminor and sale within 1,500 feet of a school will both double thepunishment. The federal laws on marijuana possession are even more harsh.Possession of any amount has a fine of $10,000 and a possible oneyear prison term. Growing, delivering or selling less than 100kilograms has a fine of $1,000,000 and up to 20 years in prison,whereas 100 kilograms or more has a fine of up to $2,000,000 anda prison term from 5 to 20 years. Over 1,000 kilograms, the finebecomes $10,000,000 and the prison term jumps to 10 years tolife. Distribution within 1,000 feet of a playground or school(including public or private colleges or sales to minors) orwithin 100 feet of a youth center, public pool, or video arcade,the penalty doubles with a mandatory minimum of one year inprison unless the amount is under five grams. A relatively new practice that flew across the U.S. within thepast few years are what are known as the forfeiture laws. Theserules allow law enforcement to confiscate items from amarijuana-user's possession if there is a belief the item inquestion was bought with "drug money," money gainedfrom illegal drug trades. Unfortunately, many people are frightened from possible abusesfrom the forfeiture laws. For example, in Ventura County,California, District Attorney Michael D. Bradford released adocument titled "Report on the Death of Donald Scott,"which claimed that Los Angeles County Deputy Sheriff Gary R.Spenser filed a false affidavit to receive a search warrant tothe 200-acre ranch of Donald Scott. In the raid followingissuance of the search warrant, Spenser shot the 61-year-oldScott twice, killing him. The report concluded "Based inpart upon the possibility of forfeiture, Spencer obtained asearch warrant that was not supported by probable cause. Thissearch warrant became Donald Scott's death warrant." WhenBradbury was interviewed by ABC's 20/20 and asked if the lure ofrevenue gained by the forfeiture laws were corrupting lawenforcement officials, Bradbury said "In my opinion,yes." Another problem with the current marijuana laws is prisonovercrowding. According to the Federal Bureau of Justicestatistics, 59,000 inmates were added to the already overcrowdedprisons in 1992 to a record 833,600 inmates nationwide. This is agreater than 160 percent increase since 1982 and is mostlyattributed to drug violators. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B22-54IA087-000627-B011-231http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/nahas1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045918 text/html 4675HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:59:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:35 GMTContent-length: 4458 The human toxicity of marijuana: A critique of a review Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information The human toxicity of marijuana: a critique of a review by Nahas and Latour. by Macdonald J. Christie & Greogory B. Chesher Department of Pharmacology,University of Sydney,New SouthWales,Australia Introduction Much of the scientific research which purports to show toxiceffects from marijuana has come from one man, Dr. Gabriel Nahas.Dr. Nahas' research over the years has shown a number of badeffects, such suppression of the immune system, and various othertoxic effects. Dr. Nahas, however, is not without his critics. The followingis an abstract of a review of some of Dr. Nahas' work whichappeared in Drug and Alcohol Review. The authors' address is: Department of Pharmacology,University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. -----------------------------beginquote--------------------------------- "Drug and Alcohol Review (1994) 13:209-216 Commentary The human toxicity of marijuana: a critique of a review byNahas and Latour. by Macdonald J. Christie & Greogory B. Chesher Department of Pharmacology,University of Sydney,New SouthWales,Australia Abstract A review entitled "The human toxicity of marijuana"was published in 1992 in the Medical Journal of Australia. Theauthors claimed that the adverse effects of cannabis use havebeen trivialised and that the effects are much more serious thanearlier reported. We have made a careful study of this review andexamined the claims made. We compared the claims of the authorswith the information contained in the documents they cited andfound that at least 28 of the 35 citations in this article werecited inaccurately. Five of these publications were misquoted,or the findings ofthe study were not fully reported. Twenty-three citationscontained other errors, leaving only six to eight (two citationscould not be traced because of their obscurity) accuratecitations among the 35. All of these inaccuracies operated in thedirection of finding an adverse effect of marijuana. Introduction It is not a pleasant task to make an open criticism of a paperby colleagues, but we feel compelled to do so in the case of apaper published in the Medical Journal of Australia in 1992.. .etc " ------------end of quote from Drug and AlcoholReview------------------------ Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B22-55IA087-000627-B011-257http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/marieff.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045932 text/html 10328HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:59:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:31 GMTContent-length: 10110 Marijuana and the Human Body Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information MARIJUANA AND THE HUMAN BODY The Common Sense Series a publication of the National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws The moderate use of marijuana is neither harmless nordevastating to the user. Unfortunately, the politics of marijuanahas distorted research findings and made it difficult to find outthe truth about marijuana's effect on human health. NORMLbelieves that honest, verifiable information is the mosteffective tool to prevent the abuse of marijuana. This textexamines the effects of marijuana on the human body, as describedby a comprehensive report prepared for the Federal government bythe most respected scientific body in the United States, theNational Academy of Sciences. This text first examines some ofthe exaggerated claims made about marijuana and then provides thetruth about marijuana's effects on human health. EXAGGERATED CLAIMS ABOUT MARIJUANA Despite evidence to the contrary, many individuals andorganizations maintain that marijuana is an extremely dangerousdrug. For example, the National Federation of Parents for DrugFree Youth attempts to reach its societal and legislative goalsby making the following claims: Marijuana is a harmful substance because it has 421 chemicals. Marijuana is stronger than it was 10 years ago, and this new, potent marijuana presents dangers unrecognized years ago. Marijuana is far worse for the lungs than tobacco. Marijuana causes damage to the reproductive system. The psychoactive chemicals in marijuana are fat soluble and stay in the human body for a month, increasing the danger of exposure. Marijuana causes brain damage and a behavioral disorder known as amotivational syndrome. Any use of marijuana is abuse, and marijuana has no medical value whatsoever. The National Federation of Parents supports prohibition ofmarijuana because it believes that marijuana is so dangerous thatno one can use it safely. According to the National Institute onDrug Abuse, which supports the NFP, many parents welcomeddiscovery of reports suggesting marijuana's harmfulness becausethe claims reinforced their own instincts about marijuana. In fact, the reports used to justify the above claims havebeen found to be inconclusive by other researchers. Hence,warnings intended to dramatize the supposed ill-effects ofmarijuana are often couched with phrases like "marijuanacan...". "Marijuana may...", or "If theexperts are right...". THE TRUTH ABOUT MARIJUANA The Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciencesconducted a 15-month study of the health-related effects ofmarijuana in 1982. They appointed a 22-member committee toanalyze existing scientific evidence bearing on the possiblehazards to the health and safety of users of marijuana. The report concludes: "the scientific evidence publishedto date indicates that marijuana has a broad range ofpsychological and biological effects, some of which, at leastunder certain circumstances, are harmful to human health". In a companion report providing policy recommendations to theAcademy's National Research Council, regulation of the marijuanamarket is advocated as the most effective method of controllingmarijuana. The National Academy of Science's report rebuts manyof the exaggerated claims made about marijuana. Of the 421 chemicals in marijuana, only 61 are unique to marijuana. The chemicals are known as cannabinoids. One of them, delta-9 THC, produces the psychoactive effect and is the focus of most research. The other 360 chemicals in the marijuana plant are found throughout other natural substances. The higher potency marijuana grown in the United States represents about half of all the marijuana consumed here. Because of it's higher potency many smokers use far less of it than less potent marijuana. Differences in dosage and frequency of consumption render comparisons between marijuana and tobacco consumption invalid, despite similarity in the composition of their smoke. Marijuana smoke irritates the lungs. Heavy exposure of the lungs to irritation such as smoke increases the likelihood of lung cancer and other lung problems. Marijuana speeds the heartbeat and is unhealthy for people with high blood pressure or other cardiovascular ailments. Marijuana does reduce the sperm count and obstruct sperm mobility in males within the normal range. These side-effects do not seem to affect human fertility, and are completely reversible thirty days after cessation of use. Marijuana, like other drugs, crosses the placenta. While the effects of this are unknown and there is no evidence that marijuana causes chromosome damage, we advise women to avoid the use of marijuana, tobacco, alcohol, or other drugs not prescribed by their physician during pregnancy and nursing. The intoxicating chemical, THC, is broken down by the human metabolism after two or three hours in the body. The by-products of this chemical breakdown are referred to as metabolites. These metabolites are fat soluble, and take 21-30 days to leave the human body via the urine. These metabolites exert no psychoactive effect on the human body. After reviewing all of the evidence, the Academy concluded: "There is not yet any conclusive evidence as to whether prolonged use of marijuana causes permanent changes in the nervous system or sustained impairment of brain function and behavior in human beings". "Interpretation of the evidence linking marijuana to 'amotivational syndrome' is difficult. Such symptoms have been known to occur in the absence of marijuana. Even if there is an association between this syndrome and the use of marijuana, that does not prove that marijuana causes the syndrome. Many troubled individuals seek an 'escape' into use of drugs: thus frequent use of marijuana may become one more in a series of conterproductive behaviors for these unhappy people". "Cannabis and it's derivatives have shown promise in the treatment of a variety of disorders. The evidence is most impressive in glaucoma, where their mechanism of action appears to be different from standard drugs: in asthma.... and in the nausea and vomiting of cancer chemotherapy... Similar trials have suggested cannabis might also be used in seizures, spasticity, and other nervous system disorders". N O R M L ' s V I E W 1. NORML favors discouraging marijuana abuse and is opposed toadolescent drug use. 2. Exaggerated claims about health hazards lack credibilityand encourage adolescents to try marijuana and other drugs.Government research which relies on animal studies and studies ofadolescent drug abusers presents a skewed perspective ofmarijuana's effects. 3. The illegality of marijuana, because it equates use withabuse, discourages frank discussion of marijuana's effects onhealth within the family and with doctors and nurses. 4. Over 35 million adult Americans use marijuana regularlybecause they find it a relatively safe way to relax. A regulatedmarijuana market would better protect their health than theunregulated black market. W H A T D O Y O U T H I N K ? For further information: NORML 8749 Holloway Dr. Los Angeles, CA 213-652-8654 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B22-56IA087-000627-B011-283http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mjtest1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045951 text/html 2872HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:59:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:26 GMTContent-length: 2655 Detecting Marijuana Through Urine Testing Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information Detecting Marijuana Through Urine Testing Approximate times for testing positive versus frequency ofuse. In response to questions referring to the time it takes thebody to cleanse itself from detectable urine traces, according toa national report titled, "Drugs, Crime, and the JusticeSystem", (published from the Bureau of Justice Statistics,U.S. Department of Justice): Single Use : 3 Days Moderate Use (4 times a week): 5 Days Heavy Use (Daily smoking): 10 Days Chronic Heavy Use: 21-30 Days Although do keep in mind that there are many factors thateffect the outcome of the tests (potency of drug taken, testingmethods, metabolism, etc.) so this is just a estimate figure-sobe careful out there. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B22-57IA087-000627-B012-24http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mjdriv1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050051 text/html 7658HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:00:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:23 GMTContent-length: 7441 The Interaction Between Alcohol and Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information The Interaction Between Alcohol and Marijuana A Dose Dependent Study of the Effects on Human Moods andPerformance Skills By Gregory B. Chesher, Helen Dauncey, John Crawford, Kim Horn Psychopharmacology Research Unit Department of Pharmacology University of Sydney, NSW. for the Federal Office of Road Safety (Australia) Executive Summary A study was designed to examine the effects of marijuana and alcohol when taken alone and in combination on human skills performance and mood. Four dosage conditions were employed for each drug (placebo and three active doses). All possible combinations of these dosage conditions were tested (ie 16 dosage groups). Twenty subjects were used for each dosage group, the experiment employing 320 subjects in all. Each subject attended the laboratory on one occasion only. Data collected were for psychomotor performance using a battery of computer-presented tests, mood effects, subjective assessments of the nature and degree of intoxication, and the subjective assessment of the effects of the drugs on driving skills and willingness to drive a motor vehicle. The performance battery included tests of human skills related to those considered necessary to drive a motor vehicle with safety. The population sample were recruited by advertisements on two Sydney "Rock music" FM radio stations. All volunteers were non-naive as regards marijuana use and were indeed heavy to very heavy users of this drug. The extent of alcohol use by the volunteers was considered to be within the normal range of use of this drug within the community. The attitudes expressed concerning the dangers associated with the use of the two drugs indicated that the population sample was heavily biased against alcohol and in favor of marijuana The subjective assessment of the doses of each drug employed indicated that they were comparable. The subjects assessed the degree of intoxication by marijuana as being of a similar intensity as that produced by alcohol. The doses selected therefore appear to be relevant to those used within the social experience of the volunteer population Both drugs produced significant dose-dependent effects on the performance measures, on the intoxication rating scales and on some of the mood measures. However, there were both quantitative and qualitative differences between these effects, both on the performance measures and on the subjective mood effects of the two drugs. By far the major effects on these tests were those produced by alcohol. The effect on skills performance of alcohol and marijuana when taken in combination was essentially one of addition. Marijuana tended to increase the intensity of the performance impairment produced by alcohol. However there was evidence to suggest that the lowest dose of marijuana produced a degree of antagonism of the effects of alcohol. Marijuana had no effect on the absorption or metabolism of alcohol. The blood alcohol concentration was not affected by any of the doses of marijuana used. The results of this study indicate clearly that alcohol and marijuana are distinctly different drugs. The effects produced on the performance measures were qualitatively and quantitatively different. In addition, the differences in the nature of the drug-induced subjective intoxication and the self-reported changes in mood effects such as anxiety and alertness, strongly suggested different drug actions. The ability to discriminate and assess the degree of intoxication with alcohol was not affected by marijuana. However, the ability to assess the intoxication due to marijuana was greatly affected by alcohol. The subjective intoxication produced by marijuana appears to be of a more subtle nature than that produced by alcohol. Evidence is presented which suggests that under the influence of alcohol, subjects engage in a "speed-accuracy trade-off". They are prepared to make a hasty response to a question rather than to spend more time to ensure a correct answer. This effect could be related to a risk-taking behaviour. The results with marijuana on the other hand suggested a slower and more careful approach to the problem, though as with alcohol, an increased error rate in responses was recorded. Evidence is presented which suggests that marijuana produces periodic attentional lapses. The results strongly suggest that the performance deficits and mood changes produced by alcohol are of a greater magnitude than those produced by marijuana. Recommendations for directions of further research are made. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana InformationWT01-B22-58IA087-000627-B012-61http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/bruin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050117 text/html 30431HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:08:52 GMTContent-length: 30213 Marijuana (Cannabis) Fact Sheet Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information MARIJUANA (CANNABIS) FACT SHEET ISSUES STUDY COMMITTEE OF THE BRUIN HUMANIST FORUM Copyrighted by the Bruin Humanist Forum 1967 Marijuana is not a narcotic. Although California law calls ita narcotic, it is pharmacologically distinct from the family ofopium derivatives and synthetic narcotics. (Wolstenholme, 1965;Watt, 1965; Garattini, 1965; 1 Crim 5351 Calif. District Court ofAppeal, 1st Appel. Dist.) Marijuana is not addicting. The use does not develop anyphysical dependence (see below). (Mayor's Committee on Marihuana,New York City, 1944; Allentuck & Bowman, 1942; Freedman &Rockmore, 1946; Fort, 1965a, 1965b; Panama Canal Zone Governor'sCommittee, 1933; Phalen, 1943; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission, 1894;Watt, 1965; I Crim 5351 Calif. District Court of Appeal, 1stAppel. Dist.; United Nations, 1964a, 1964b) In a small percentage of individuals, a "psychologicaldependence" can develop, but a predisposition must bepresent. In his paper, "Dependence of the HashishType," Watt (1965, p. 65) concludes: The habit is gregariousand is easily abandoned. Personality defect and incipient orexisting psychotic disorder are the essential factors underlyingthe formation of the habit. Marijuana is not detrimental to the user's health. Even whenused over long periods of time, it does not appear to causephysical or psychological impairment. (Mayor's Committee onMarihuana, New York City, 1944; Freedman & Rockmore, 1946;Fort, 1965a, 1965b; Panama Canal Zone Governor's Committee, 1933;Phalen, 1943; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission, 1894; Becker, 1963) Marijuana does not tend to release "aggressivebehavior." On the contrary, its use inhibits aggressivebehavior; it acts as a "tranquilizer." (Mayor'sCommittee on Marihuana, New York City, 1944; Fort, 1965a, 1965b;Panama Canal Zone Governor's Committee, 1933; Phalen, 1943;Garattini, 1965) Marijuana does not "lead to" or"promote" the use of addicting drugs."Ninety-eight percent of heroin users started by smokingtobacco and drinking alcohol firsts" (Mayor's Committee onMarihuana, New York City, 1944; Fort, 1965a, 1965b; Panama CanalZone Governor's Committee, 1933; Phalen, 1943; Garattini, 1965)Marijuana comes from the Indian hemp plant, which was formerlygrown widely in the United States for the making of rope, andwhich still grows wild in many areas. Up until a few years ago itwas a main ingredient in commercial bird-seed. Leaves andflowering tops provide the cannabis (commonly known in theWestern Hemisphere as marijuana, grass, or pot); the resin andpollen, in which the active ingredients are highly concentrated,are the source of "hashish." (Wolstenholme, 1965) The effects of smoking marijuana have been described asfollows: "euphoria, reduction of fatigue, and relief oftension . . . [It will] also increase appetite, distort the timesense, increase self-confidence, and, like alcohol, can relaxsome inhibitions." (Fort, 1965) A heightened awareness ofcolor and of esthetic beauty, and the production of rich andnovel mental associations are also commonly reported effects.Some users report that the marijuana experience is"psychedelic": can result in heightened awareness, orin a consciousness-expanding change in perspective, ideas aboutthe self, life, etc. Marijuana is not, however, like LSD---a verypowerful psychedelic. Whereas LSD drastically alters thoughts andperspective, often "jarring" the user into heightenedawareness, marijuana "suggests" or points the way to amoderately deepened awareness. The user is free to follow thesepotentials or not, as they present themselves. (Mayor's Committeeon Marihuana, New York City, 1944; Fort, 1965a, 1965b ; PanamaCanal Zone Governor's Committee, 1933; Goldstein, 1966; Becker,1963; De Ropp, 1957; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission, 1894)Pharmacological studies of marijuana and tetrahydrocannabinol(the major active ingredient) are as yet inconclusive, bothbecause of insufficient research and because of the subtlety andcomplexity of its effect on the human mind. Garattini (1965)tested maze-learning in rats and found that marijuana caused nochange or very slight impairment; Carlini and Kramer (1965) foundthat maze-learning was significantly improved by an injection ofa marijuana extract. Multiple active ingredients are present inthe marijuana plant, and these could vary in concentration (e.g.,one of the components is sedative, and another iseuphoric/psychedelic). (Wolstenholme, 1965; Watt, 1965; Carlini& Kramer, 1965) As with other psychedelics, the effects of marijuana depend inpart on how one interprets, uses, and learns to develop them. Aspointed out by many researchers in the area ofphilosophical/psychological effects, the environment("setting") is of great importance. Many people have noeffects whatever the first time they smoke a marijuana cigarette,but do the second or third time---and thereafter. Everyone has tolearn the effects before he can use them to his own benefit.(Becker, 1963; Fort, 1965a, 1965b; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission,1894) Some years ago it was estimated that marijuana users numbered"several hundred thousand people in the United States,including many from the middle-class." (Fort, 1965a, 1965b)During the 1960's, however, there has been a rapid increase inthe use of marijuana, particularly among "respectable"people: those in the professions, non-bohemian high school andcollege students, artists, writers, intellectuals, etc. Onereport on campus use (Goldstein, 1966) estimates thatapproximately 15% of college students have used or are usingmarijuana, with the percentage at some large, metropolitancampuses as high as 30-60%. This same report also held thatmarijuana use is now becoming "respectable," andindulged in by members of student government, campus groups, andfraternities and sororities. (Fort,1965a, 1965b; Irwin, 1966;Goldstein, 1966) Marijuana smoking does not constitute a social hazard. Fourseparate official studies have been conducted on this question,as a part of a larger study: New York City Mayor's Committee in1944; a committee of the health department of the U. S. Army;another U. S. Army committee, concerned with discipline effects;and a very thorough study by a committee established by theBritish Government to study the effects in India where it is-andwas-in as widespread use as is alcohol here. All of these studiescame to the conclusion: marijuana is not damaging to the user orto society, and therefore should not be outlawed. Political andeconomic pressures prevented authorities in New York fromcarrying out the recommendations of the Mayor's Committee---thegreatest part of the political pressure from Harry J. Anslinger,former U. S. Commissioner of Narcotics. (Mayor's Committee onMarihuana, New York City, 1944; Panama Canal Zone Governor'sCommittee, 1933; Phalen, 1943 ; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission,1894) On the grounds that marijuana is safer and more beneficialthan tobacco or alcohol (both of which are physically toxic; bothof which are addicting), and that there is no basis forlegalizing these two dangerous drugs while outlawing one which isnot dangerous, attorneys are challenging the present laws. In thewording of one such legal brief: "The appellant contendsthat the classification of marijuana as a narcotic in Section1101 (d) of Health and Safety Code and the marijuana prohibitionlaw is based upon an arbitrary and unreasonable classificationhaving no reasonable relation to the public health, safety,welfare, and morals.... The classification of marijuana as anarcotic is unconstitutional and void in violation of the EighthAmendment provision against cruel and unusual punishment, and theDue Process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of theConstitution of the United States." (1 Crim 5351 Calif.District Court of Appeal, First Appel. Dist., pp. 61-62 andAppendix 1, p. 6) Among the authorities favoring legalization of marijuana,there have been medical doctors, lawyers, psychologists,sociologists, and even some religious leaders. Bishop Pike, forexample, supports re-legalization. Lancet (1963), theBritish journal of medicine, in an editorial in 1963, found nogood reason for marijuana being prohibited, but good reason whyit should be legal. (Irwin, 1966) Many authorities, however, remain opposed to there-legalization of marijuana. Predominantly, these are lawenforcement" authorities, or politicians (e.g., AttorneyGeneral Lynch of California). Although these authorities rarelygive verifiable reasons for their insistence that marijuana beillegal, the ones which have been offered prove to be eitherunsubstantiated "opinions" or out-and-out mistakendata. In this same area, there was a time whenlaw-breakers---taking their cue from the law-enforcementofficials---claimed marijuana use as an excuse for their crimes.The fiction of a marijuana-crime relationship has been thoroughlydetailed (if there is any correlation at all, it is in a negativedirection---crimes of violence are drastically lower than wouldbe statistically expected among marijuana users). (Fort, 1965a,1965b; Phalen, 1943; Anslinger, 1932; 1 Crim 5351 Calif. DistrictCourt of Appeal, First Appel. Dist.; Irwin, 1966; Blum &Wahl, 1965; Boyko, Rotberg, & Disco, 1967; Laurie, 1967) Seealso below, pages 337 and 339. Harry J. Anslinger, not one to be daunted by mere facts,included the following comments---both of which are in diametriccontradiction to statements by him before committees of the U. S.Congress: "The section noting that many criminals comingbefore the courts who allege that they were under the influenceof marijuana when a crime was committed, and that this defense isusually without foundation and is used with the idea of obtaininglenient treatment by the courts, recommends that a defense ofbeing under the influence of marijuana during the commission of acrime should not mitigate the penalty for a criminal act."(Anslinger, 1932) "The Narcotic Section recognizes the greatdanger of marijuana due to its definite impairment of the mentaland the fact that its continuous use leads direct [sic] to theinsane asylum." Even without the aid of Anslinger, argumentsopposed to free marijuana use are contradictory, confused, andgrossly innocent of verifiable facts. (Fort, 1965a, 1965b;Phalen, 1943; Anslinger, 1932; 1 Crim 5351 Calif. District Courtof Appeal, First Appel. Dist.; Irwin, 1966; Blum & Wahl,1965; Washington Bulletin, 1963) In a study of policeattitudes and reasoning on "drugs," Blum and Wahl(1965) found much disagreement as to reasons why marijuana shouldbe suppressed. Some officers simply felt that, although marijuanawas less dangerous than alcohol, society (and the law)disapproved of marijuana. Reasons given for suppressing marijuanaran from claims that it caused criminal behavior [which is, expost facto, correct-so long as marijuana use is"criminal"], to the claim that it is more dangerousthan alcohol because it isn't as disruptive of behavior and istherefore harder to detect. Many "expert" groups such as WHO Expert Committee onAddiction Producing Drugs have tended to perpetuatemisinformation on marijuana because of poor data [Anslinger wasthe U.S. spokesman for many, many years at the U.N.], and aconservative reluctance toward "softening" or changingprevious policies. In the last few years, however, the WorldHealth Organization has progressively modified its view onmarijuana. In 1964 the Expert Committee proposed reviseddefinitions of types of drug dependence, which were subsequentlyadopted. The new definition of "dependence of the Cannabistype" was as follows: "(1) a desire (or need) forrepeated administrations of the drug on account of its subjectiveeffects, including the feeling of enhanced capabilities; (2)little or no tendency to increase the dose, since there is littleor no development of tolerance; (3) a psychic dependence on theeffects of the drug related to subjective and individualappreciation of those effects; (4) absence of physical dependenceso that there is no definite and characteristic abstinencesyndrome when the drug is discontinued." (United Nations,1964b) The Committee actually is saying that there is no reasonto keep marijuana on its list: Its definition of dependence ofthe marijuana type would easily satisfy for a definition of"liking" (i.e., the natural tendency to repeat apleasant and rewarding, non-harmful experience). Actualdependence on marijuana is extremely rare, and depends entirelyon a pre- existing psychological problem-and even this is not"addicting." [See above, p. 333] (Watt, 1965; UnitedNations, 1964b) As has been noted by many researchers, scientific as well asgovernmental groups which have seriously investigated the effectsof marijuana on the individual and on society have consistentlyrefused to condemn it or support legislation aimed at suppressingit; law enforcement-oriented groups, on the other hand, includingthe Narcotics Experts, are very slow indeed to admit any of thisevidence into the debate. In spite of this, the Proceedings ofthe White House Conference on Narcotic and Drug Abuse, 27-28September I962, states: "It is the opinion of the Panel thatthe hazards of marijuana per se have been exaggerated, and thelong criminal sentences imposed on an occasional user orpossessor of the drug are in poor social perspective. Althoughmarijuana has long held the reputation of inciting individuals tocommit sexual offenses and other antisocial acts, the evidence isinadequate to substantiate this. Tolerance and physicaldependence do not develop, and withdrawal does not produce anabstinence syndrome." (United Nations, 1965; United States,1963) The following, from an editorial in the Washington Bulletin,is given here both for the illuminating facts uncovered, and asan example of the more modem approach to the "problem"of marijuana. "Seventy years of institutional documentationindicate that this vision [of marijuana's "dangers"]was a big American fib. Latest such document is the New YorkCounty Medical Society Narcotics Sub-committee Report of May 5,1966: 'There is no evidence that marijuana use is associated withcrimes of violence in the United States . . . marijuana is not anarcotic, nor is it addicting . . . New York State should takethe lead in attempting to mitigate the stringent federal laws inregard to marijuana possession.' Well, everybody knew that 10years ago. [U.S.] House Marijuana Hearings, Ways and MeansCommittee, 1937, page 24, Rep. John Dingall: 'I'm just wonderingwhether the marijuana addict [sic] graduates into a heroin, anopium, or a cocaine user}' Anslinger: 'No sir. I have not heardof a case of that kind. I think it's an entirely different class.The marijuana addict [sic] does not go in that direction.'Nowadays the Narcotics Bureau [headed during this entire periodby Anslinger] propagandizes the idea that marijuana leadsdirectly to heroin, which is obviously silly, as millions ofcollege boys can inform their parents. But the Narcotics Bureauhas raised such an unscientific scream on this point that nothingwill suffice to prove the obvious except a giant survey ofcomparative statistics showing that millions of pot smokers arenot junkies. When such documents are at hand, timid butsympathetic medical authorities in key places have declaredthemselves ready to move toward legislation, licensing orreduction of punishment for marijuana possession to the status ofa parking violation." (Washington Bulletin, I966) The UCLA Law Review, in March of 1967, published an article onCalifornia's anti-marijuana laws, from which the following isquoted. ". . . the purpose of this article is to outline thedefects in one area of both federal and state criminal law: thecontrol of marijuana-specifically, treatment of possession of thedrug, without more, as criminal. The pattern in California,perhaps more than in any other state, has been one of legislativeintransigence and increasingly harsh penalties for possession anduse of marijuana. The authors take the position that at least aportion of the existing legislation in California againstmarijuana---Health and Safety Code section 11530, imposingstringent penalties for possession of the drug irrespective ofabuse---is an unwelcome disruption of the delicate balancebetween reason and emotion in the state's drug control laws....Although the United States Supreme Court normally has given thestate legislatures an extended opportunity to clean their ownhouses, judicial finger-tapping where marijuana is concerned hasall the signs of continuing indefinitely. But, unbridledlegislative and police suppression of all uses of marijuana,together with savage sentences for even the most innocent uses,might prove to be the source of earlier constitutional review....The characteristics attributed to marijuana by law enforcementagencies, legislative reports and the communications media aremarkedly different from, or not supported by, availablescientific information.... In this country, the onlycomprehensive publication at a local or state levelscientifically describing the effects of marijuana is theso-called 'LaGuardia Report' . . . reactions which are nativelyalien to the individual cannot be induced by the ingestion orsmoking of the drug.... An even more subtle claim, assertedprimarily by law enforcement agencies, is that marijuana is a'stepping stone' to addictive and disabling drugs. Not only isthe alleged causal relationship unsupported in fact, but even theCalifornia Attorney General's Office has suggested that theevidence leads to a contrary conclusion.... In addition to the'stepping stone' thesis, the widely promoted claim that marijuanause causes crime is also lacking in factual support. TheLaGuardia researchers, in direct conflict with the routine alarmsfrom law enforcement officials, found that the alleged causalconnection does not exist. . . . Indeed, in several subsequentstudies it has been shown that there is a negative correlationbetween crime and the use of marijuana. . . . Unlike 'plaindrunk' reckless driving and drunk driving statutes, protectingonly against the abuses of alcohol, section 11530 [marijuana]declares a crime even when there is no abuse or victim.Ironically, although it is unlawful to drive under the influenceof any narcotic or any drug within the separate statutoryclassification of 'restricted dangerous drugs' (barbiturates,amphetamine and LSD), these driving offenses are alternativelypunishable as misdemeanors, and the penalties are less severethan for possession, without use, of marijuana. And it is only amisdemeanor to 'use' or 'be under the influence of'marijuana." (Boyko et al., 1967) "These 'new' drugs, however, were neither physicallyaddicting nor illegal; the dangers were considered moderate. Infact, this moderate element of danger might have added anintriguing dimension to the undertaking. The increased use ofmarihuana on college campuses appears to have a similarbackground with one added factor: the legal penalties are quitesevere, even though, like LSD, the drug is not physicallyaddicting. Students, therefore, rationalize that it is a 'bad'law which they are not obligated to obey (an attitude somewhatsimilar to the reaction to Prohibition)." (Kleber, 1967) R. D. Laing, M.D., writing in Sigma (Vol. 6), states: "Iwould be far happier if my own teenage children would, withoutbreaking the law, smoke marijuana when they wished, ratherthan start on the road of so many of their elders to nicotine andethyl alcohol addiction." "Summary of conclusions regarding effects. The Commissionhave now examined all the evidence before them regarding theeffects attributed to hemp drugs. It will be well to summarizebriefly the conclusions to which they come. It has been clearlyestablished that the occasional use of hemp [marijuana] inmoderate doses may be beneficial; but this use may be regarded asmedicinal in character. It is rather to the popular and commonuse of the drugs that the Commission will now confine theirattention. It is convenient to consider the effects separately asaffecting the physical, mental or moral nature. In regard to thephysical effects, the Commission have come to the conclusion thatthe moderate use of hemp drugs is practically attended by no evilresults at all. There may be exceptional cases in which, owing toidiosyncracies of constitution, the drugs in even moderate usemay be injurious. There is probably nothing the use of which maynot possibly be injurious in cases of exceptional intolerance....In respect to the alleged mental effects of the drugs, theCommission have come to the conclusion that the moderate use ofhemp drugs produces no injurious effects on the mind.... Inregard to the moral effects of the drugs, the Commission are ofthe opinion that their moderate use produces no moral injurywhatever. There is no adequate ground for believing that itinjuriously affects the character of the consumer . . . for allpractical purposes it may be laid down that there is little or noconnection between the use of hemp drugs and crime. Viewing thesubject generally, it may be added that the moderate use of thesedrugs is the rule, and that excessive use is comparativelyexceptional." (Indian Hemp-Drug Commission, 1894) "The psychic habituation to marihuana is not so strong asto tobacco or alcohol.... There is no evidence to suggest thatthe continued use of marihuana is a stepping stone to the use ofopiates. Prolonged use of the drug does not lead to mental,physical, or moral degeneration, nor have we observed anypermanent deleterious effects from its continued use."(Allentuck & Bowman, 1942) "There are no apparent reasons for cannabis' status as aDangerous Drug. It is not addictive, its use does not in Westernsociety cause crime or unacceptable sexuality, and it does notlead to addiction to the hard drugs. The major problem with thisdrug is that it is illegal. This has three undesirable effects:first, an underground, cannabis-using sub- culture is created andmaintained that puts the potential heroin addict one step neareraccess to the hard drugs; second, it lessens respect for D.D.A.[Dangerous Drug Act] drugs in the thousands of young people whohave tried marihuana or hashish and know from personal experiencehow harmless the drug is; third, it causes considerable waste ofman-power, either through creative and educated people being sentto prison for possession of the drug-a Glasgow doctor wassentenced to six months recently-or through the use of policemenwho would be better otherwise employed, to track down the drugand its users." (Laurie, I967) "The smoking of the leaves, flowers and seeds of Cannabissativa [marijuana] is no more harmful than the smoking of tobaccoor mullein or sumac leaves.... The legislation in relation tomarihuana was ill-advised . . . it branded as a menace and acrime a matter of trivial importance.... It is hoped that nowitch-hunt will be instituted in the military service over aproblem that does not exist." (Phalen, 1943) "Thecontrols over marihuana under federal [law] and state laws aredissimilar. Under the federal law, marihuana is not considered anarcotic drug. On the other hand, many states have coveredmarihuana by including it within the definition of 'narcoticdrug' since adoption of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act in 1932.Marihuana is equated in many state laws with the narcotic drugsbecause the abuse characteristics [under current laws, all use is'abuse'] of the two types of drugs, the methods of illicittrafficking [all exchange of pot is 'illicit'], and the types oftraffickers have a great deal in common.... Because marihuanadoes not result in physical dependence, the physician need notapply himself to physical complications of withdrawal.... Nophysical dependence or tolerance has been demonstrated. Neitherhas it been demonstrated that cannabis causes any lasting mentalor physical changes." (A.M.A. Committee on Alcoholism andDrug Dependence, 1967) "Two of the most common and widely used psychic modifiersare cannabis and alcohol.... First, marijuana is most often usedin a social setting, in a group of users who mutually enjoy theeffects of the drug. Second, the intent is to heighten enjoymentof outer experiences, e.g., conversation, listening to orperforming music, dancing, joking. Unlike the Brahman priest,whose vocabulary during his intoxication is limited to repeatingone of the names of his God, the marijuana devotee laughs,giggles, eats without restraint, tells jokes, participates insexual relationships, and takes pleasure in the company of bothmen and women, especially if they are also using marijuana.Third, the effects are interpreted by a marijuana-user asanalogous to those of alcohol. He prefers marijuana because theeffects are more rapid and 'neater'; there is no hangover, and nodebilitating physical consequences of chronic use. Thus, the useof cannabis in our society is to attain an experience which, farfrom renouncing the active life in favor of contemplative,ascetic ideal, affirms the pleasures of sex, music, food,laughter, and human companionship." (Chein et al., 1964) "A characteristic marihuana psychosis does not exist.Marihuana will not produce a psychosis de nova . . .""But even excessive marijuana use is less likely to lead toaggressive or anti-social conduct than immoderate consumption ofalcohol." (Allentuck & Bowman, 1942; Boyko et al., 1967;Murphy, 1963) The following excerpt is from a letter to The Princetonian,Princeton University, by the Director of Counseling Services atPrinceton. "If and when the severe laws governing marijuanaare to receive the review they probably deserve, this will comeabout only after a significant level of public interest andinfluential desire has been achieved. . . . In the meantime theunderground tide of illegal use will continue to swell and'lamentable affairs' [arrests] will occur. In judging thereasonableness of current laws, and indeed current clandestinemarijuana use, the individual should probe the facts, rather thanmerely harbor widespread and misinformed assumptions which oftenyield a sort of sociological hysteria whenever the subject israised. In the confidential settings of the Counseling Servicesand the Health Services, whenever the subject of marijuana isdiscussed we are pleased to find that factual information usuallyhelps clear away much of the undue anxiety stemming from thepopular myths surrounding this subject in our society at-large.Recognizing the reality of existing laws, and recognizing thefact that every individual must come to terms with such realitiesin his own way, we hope we may find ways to be helpful tostudents currently faced with such quandaries."(MacNaughton, 1967) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information WT01-B22-59IA087-000627-B012-98http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/mjeff1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050131 text/html 62002HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:08:44 GMTContent-length: 61784 The Effects of Marijuana on Consciousness Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) THE EFFECTS OF MARIJUANA ON CONSCIOUSNESS ANONYMOUS From: Altered States of Consciousness, edited byCharles T. Tart, Doubleday & Co., 1972, Chapter 22 A marijuana high usually lasts two or three hours, duringwhich a wide range of effects may occur, varying both inintensity and quality. The usual, most noticeable effect isintensification of sensation and increased clarity of perception.Visually, colors are brighter, scenes have more depth, patternsare more evident, and figure-ground relations both more distinctand more easily reversible. Other sense modalities do not havethe variety of visual stimuli, but all seem to be intensified.Sounds become more distinct, with the user aware of sounds heotherwise might not have noticed. Music, recorded and live, isheard with increased fidelity and dimension, as though there wereless distance between the source and the listener. Taste andsmell are also enhanced under marijuana. The spice rack is atreasure of sensation, and food develops a rich variety oftastes. Skin receptors are also effected. Heat, cold, and pressurereceptors become more sensitive. Pain produces paradoxicaleffects. If attention is not on the area of pain, there is areduced sensitivity to the hurt. But awareness of pain from alesion, such as a burn or cut, will often persist for a longerperiod than usual, even allowing for the changed perception oftime under marijuana. Awareness of proprioceptive responses is enhanced. The personusing marijuana may become aware of usually automatic,non-conscious, muscle tensions, small movements, feedback andcontrol processes, and feelings of physical comfort anddiscomfort. These can be perceived with great clarity anddistinctness. Such effects vary with the individual and the situation.Sometimes one modality will predominate; sometimes a sequence ofeffects will occur; sometimes nothing will seem to happen. Thedirection or modality of effect can be often manipulated by theindividual if he deliberately exposes himself to the stimulus,such as music, or paintings. However, such setting may not affectthe perception if the person is not otherwise ready to respond inthat way. Effects more often call attention to themselves; theuser observes what he is experiencing in the situation andrealizes it is not how he usually experiences the stimuli. On theother hand, some sense modalities may function in a straightpedestrian manner, neither being enhanced nor diminished. The person himself is the most important determinant of howthe enhancement will appear. Some persons orient primarily tovisual stimuli and visual thinking, others to sound, others totactile impressions. Visual orientation seems to predominateamong persons in our culture; audile and tactile thinking is lesscommon. It seems likely that sensory enhancement of a marijuanahigh would be most noticed in the predominate sense modality ofthe user; it certainly should have a differential response inrelation to less used ways of perceiving. Another factor which affects the response is that personsunfamiliar with the marijuana state frequently must"learn" that they are perceiving experience in adifferent way. That is, someone makes them aware of changedperception by showing them objects, playing music, and callingtheir attention to the difference in sights and sounds. Then theybecome consciously aware of the perceptual changes. Thisinitiation procedure has led sociologist H. S. Becker (Becker,I963; partially reproduced in Solomon, I966) to suggest that mostof the effects of marijuana are learned, not spontaneous. He says(accurately, I am sure) that the user must learn to notice theeffects, categorize them, and connect them to the totalexperience of using the drug. What is learned in most cases isnot a new way of perceiving, but the awareness of a change inperception. Few persons observe what they are doing in the senseof observing their seeing, and it is not surprising that manyshould have to learn how to become aware of themselvesexperiencing by checking current perception against memory andexpectations. The user's internal psychological needs will also influencehis response. A fear of being overwhelmed by too much input willoften reduce any changes to only those which the user can copewith or to changes only in certain modes. A fear of losingcontrol over the perception of experience may suppress most ofthe effects and even shut down responses to below normal. On theother hand, emotional involvement with some part of theenvironment may enhance its perception. Internal physical needsalso affect the response, e.g., hunger may be intensified so theperson finds himself ravenous on getting high. For a person using marijuana for the first few times sensorychanges occur sequentially, rather than all at once. First he maynotice increased brightness and clarity of colors, then sounds,then visual structures, such as paintings or designs. (Twodimensional photographs and motion pictures may be seen in threedimensions in the marijuana high, a perception which can betransferred to the normal state under certain conditions.) Thenproprioceptive sensations may present themselves. Any order ofthe effects may occur during one high state or several. Ofteneffects will develop to particular levels and then stabilizewithout further elaboration. I know some individuals who listento music during a high, and this is their major use andapparently their only enhancement. There are two states of awareness which relate to thesesensory effects. The basic one can be called pure awareness. Inthis state the person is completely and vividly aware of hisexperience, but there are no processes of thinking, manipulating,or interpreting going on. The sensations fill the person'sattention, which is passive but absorbed in what is occurring,which is usually experienced as intense and immediate. Pureawareness is experiencing without associations to what is there. The other state of awareness is one which can be termedconscious awareness, in which the sensory experience is connectedto meanings, plans, functions, decisions, and possible actions.This is our normal way of perceiving and how we usually go aboutour daily lives. We do not sense the world directly, but with theincorporation of our memories, meanings, and uses. In the stateof pure awareness objects are experienced as sensory qualities,without the intrusion of interpretation. There are examples ofthis in normal life. The sensation of sexual orgasm may be (andhopefully is) experienced with pure awareness. Natural beauty,such as flowers, mountains, oceans, and sunsets, is sometimesexperienced from a point of awareness without adding consciousthinking. These two processes of awareness have been described byCharles Solley and Gardner Murphy (1960, Chapter 14) asnon-reflective consciousness and reflective consciousness. AlanWatts compares the awareness state to a floodlight of attention,which shows a broad area and lights up anything that is there.Consciousness awareness he compares to a spotlight, which isfocused and can be directed, though on a narrower area. This is agood analogy in pointing out that no deliberate directing is donein the awareness state, although it is sometimes the case thatthe area perceived in awareness may be a small one seen in greatdetail. The awareness state can be called "choiceless"because choice is a part of consciousness functions. Decisionsmade outside of consciousness are not called "bychoice" since choice implies conscious action. In a state ofdirect awareness there are no choices made and no decisions oractions occur. The stream of sensation flows and the person isaware of what is happening; if he acts he does so withoutconsciously deciding to move. (That is, action is handled by someprocess other than the consciousness monitoring the awarenessexperience.) When complicated action becomes necessary consciousattention is activated and the sensation is used as stimuli,criteria, or information for the choices, plans, or action. The awareness is not always experienced purely undermarijuana, but often is mixed with some, though reduced,conscious attention. Consciousness, conscious awareness, orconscious attention involves a connecting function which observesexperience in relation to past experience, memory images, memoryrecording, expectancies, plans, goals, etc. This type ofconsciousness may intrude on the awareness state at a low level.However, when awareness fills the attention there is a"becoming lost" in the experience, in which there isoften not even a memory of what occurred. This seems to be astate in which consciousness functions are not present, and allexperience is at the level of awareness. Consciousness,attention, and memory recording are apparently not active. (It ispossible that attention was present and either was not rememberedor the memory is not accessible to consciousness.) Such a stateof pure awareness is at one end of a continuum of varying degreesof conscious activity, with the other end at a state in which thecontents of awareness are used for decisions, plans, inferences,etc., and are not experienced for their primary sensoryqualities; they are information rather than experiences. This analysis suggests a reason for sensory enhancement undermarijuana, a movement of attention from consciousness processesto awareness processes. We usually think of attention assynonymous with consciousness, but it is an uneasy synonymy.Consciousness seems to be more than attention, but we cannotdescribe a consciousness without attention. Perhaps it ispossible for attention energy to move into sensory processes andoperate less in the decisional, deliberative processes ofconsciousness. If this happens it would provide much more energyfor attending to sense data, and we could expect the sensoryexperience to be more vivid and more detailed. Intensity of sensory experience seems related to the totalproportion or amount of attention which is involved in theprocess. If attention is used in conscious or unconsciousprocesses in making decisions, remembering, evaluating, etc.,then this much is removed from the awareness of the senseexperience. Thus it may be that one of the causes of sensoryenhancement under marijuana is that attention energy moves fromconsciousness processes into awareness processes, which amplifiesthe experience. TIME DISTORTION Besides sensory enhancement, the other most immediate effectof marijuana is a change in the perception of time: events takelonger to occur. Bach's first Brandenburg Concerto lasts hours.An hour seems to have passed, but the dock records 25 minutes.The person's internal fantasies are long and involved, but only afew minutes have passed in government time. In this state thefantasies and music do not move at a faster pace---they move attheir own usual rate, though often more fluently and more dearly.The impression is that external time must have slowed down, whilethe internal experience continues at the same rate. There is notthe impression of speed or rapidity, but that the time availableto the user is magnified. There are similar effects in normal experience. Time spent ata boring talk seems to pass more slowly, and one thinks indismay, "What, only five minutes have passed since I lookedat my watch?" A method used by Linn Cooper (1956) to induce time distortionunder hypnosis is useful to note here. A metronome set at onebeat per second is used. The hypnotized subject is told that themetronome is slowing down to one beat every two seconds, everyfive seconds, once a minute. Verbally or conceptually we can nowsay that the subject's internal rate has remained the same, butexternal time relative to the subject has slowed down. Has thesubject's own pace actually speeded up? I do not know, and I canthink of no reliable criteria for determining this. Brain waveresearch shows that the basic alpha rhythm can be speeded up by aflickering light (called photic driving), but not very much, andnot even to twice its normal rhythm. Cooper's subjects reportthat they do mentally imagine the amount of thoughts appropriateto the expanded time available, including counting imaginedobjects. This may be a convenient hallucination or it may be anaccurate description of what they do. (Even calculation of realproblems would not be a valid test because calculating geniusescan answer complex mathematical problems almost instantaneously,and this ability may be available under hypnosis, though it hasnever been reported to my knowledge under marijuana or hypnosis.)In this procedure under hypnosis and also in marijuana thesubjective experience of time is disconnected from the marking ofsocial or government time. The effect under marijuana is analogous to effects in visualand sound modalities. Visual scenes often have more depth, soundsare heard with more dimension; so too with time-there is anexpansion of the fabric of time so there is a feeling of depthinstead of the usual two dimensional flow. The explanation of this sometimes given by marijuana users isthat more is happening: they are thinking faster or more thoughtsare occurring in the same time period. This could cause externaltime to be relatively slower. Although it need not be the casethat internal processes change at a faster rate it is possiblethat a person is aware of more perceptions in a given amount oftime as a result of the enhancement of sensory data. With visualenhancement more details of the movements of the self and othersare attended to. This means that more information is perceived inthe same amount of time. This is also true of proprioceptive andtactile responses. Time is somewhat conditioned to a normal rateof information input in particular contexts. One has a"standard rate of intake" and if the amount ofinformation is increased for a unit of time, then one of theresponses may be that time is going slower. To be conscious ofany change in experience there must be a comparison with previoussimilar situations. Thus if the time experience while high iscompared with a similar normal experience, or with a time paceconstructed from normal experience, it may be perceived asslower. A more important cause for time distortion under marijuana canbe found by noting how persons normally judge the passage oftime, then investigating the changes in these criteria caused bymarijuana. This is rather difficult because no one knows how wejudge time. Nevertheless there are some relevant observationswhich can be made.(1) Notice the situations in which time seems to alter for manypersons in everyday experience and out-of-the-ordinaryexperience. These are situations in which the experience itselfis the focus of attention, they are not means to extrinsic goals.Persons totally involved in making love seem to have no awarenessof how much time may pass. Persons in a state of anger do notbecome aware of time lapse until the emotion subsides or egocontrols are invoked. Psychotherapy hours in which emotionalmaterial is covered seem to be out of time awareness. Mysticsbecome unaware of the passage of time during meditation, as dopersons having peak experiences (Maslow, I964). In dreams,daydreams, fantasies, ecstasy, and strong emotional states, thesense of time is absent or changed. And in the state of pureawareness, as I have used the term, there is no perception of therate of time. These are all personal experiences in whichconscious attention is not dominant, and immediate experience,rather than goals, expectancies, plans, and decisions, ispredominant. Time perception is a socially reinforced response.The experiences and states I have described are not states whichare socially conscious; they are not internally subordinated tosocial time or schedules. Anger cannot be paced with consciouscontrol, nor can ecstasy. Feelings, fantasies, dreams, andawareness do not incorporate the sense of time which is built upby and maintained in the consciousness. Thus when one isexperiencing such content there is no marking of the passage oftime, and to the extent this material is the content ofawareness, the less social time is noted. Immediate experience isalways timeless; time is perceived in relation to the uses ofexperience in controlling or predicting the future orinterpreting the past, the present being perceived in relation topast or future. This is one of the major functions ofconsciousness. In a normal conscious state when the internal orexternal input is to be changed or manipulated the time requiredis automatically projected, based on past experience. Thisimposes the knowledge of time on the consciousness. One of theeffects of marijuana is to reduce the strength of expectanciesand goals which are socially reinforced. Thus non-timeexperiences are increased in relative strength and time orientedassociations are decreased, which creates the sense that time isexpanded. Some indication that this is what occurs may be seen inreports of marijuana users that time passes instantaneously. Onegirl reported that when high she suddenly discovered 45 minuteshad passed without her realization of this. And there are reportsof listening to music when the individual realizes the music hadstopped, without his remembering hearing the selection as it wasplaying. What happens in these cases is that most of the person'sattention is in non-time processes, so that time passage is notnoted until the social consciousness returns. Then it seems thatno time has passed, since there was no process noting itspassage. Just as in sleep, amnesic hypnosis, or anaesthesia,there is no consciousness of the duration of the state, and theconscious time flow seems unbroken from the moment of fallingasleep to the moment of waking. When observing sensory stimuli, listening to music,fantasying, etc., there is the feeling of expanded time becausethe outside experiences are overwhelmed by the mental, internalexperience which is not marking time and there is no way to gaugetheir pace. The quantity of the time change varies. If the useris almost totally involved with the awareness processes, withlittle conscious attention, then there will be little sense ofduration, and long periods of clock time will go by quickly. Events themselves are timeless, in that they are always in thepresent---they do not echo their past nor presage their futurestates; we alone do that to them, for ourselves. And we ourselvesdo not experience the past or the future; we experience memoriesor expectancies, which may be realistic or fantasies. So ourexperience of the passage of time is based on our comparison ofpresent experience with our remembrance of the past, usually theimmediate past, or our anticipation of the future and how we getthere. Marijuana decreases the strength of the automatic memory,expectancy, and anticipation processes; thus the perception of anexperience is not surrounded by the usual multitude of pastencounters, future possibilities, and potential uses. In contextsrequiring action on the basis of expectations and plans, such asdriving an automobile, they are available and often with morefocused attention. Given a situation not requiring activity ordecisions, the penumbra of response patterns, functions, andpotentials surrounding experience decreases, and the immediateexperience per se is perceived, rather than its position in apattern of change. This decreases comparison of the present withthe past, and again reduces the feeling of duration or passing oftime. ("Passing of time" is a curious phrase, becausetime passing cannot be empirically observed. One may conclude thepassage of time by observing changes in experience, but it is notreally an inference either. What seems to be described is themental reviewing of the preceding changes which led up to thepresent point. Re-running the succession in memory from somepoint up to the present gives the sensation of passing time. Weare aware of events which are different from the ones we nowexperience but that are connected by physical changes in which wehave participated (directly or through observation). Thisawareness may be "awareness of the passage of time." In summary, under marijuana, the sense of time is distorted.First, because mental contents and awareness processes which arenot connected to time needs or markers are strengthened. Theseinclude daydreams, fantasies, event memories, peak experiences,emotions, and the pure awareness state. Second, because goals,anticipations, and expectancies are decreased in prominence,reducing attention given to possible changes in the environment,which decreases awareness of future states. Third, memory ofimmediate past experience is decreased in strength, which reducesknowledge of change and moves attention to the present. Ifconsciousness is completely passive, and non-time elements fillattention, then the experience seems timeless. If someconsciousness processes and associations are maintained time willseem to have slowed, as attention moves among the variouscontents. EXPECTANCIES Both the intensification of sensory experience and theexpansion of time are part of an increased attentiveness toimmediate experience in contrast to memories of the past or plansfor the future. Memories and plans are experienced but only asthey arise out of the immediate content and needs of the person'sinternal and external experience; they do not automaticallyoperate as in normal consciousness. Every action and potentialaction, in the normal state, is evaluated according to itsconsequences: what results will follow. Mental processes imagineas many consequences as they have experience to do so, bothimmediate and long range, testing these consequences againstcriteria or goals of valued states. The consequences which aremost valued control the action. For example, if a person feelsangry toward another he may want to insult him verbally. Hementally anticipates the possible consequences of this action,which may include the release and satisfaction of the anger,feelings of masculinity, enhanced self concept of strength, etc.,on the positive side, and the anger or disapproval of the otherperson, loss of self control, fear of his own impulses, what hismother would think of the action, etc. on the negative side.Depending on the person's past experience, his needs andstrengths of various values, the action will be taken, modified,or inhibited. Every action a person engages in is surrounded andextended mentally (consciously and unconsciously) by suchexpectancies, and every situation experienced by a person isresponded to by anticipating its potential consequences andrelating them to desirable and undesirable conditions. (Ofcourse, the opposite of such action---its inhibition---is alsosubject to the same processes.) Some of this process isconscious, especially when the situation is new, unfamiliar, veryimportant, or ambiguous, but most of the expectancy andanticipation process is done preconsciously. Normally persons arenot aware of the activity which occurs to determine an action;expectancies have become incorporated into automatic responses. The mind is efficient in making its activities automatic.First an action is consciously made in response to a need orsituation. If it is successful (reinforced) it becomes habitual,and is taken automatically without the need of consciousattention, much as driving a car, sewing, tying your shoes, andsmoking a cigarette are all composed of large blocks of nowautomatic actions which once had to be done with consciousattention at every point. Later only the major elements must becontrolled with conscious attention, such as changing lanes whendriving, searching for an ashtray, etc. How can an action bereleased without conscious attention? What must happen is thatcriteria for action and the particular action are connected bythe conscious mind; then the process can be made automatically.When the criteria are fulfilled, then the action is made.(2) Thissuggests that there is some process or energy which releasesaction but which does not need conscious attention. Similarly,most of the expectancies around experiences are notconscious---only the more important ones or ones which are socomplex as not to be automatically used. Such expectancies and anticipations function to keep behaviorconsistent, goal directed, and reasonably integrated. They helpavoid conflicts within the personality and with the environment,including other persons. They have obvious survival value andundoubtedly are reinforced by our society and our own needs. Thefunction of reinforcement is clear: The reinforcement value ofthe projected consequences of an action come to affect ourdecision to take or not to take the action. These expectanciesare responses to possible futures, and orient our actions to thefuture} not the present. One of the major effects of marijuana is to decrease thestrength of these expectancies and anticipations, on bothconscious and preconscious levels. Thus in the high state theexpectancy processes decrease their influence on behavior. Sincethese are always oriented to future states, they take attentionaway from perception of immediate experience and turn it tofollowing imagined states. Thus when attention given to imaginedstates is reduced, the perception of the present experience willincrease in strength or intensity, either because more energy isavailable for such awareness or because there are fewer processesto attend to, and present experience becomes relatively morepredominant in the mental field. This enhancement of immediateexperience is reflected in the effects of marijuana on sense dataand time perception. Indeed, the decrease in expectancies, whichare connected to goals, may be one of the reasons for the changein the awareness of time, since time is perceived in terms ofchanges, including changes in relation to a potential state ofaffairs. If the knowledge provided by expectancies is reduced,then the immediate experience will not be seen as a point in timewith a future, but more as an event, per se. The reduction in the strength of expectancies also contributesto the increase in intensity of sensory experience. Objects aswell as situations and actions are surrounded by our potentialresponses to them, such as our past experiences with them, how wemight use them, other forms they have taken, how they are made,their qualities in other sense modalities, etc. When we perceivean object, whether a fire in a fireplace, a photograph of a fire,a fire engine, or a fiery speaker, not only are we aware of theobject, but also we have incorporated in our awareness theseother elements which give structure and meaning to the sensedata. Thus we know that the object is a bird cage or a rib cage,and we know its qualities, functions, and potentials. Usuallythese are keyed to our verbal response, our classification, butthey are known non-verbally as well (e.g., we can have emotionalresponses or motor responses without verbal responses). FUNCTIONAL ASSOCIATIONS Particularly important to us is the function of objects.(3)One sees this in a child's definition: a hole is to dig. A bridgeis to walk over to get to the other side. Someone said that homeis "A place where when you go there, they have to take youin." There is an essential effect of these operationaldefinitions: they force classifications rather than specificity.Any hole is to dig and how hole X differs from hole Y is notimportant so long as each can be dug. My home is not differentfrom your home, since they will both take us in. Such definitionsattempt to capture some particular criteria of whatever theydefine. The criteria of definition are the only characteristicswhich need to be observed in perceiving the object, and we aretrained to perceive in this way. We learn as children to see thefunction of objects and to see the similarities of objects,rather than experience them in all possible ways. The advantageof this is obvious: we survive because we can use theenvironment, we can generalize, we can cooperate within asocially constructed reality. The disadvantages are obvious: wemay not see reality except in terms of functions, which shuts outan enormous amount of reality (some of which would be functionalin various contexts). And often persons see objects only in termsof their own functional needs, which narrows their perspectiveconsiderably. (Psychologists might see persons as experimentalsubjects, an insurance salesman might see one as a prospect,etc.) This leads, incidentally, to failures of discrimination inperception, illustrated by the classical occidental observationthat all Chinese look alike, and no doubt Chinese observe thesame about occidentals. One of my friends took an astronomycourse and discovered that stars were not all the same color, ashe had previously perceived, but were red, blue, yellow, andwhite. This led him to realize that all trees looked alike tohim. Of course he would not have said that they were identical,but I doubt if he could have told the differences between an elmand an oak, even standing in front of them, because a tree iswith leaves and to be shaded by. And after all, which of us couldeasily describe essential differences between two holes dug by achild in the sand at the beach? Though the child probably could. Under marijuana the functional associations of objects aredecreased in strength. In addition to this specific association,other associations such as verbal labeling and memory constructsof such objects are decreased in strength. Normally all theseelements are imposed on the conscious experience of the object,some incorporated into the perception (such as seeing the objectas a teapot) and some claiming attention on the periphery ofconsciousness (such as knowing it is hot and not touching it).When these associations are decreased there are fewer mentalimpositions on the sensory perception of the object. Aspectswhich would normally be shut out (such as a blemish on the teapotor the shape of the handle) are given equal attention, and henceare seen instead of being ignored. When attention is directed bygoals, as it usually is in the normal state, it is simply notgiven to non-functional stimuli, i.e., elements that do not haveanything to do with what the person wants at the moment. The person under marijuana is not seeing this object as"flowers" with a mental image of flowers and hismemories of flowers being confirmed by these flowers, which areto look at and smell and if one can look at and smell these onehas confirmed that they are flowers and that settles that part ofreality, and so on to another. Rather he has a great deal of timeand it is not urgent what uses these have or what consequencescould result and much more of his awareness is filled by theseflowers.. And there are textures, colors, shades, shapes, feels,crevices, shadows, smells; all things that are there; experiencedrather than used. An important principle is that you can experience somethingonly if you do not think in terms of its function. You can knowwhat it is only if you do not impose what it will be or could beor ought to be. This often becomes quite evident under marijuana. This suggests a principle regarding processes of attention.When attention is reduced for some elements in perception, theamount given to other elements increases, as though attention isa mobile amount of energy, and when a quantity is not needed atone point it moves to another point. This is consistent withFreudian theory, which holds that as energy is released fromconflict points it becomes available to the general system. Withmarijuana, when association processes reduce their demands onattention, it flows to whatever else is in the consciousness. (Iam using a fluid metaphor, but other models will do equally well.Electrically one can speak in terms of activation. Cyberneticallywe could refer to homeostatic balancing of elements. Or we couldtalk of homunculi leaving the study and going to the patio.) ASSOCIATIONS This reduction of associations is an important basic effect ofmarijuana. It contributes to the expansion of time, to sensoryenhancement, and to the increase in attention which is given tothe focus of consciousness. However, not all association patternsare decreased in strength in the high state. Well known are theflights of fantasy and dreaming stimulated by hashish andcannabis.(4) And in non-fantasy high states users have reportedthat they can perceive connections and associations of ideas thatwere not accessible to them in the non-high state (usually called"straight" by users). This seems inconsistent with whatI have just said about the decrease in association strength.However, while associations, particularly those based on sociallearning, are reduced in strength, any association may gain instrength if it becomes the focus of the detailed attentionpossible under marijuana. Thus fantasies and creative thinkingmay have increased associations and may be more fully developedthan in the normal state of consciousness. The associations which are reduced in strength seem to bethose which are learned through social reinforcement: meaningsand behaviors which are taught by society. Functions of objectsare socially taught. Patterns of communication are social.Language and verbal knowledge (Columbus discovered America in1492) is social in origin. Inhibitions and controls on behaviorare socially reinforced, and are often incorporated into theverbal system through "should" and "shouldnot" statements. When social norms are the same as personalneeds, desires, and meanings, there is consistency in theresponse to a situation or object. When conflict between socialand personal directions occurs it must be resolved, and usuallyit is resolved in favor of social meanings, functions, andapproved behavior (usually called rational). Thus the socialperception of a situation may exclude many of the potentialmeanings, behaviors, and emotions. Under marijuana this excludingfunction of socially learned associations is reduced in strength.The excluding function has certain survival value. It keeps ourconsciousness from being dogged up with unnecessary anddistracting contents. Thus a scholar looks at a book and noticesthe title but not the binding; for a book binder the opposite isthe case. Associations which contribute to the goals of societyare learned by persons through social reinforcement, and oneeffect of these associations is to inhibit other associations.Marijuana decreases this inhibition and lowers the reinforcementvalue of the association. In effect this makes all associationsmore equal, and the network of associations is less guided orchanneled in socially reinforced directions. A person who is highmay be aware that an object is a pencil, but he may successivelyalso see it as a shape, a phallic metaphor, a geometrical solid,the printing on it, etc. He has more associations once they areaway from the strict control of social perception. INHIBITIONS The same pattern can be seen in expectancies andanticipations. Socially oriented behavior makes great use ofexpectancies to control behavior in an effort to maximizeapproval and minimize or avoid disapproval, which are socialreinforcers.(5) Such behavior thus involves a large amount ofinhibition. By inhibition I mean any kind of control to preventactivity from reaching a certain level. The activity can bethoughts, action, fantasies, or emotions. Inhibitions in Freudianterms are controlled by anti-cathexes, in learning theory byaversive stimuli, and in terms used here, by expectations ofaversive stimuli. Inhibitions need not be on anti-social acts,but are often to direct behavior into patterns normal in oursociety. Persons maintain appropriate social distances (which arearbitrary), you do not tug at the beard of someone you have justmet (though the thought may cross your mind), and a man does notcry in public. These may seem minor but they are controlled withgreat power by social reinforcement, as can be seen by the strongrejection of the behavior if it occurs. Of course, inhibitionsare also placed on behavior which would be dangerous to society,such as aggressive or destructive acts. When behavior is inhibited, the psychological tendency is toinhibit any mental activity which might lead to such behavior.Feelings, impulses, images, fantasies, etc., may be inhibited anddecreased in strength, or even prevented from enteringconsciousness. Such inhibited feelings and impulses may appear inconsciousness in the high state, often without effort of theperson. This may cause anxiety and the person may use ego defensemeasures to block their appearance or diminish their threat. Onthe other hand, he can also use methods of analysis andself-therapy in the high state to deal with conflict material,and may free himself from neurotic responses. The effects of the reduction of social inhibitions can be seenin various ways. At marijuana social gatherings persons may notfeel pressure to participate in conversational games, playbehavior increases, physical activity may increase. The decreaseof socially reinforced inhibitions also accounts for the actionsof users which claim public attention: jumping over fireplugs andparking meters, uninhibited dancing (erotic and non-erotic), andplayful behavior (which is subtly taboo in our society). Here theperson is expressing impulses in behavior which would usually beinhibited by expectancy of negative social reinforcement (frowns,rejection, blame, punishment and other expressions ofdisapproval). However, this reduction in strength of socialinhibitions does not usually result in anti-social acts (unlessjumping fireplugs is considered anti-social). This is curiousbecause social inhibitions are usually considered the bulwarkagainst committing crimes, aggressing against others, rapingwomen, etc. But we do not have cases of contemporary users ofmarijuana burglarizing or attacking others, though such effectsare evident in the use of alcohol, where users are much morelikely to express violent and aggressive behavior. Why then if inhibitions are reduced in strength do not usersbecome violent and aggressive? One reason may be that aggressionis usually specific to situations and expectancies aboutsituations, and the use of marijuana today rarely is in aconflict situation. With reduced pressure from memories andexpectancies one would also expect less non-relevant feeling.Beyond this, one of the psychological effects of marijuana iseuphoria. Thus anger and aggressive impulses are less strong anddo not draw much support from the rest of the personality. Thiseffect may also be related to the decrease in the strength ofsocial reinforcers, since chronic anger is often the result ofconflicts between social requirements and personal desires. ATTENTION The process of attention is clearly affected by marijuana. Themost obvious effect is to narrow the amount of diverse contentsin the focus of attention. The person under marijuana usuallyperceives fewer objects of attention, which may mean physicalobjects, actions, social elements, emotions, etc. We have alreadynoted this effect: a person who is high may become absorbed in anobject, event, or process to the exclusion of everything else. Atrain of fantasy may occupy all of a person's attention. This isa psychological analogy of tunnel vision, with the contents ofthe tunnel expanded. In the normal, straight state, conscious and non-consciousprocesses give continual attentiveness to many internal andexternal stimuli, with responses such as awareness, memories,expectancies, and the many associations we have already noted.Many of these are conscious, especially those on which decisionsare necessary. Others, and probably the bulk of the responses,autonomously operate without being consciously attended to, andcome to consciousness only when necessary. These are in apreconscious state, but nevertheless involve perception,associations, memories, and expectancies.(6) Such processes oftenregulate behavior when consciousness does not intervene (as indriving a car automatically). But whenever novel stimuli appearor more than routine decisions must be made, the contents becomepart of the conscious state. In the consciousness processes connections can be made amongseveral types of information, and in different contexts ofmeaning---making connections with the many factors relevant to adecision or the resolution of conflict.. Conscious attentionmoves easily from one interpretation to another interpretation ofinformation, with the various memories and expectancies which gowith each interpretation, thus obtaining more information for thedecision. These interpretations and associations are drawn fromthe preconscious processes, which, alone, cannot makeinterconnections among themselves as fluidly as canconsciousness. Connections of ideas are made in preconsciousstates, but these seem based on almost any relation, fromcontiguity to puns. Consciousness can select the significant orrealistic connections and systematize their use. We can regard the conscious system as the system which doesjust that: selects and interprets information in relation to agoal or purpose. It does this when it is activated by attentionenergy. It may be that attention is the activating energy ofawareness. Attention usually is in the conscious system, whichconsists of processes which select information to make decisions.It can also be activated in preconscious contents, which containinformation, emotional values, and random associations. Most ofthe time awareness is of the conscious processes. Under marijuana attention-awareness energy may move into thepreconscious system and be less in consciousness processes. Sincethere are fewer elements in attention the person is more stronglyaware of any individual element of meaning, memory, emotion,etc., and less of its relation to other elements which would berelevant in the conscious system. Whatever is in the center of attention occupies all ofawareness: this may be sensory data, such as visual stimuli, orimagery, such as fantasies. The effect can be termed a unity ofattention, in that all attention is focused on one subject. Innormal conscious states, several channels can be used at once,e.g., reading a book while listening to music. Attention mayalternate, but even so keeps all channels of input on the edge ofattention. This does not occur with marijuana, which so far asawareness goes, fills the attention with one thing at a time. Ifone is recalling an experience from the memory, then almost allattention is on the event, and almost none on the externalenvironment, expectancies or plans. Processes in normal stateswhich seem to parallel this would be extreme concentration on abook or television, exciting conversations, and the state ofromantic love. It is not the case that there is less attention, for thequantity seems at least the same. Analogically it is as though aportion of a photograph were blown up to the size of the originalpicture, thus maintaining the size of the print but increasingthe magnification of a smaller relative section. Some of the processes which contribute to this effect areobvious. The reduction in expectancies and associations reducesperipheral contents of consciousness. Many of these elements aremaintained continuously at a low level, appropriate to theenvironment and needs of the person. Some items are continuouslymonitored, much as a hostess may habitually check how each of herguests is getting along. Such monitoring takes some attentionaway from any central content, just as the hostess may notconcentrate fully on her own conversation if she is attending tothe state of her party. However, without the need for these sideglances, attention flows to the central subject. This means thatthe plans, anticipations, etc., are not automatically attendedto, although if such an element enters the central position itreceives the intense central attention and is attended to ingreat detail. Peripheral attention and its contents are reduced in the highstate; central attention receives the energy which wouldotherwise be used in peripheral attention. This could be becauseeach type of attention is different, and thus differentiallyaffected, or because the peripheral contents are reduced instrength because of the reduction in the strength ofassociations. The latter seems to be true; the former may bealso. MEMORY One of the processes important in perception is the comparingof current input with similar past experience. When we see afriend, a memory image of his face is presented to ourconsciousness along with the sensation of his actual presentappearance. This memory image (which can be called a schema)blends with the current sensation, so that the perception is acombination of the two. The relative strengths of each source ofinformation probably vary from person to person. Some primarilyperceive the memory image, with the sensory input serving asconfirmation of the identification. For others, the memory imagemay be so weak that reorientation and identification iscontinually necessary. Though the construction and recall of thisimage is not clearly understood, it must be partially constructedfrom previous experience of the stimulus (including verbalknowledge) up to a point where the person knows all he needs toknow for purposes of his response. After this, encounters withthe stimulus do not add to the memory image appreciably; furtherdiscrimination is unnecessary and the image stabilizes. (Ofcourse, the person may continue to make discriminations. One ofthe valued behaviors in science is to make perceptualdiscriminations for which we have no functional need, assumingthat such information is valuable per se or may be valuablelater.) Most persons rely principally on memory images in perceptionunless there are evident differences in the immediate situation,and their responses are keyed to the memory image. Consequentlywe do not respond only to immediate experience. We identifycurrent experience according to past experience and then respondon the basis of past experience, modified by whatever differenceswe perceive to be significant in the current information. Ouractions originate from past experience, they are connected to thestructures built up in our memories, and these memories areelicited by the immediate stimulus. In unfamiliar settings, nomemory image is available. Then we must deliberately andconsciously act, randomly act, follow instructions or models, oract according to the most similar memory image. Any situation isa combination of elements, and may call for complex combinationsof memories and response patterns, some new, some familiar. Marijuana has two effects on this process. The first is toreduce the general automatic availability of memory images; thesecond is to increase the strength of memories when they arerelevant to central needs. We have already discussed the generalreduction in strength of memories in response to currentexperience, which is principally in the automatic recall ofmemory schema. The strength or visibility of the mental image isreduced, with a resulting increase in the brightness of the datathemselves (there being nothing else to look at). This explainsalso why experiences seem new: they are observed without thefeeling of familiarity caused by memory images. For most personsin straight consciousness it is likely that sensation is checkedagainst a memory image (at a preconscious level) and what is seenfrom the current stimulus is what is necessary to fulfill thecriteria for identification, based on the memory schema. Therelevant elements, the criteria, are affected by the goals orfunctions which are important to the person. We do not perceivedust on a typewriter when we look for something to type on. Whenwe look for a friend in a crowd we do not look at his face, weidentify it. Similarly, in conversation and daily life wegenerally know what we are seeing, so perception is moreidentification than observation. However, when fewer memoryimages are available, as when high, one must respond to the sensedata as unfamiliar material. This may cause anxiety, depending onthe individual and the environment, or it may result in pleasureat the enhancement or challenge of current perception. It mayalso increase the potential responses, since there is lesspressure for a learned habitual response, which would normallyinhibit other responses. (This may, incidentally, suggest an explanation for the jamaisvu sensation, in which there is the feeling that a normallyfamiliar situation is totally unfamiliar. Several experiences of jamaisvu reported to me seem to have occurred when there areunfamiliar emotional elements present, as though the usual memoryschema and their associated responses were not available.) At the same time, some memory images may be strengthened ifthey are emotionally salient. A person having paranoid fears, forexample, may find his imagery increased in strength. One personreports that once when high he observed a friend sitting to oneside of him staring directly at him. He turned to face his friendand found him looking in another direction, his face turnedpartially away from him. Apparently a fear activated the image ofa full staring face, which was superimposed on the profile of theother person. It may be that psychotic or schizophrenicperceptual projections are partially caused by increased internalimagery. Under marijuana, at least, emotional force may activateinternal imagery which is used to search for, identify, orinterpret incoming stimuli. So also if the person deliberately attempts to recall pastexperiences there will often be increased recall, either ofevents in great detail or Hashes of experiences. This isparticularly true if there is salient emotional content. Recallwhich appears to be eidetic may occur under marijuana, and imageswhich are like playbacks of the original perceptual experiencemay become accessible at will to conscious attention. If theconscious attention is allowed to unfocus, so that onlymonitoring is going on, almost instantaneous images can beobtained of visual and sometimes auditory or tactile stimuli. Theimage must be seen when it occurs; if there is an attempt to holdit in consciousness a mental composite image takes its place. Itis possible that what occurs is an activation of the actualmemory record, selected from the stream of consciousness which isrecorded in the brain.(7) Only one flash comes at a time. Thisability, incidentally, has been transferred to straight, non-highcontrol after it has been observed under marijuana. The essentialfeature seems to be in allowing the conscious attention not totry to hold on to the image when it appears. One must learn tosee rather than look. Another type of memory which is strengthened is that foremotion-laden events. Strong emotional responses, such as grief,fear, guilt, etc., often arise under marijuana. These areresponses to remembered events, responses which might normally besuppressed. Usually the person's sense of identity isfunctioning, so he can either accept the emotion and be a part ofit, which is usually therapeutic, or reject it, which may producedissonance and anxiety. "Bad trips" are sometimescaused by emotions or pressures which threaten the person's selfconcept or his sense of control. While suppression processes areusually not too effective as defenses, distraction is, because ofthe mobile flow of attention under marijuana. For this reason,movement such as dancing, running, exercise, showers, etc., willusually change the emotional tone. One other effect on memory should be noted. Normally we have ashort-term recall process which holds memories in access forabout 20 minutes, and then a long-term storage, which ispermanent. In the high state, short-term memory becomes shorter,and in very high states the sequence of thoughts is notremembered past one or two transitions. The sequence cansometimes be recalled with an effort, or reconstructed, but thereis no automatic remembering as there is normally. On the otherhand, after the high, events within it can be remembered,indicating that at least some of the experiences are being filedin long-term memory. Partly due to the reduction in strength of memory there isless intellectual control over the stream of consciousness.Memory seems to be needed to maintain concepts or goals underwhich to manipulate thoughts. Another cause of the reducedcontrol is the lowered inhibition processes, which are used inthinking to filter irrelevant material and keep it fromcluttering the conscious attention. Logical ideas and connectionsmay also be enforced by such inhibitions; these would be loosenedby the decrease in association strength. VARIABLES In general for marijuana to have effects the user mustcooperate with it and facilitate the effects. He must learn toallow himself to respond. There are some persons whose responseto marijuana is almost unnoticeable; their consciousness seemsnot to change. These may be persons who have fears about andstrong defenses against losing control, and elements of theirfeeling, thoughts, or action which threaten their control arestrongly rejected. Such personality systems are endangered bymarijuana effects and often maintain their structure againstthese effects. Sometimes they will respond, but what effects areoccurring will be blocked from their conscious awareness. Themost noticeable effect is often time distortion, indicated bylong silences and broken often by a comment that nothing ishappening. The effect of the physical and interpersonal setting on theresponse to marijuana is strong and usually controls the tone ofthe experience. The basic fact is that the individual creates thereaction, not the drug. If the person feels under pressure, thenthe drug will enhance his feeling of stress, and the effect willdepend on how the person can deal with the stimulus. If he feelsenergetic, the drug will enhance his willingness to be active.Some persons become less self- conscious, others moreself-conscious. Some move physically, others sit quietly. Sometalk, others are silent. Users of marijuana are as individual asthey are. For this reason, one must expect different effects tooccur from different times and varying physical and interpersonalsurroundings. For some the effect is quite different when smokedalone than with other persons, probably because social situationselicit different personality elements and present variouspressures. These variable factors should be noted in considering researchand investigation of the effects of marijuana. The plant probablydoes everything anybody has claimed for it, but only in asituation which enables it to do whatever is claimed for it. Onehighly respectable philosopher and author, who has explored avariety of chemicals, says that marijuana will take a person asfar as LSD. To which I would add, especially if you can go as faras LSD on it. This is not tautologous, for it cannot be said ofcoffee or orange juice; even if you are ready, coffee will nottake you there. There are further effects of marijuana which relate to complexstructures of association, learning, values, intra-personalitycommunication, interpersonal perception, and consciousness. It isdifficult to separate the awareness of these effects from theeffects of the awareness. It seems best to stop at this point,having discussed what seems verbalizable at present. Given facilitating conditions, the effects I have describedwill develop. Sensations are enhanced and clarified: sight,hearing, taste, touch. Time perception changes. Attention becomesmore unified, and moves more into preconscious material and thestate of pure awareness. The many broad processes of association,such as social meanings, memory images, expectancies, and plansare reduced in number and relevance. Inhibitions and suppressionsrelax, allowing emotions, thoughts, fantasies, and memories toHow more freely. The development and strength of these effectswill depend on the individual, the times he has used marijuana,how he has used marijuana, and the environment. (1) See "Time and the Unconscious" by MarieBonaparte (1940) for speculation on this problem from theframework of psychoanalysis. (2) This is the behavior structure described insightfully inPlans and the Structure of Behavior, by George Miller, EugeneGalanter, and Karl Pribram (1960). (3) An excellent discussion of this and other relations oflanguage to perception is in Semantics and Communication, by JohnC. Condon (1966, Chapter 3). (4) Accounts of such experiences can be found in The DrugExperience (Ebin, 61). (5) Julian B. Rotter (I955) discusses this process in"The Role of the Psychological Situation in Determining theDirection of Human Behavior." (6) By preconscious processes, I mean a state of mentalfunctioning which goes on outside of conscious attention.Lawrence Kubie describes this foggy territory in NeuroticDistortion of the Creative Process ( 1961 ) . (7) This kind of recall can be obtained by electricalstimulation of the brain. See Wilder Penfield and Larnar Roberts'book Speech and Brain Mechanisms (1959), Chapter 3. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) WT01-B22-60IA087-000627-B012-121http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/cbos.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050141 text/html 17877HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:08:31 GMTContent-length: 17659 Cannabis: the brain's other supplier Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information Cannabis: the brain's other supplier Rosie Mestel reprinted from the New Scientist 31 July 1993 Introductory Comment by R. Givens. The fact that THC has naturally occurring analogs in the humanbody flies in the face of REEFER MADNESS propaganda. A naturalcompound with specific receptors and a non-toxic disposal systemmakes it extremely unlikely that marijuana causes any healthdamage. This logic is supported by over 5,000 years of recordeduse without a recorded death. Now we know why. Cannabis is asnatural as vitamin C. THREE years ago, Israeli archaeologists stumbled upon a 1600year-old tragedy: the remains of a narrow hipped teenage girlwith the skeleton of a full term fetus still cradled in herabdomen. With her were grey ashes that contained traces oftetrahydrocannabinol, the active ingredient of marijuana. Couldit be that the midwife had administered the plant in a last ditcheffort to bring on labour or to ease her pain? Today, in nearby Jerusalem, another chemical is in the news-this one extracted not from ancient ashes but from fresh,pulverized pig brain. It is anandamide, a newly christenedchemical that might do naturally in our heads what marijuana doeswhen we choose to smoke it. Anandamide's discovery, along withthat of the molecule it binds to in the brain, has marijuanaresearchers buzzing with the best high they have had in years.The findings provide new hope for therapies that draw on theweed's long list of anecdotal medical uses: as a pain killer,appetite stimulant or nausea suppressant, to name a few. Theyalso throw open the windows onto the mysterious workings of ourbrains. Research into marijuana, or Cannabis sativa , has long beenmarginalised by official disapproval of the weed and its use. Itis, after all, classed as a drug with no medical merit, and itsrecreational use is widely frowned upon. But it was not alwaysso. For thousands of years, India revered the plant for itseffects on the mind. In China, where opium was the mind-bendingdrug of choice, the cannabis plant was used for medicines and itstough fibres for making clothes. The West also used marijuana:Queen Victoria's doctor administered it for Her Majesty'smenstrual cramps; George Washington and Thomas Jefferson bothgrew the plant on their southern estates as a source of fibre forropes and sails. (History does not record whether either of thesepresidents ever tried smoking their crop and, if so, whether theyinhaled or not.) But as demand for hempen rope and cloth diminished, and therecreational use of marijuana increased, anti-marijuana feelinggrew, reaching a peak in the 1930s. "If the hideous monsterFrankenstein came face to face with the monster marijuana hewould drop dead of fright," trumpeted Harry Anslinger,commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and a leadinganti-cannabis crusader of the times. In 1937, marijuana use wasoutlawed in the United States. By 1971 even its medical use wasbanned in the US and Britain. Marijuana may have been outlawed, but marijuana research wasnot, though it is not most government's top funding priority. in1964 Raphael Mechoulam, an Israeli chemist, identified andsynthesised the main mind-altering substance in the plant,delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, the most abundant of the 60 relatedchemicals. Scientists speculated that THC did its deed bysticking randomly to brain cells, interfering with their abilityto communicate by altering the electrical properties of theirmembranes, much as alcohol does. More recently came other exciting finds: in 1988, AllynHowlett of St Louis University Medical School discovered aspecific protein receptor for THC in mouse nerve cells- a proteinthat only THC and its relatives dock onto. Two years later, TomBonner's group at the National Institute of Mental Healthpinpointed the DNA that encodes the same receptor in rats. It isnow known that humans have the receptor, too. Finding a cannabinoid receptor implies that THC-unlike alcohol- has a quite precise modus operandi that taps into a specificbrain function. Presumably the drug binds to nerves that have thereceptor, and the nerves respond by altering their behavior. Theclassic effects of marijuana smoking are the consequences:changes in mood, memory, appetite, movement and perception,including pain. Researchers think THC affects so many mentalprocesses because receptors are found in many brain regions,especially in those that perform tasks known to be disturbedduring THC intoxication: in the banana-shaped hippocampus,crucial for proper memory; in the crumpled cerebral cortex, homeof higher thinking; and in the primitive basal ganglioncontroller of movement. Once a specially tailored receptor was found, the next stepwas simple- in theory, anyway. "The receptor had to be therefor a purpose -- presumably it didn't evolve so people couldsmoke cannabis and get high," says Roger Pertwee, apharmacologist at Aberdeen University. Instead, there had to be anatural chemical inside of us that fitted onto the receptor andsent some biochemical signal cascading through the nerve cell todo who knows what. But plucking that one chemical out of a brainstuffed with millions of others was never going to be easy. Blissful thinking Several laboratories set to work on the problem and ,fittingly, Mechoulam's was the first to come up with an answer,in the form of a greasy, hairpin-shaped chemical. The researchersdubbed it anandamide, from "ananda", the Sanskrit wordfor bliss. "The guy discovers the active ingredient ofmarijuana back in the 1960s, and now, almost 30 years later tothe day, he discovers anandamide," says Paul Consroe, aneuropharmacologist at the University of Arizona. "Isn't itgreat?" Mechoulam's strategy was to chase after chemicals that, likeTHC, are soluble in fat. By teasing these substances away fromthose that are water soluble, his group extracted a substancefrom pig brain that did indeed bind to the cannabinoid receptor.But did it act like THC? To find out they sent their specimen toPertwee who had devised a test for cannabinoids that involvedmonitoring a substance's ability to stop nerve twitching in mousetissue, when dropped on certain nerves. "When it arrived,there was so little of it in the phial I couldn't even seeit," Pertwee recalls. "We didn't know what it was--just that it was a greasy substance." But the tests wentwell: anandamide depressed the twitch just like THC, and lastDecember the researchers published their results in Science. The mouse result gave Mechoulam and his group theencouragement they needed to extract more anandamide from pigbrains and then analyse and synthesise the chemical in the lab.They also wanted more evidence that anandamide dockedspecifically onto the cannabinoid receptor and acted like THC,which has a very different molecular structure. And so, with ZviVogel and colleagues at the Weizmann Institute near Tel Aviv,they came up with a plan. They would add the DNA encoding the cannabinoid receptor tohamster or monkey cells growing in dishes. The cells equippedwith this DNA would then produce masses of receptor, which wouldsit in the cell membrane ready and available for any chemical"key" that should happen along. Vogel's researcherswould add anandamide to the cells and watch what happened. The results, published in July's issue of the Journal ofNeurochemistry, were clear: anandamide acted as a key, and aprecise one at that, sticking only to the cells containing thereceptor, and not to others. What's more, when anandamide stuckto the cells, it triggered biochemical changes similar to thoseassociated with THC and related chemicals. Not only didanandamide fit the same lock as THC, but it appeared to opensimilar doors in the brain. More tests followed in a number of laboratories, and theseresearchers found that in every way that has been tested so far,anandamide acts very much like THC. But why would we want such amind-altering substance in our brains? Studies on another class of drugs provide a useful parallel.Opiates such as morphine and heroin act upon the body's nervoussystem to cause euphoria and block pain. In 1973, natural opoids,which behave in the same way as opiates, but have a differentstructure, were pulled out of the body. It appears that when thebody is under serious assault, nerve cells spit out these opoids,which promptly bind to other nerve cells to stop pain signalsdead in their tracks. At the same time, they fasten onto sites inthe brain to induce a feeling of wellbeing. Anandamide, like the natural opoids, will probably have itsown specific set of jobs to perform in the brain and body. Theeffects of THC give a rough guide to what these might be:involvement in mood, memory and pain are obvious examples. But what would the brain be without anandamide? Researchersintend to find out. Bonner is gearing up to produce a geneticallyengineered mouse that has no cannabinoid receptors: no receptors,no anandamide function. Others want to tinker with anandamide tomake a version that binds to the receptor but doesn't trigger anychange in the nerve's behavior. Added to a mouse, it would stopthe body's real, internal anandamide from doing its job. Researchers are also excited by anandamide's possible role inmental and neurological disease. There are also other questionsto be asked. If anandamide, like THC, hampers memory, could adrug with the opposite effects-- a "memory pill"*-- bemade? "It's all speculation for now," says StevenChilders, a pharmacologist at Bowman Gray School of Medicine,North Carolina. "But we like to think about these things." It willtake more time before anandamide is firmly established as thebona fide partner to the cannabinoid receptor. Meanwhile,Mechoulam's lab has two other anandamide-like chemicals waitingin the wings. And in the US, Howlett and Childers both havechemicals of an entirely different kind that bind to thereceptor: they are water soluble, not fat soluble. the importanceof each remains to be seen. High hopes Whatever anandamide turns out to be, it providespharmacologists with a fresh plan of attack in their hunt fordrugs that act like cannabinoids. Such drugs could be valuable tohelp keep at bay the nausea of cancer chemotherapy; to stimulateappetite in AIDS patients; to dampen tremors in neurologicaldisorders; to reduce eye pressure inpatients with glaucoma; andto dull pain in those for whom other painkillers do not work. Cannabinoids can do at least some of these things, with onesmall drawback: they also make the recipient high. The holy grailof cannabinoid therapeutics has been to separate what causes thehigh from the source of the desired effects, by chemicaltinkering with THC or its relations-- shortening a side group onone part of the molecule, lengthening a carbon chain inanother-in hope that the "undesirable" effects will belost in the shuffle. Despite the drug's obvious reputation,several US pharmaceuticals spent several years trying to makethis work, but without success. Nor did they reach anotherequally sought after goal: an antagonist that will block theeffects of THC and similar substances when taken. Until marijuana researchers succeed in doing something alongthese lines, it is unlikely that drugs companies will pay muchattention. "There is a real stigma working with drugs ofabuse," says Billy Martin, a pharmacologist at the MedicalCollege of Virginia. "If drugs companies had three choicesof drugs to work on and one was a drug of abuse, they're just notgoing to work on the drug of abuse." This view is shared byLarry Melvin, who worked on the Pfizer pharmaceuticals company'snow defunct cannabinoid therapeutics programme. "What willultimately legitimise the field in a big way is if researcherscan come up with a really good therapeutic ability. then you'llsee the companies turn around." But Gabriel Nahas, an anaesthetist from Columbia University inNew York, who has spoken out against marijuana use for manyyears, maintains that THC's effects on the brain are too generaland too toxic for this route ever to work. The discovery ofanandamide and its receptor have not changed his mind. "Thebrain is a computer," he says. "To put THC in the brainis akin to putting a bug in the computer. I'm sticking to my gunsabout its harmful effects--not only to man but to society." Only time will reveal the value of anandamide and its receptorto drug therapy. But the importance of these discoveries to brainresearch is not in doubt. "We're no longer just dealing withthe pharmacology of a recreational drug," says Pertwee."We're dealing with the physiology of a newly discoveredsystem in the brain. And that's an enormously bigger field. Sidebar Just what the doctor ordered EVERY month Robert Randall receives a gift from the USgovernment: a tin box stuffed with 300 marijuana cigarettes. Hegets them because he has glaucoma, a condition which damages theretina. Marijuana helps to reduce the pressure in his eyes. Randall and eight others are participants in the CompassionateInvestigative New Drug programme, under which people withglaucoma, cancer, chronic pain, multiple sclerosis and AIDS aregiven the drug for its supposed effectiveness in relieving pain,suppressing nausea from AZT or chemotherapy, and stimulatingappetite. If the programme seems like an anomaly, given marijuana'sofficial status as a drug with no medical use, it is no longer.Only those patients originally on the programme now receivemarijuana from the government. Others must now buy it illegallyoff the street. That is a hardship, says Randall, president of the Alliancefor Cannabis therapeutics (ACT), which lobbies for the medicaluse of marijuana. "We get calls from AIDS patients who say'I can either buy food that I can't eat because I'm so nauseous,or I can buy marijuana and get hungry because I can't afford tobuy food'," he says. In 1975, those steep street prices had driven Randall to growcannabis plants to treat his glaucoma. This led to his arrest,followed by an acquittal and ultimately--after he filed a lawsuitto a legal supply from the government. Later, a handful ofpatients with cancer or suffering chronic pain won access, and in1990 a man known as Steve L became the first person with AIDS toget the drug, just ten days before he died. Later that year,Kenny Jenks and his wife Barbara won the same right, after afierce fight following their arrest for possessing two marijuanaplants. Until 1991, anyone wanting to get on the programme had to fillin forms so complex that it took about 50 hours. then thegovernment reduced the red tape, cutting the time down to aboutone hour--and found itself inundated with applications fortherapeutic marijuana. The US Public Health Service responded byscrapping the programme. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information WT01-B22-61IA087-000627-B012-156http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/thc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050200 text/html 3808HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:08:24 GMTContent-length: 3591 Chemical Constituents of Cannabis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information TABLE 1 Chemical Constituents of Cannabis* 1. Cannabinoids: 61 known a. Cannabigerol (CBG) type: 6 known b. Cannabichromene (CBC) type: 4 known c. Cannabidiol (CBD) type: 7 known d. D-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (D-9-THC) type: 9 known e. D-8-Tetrahydrocannabinol (A-8-THC) type: 2 known f. Cannabicyclol (CBL) type: 3 known g. Cannabielsoin (CBE) type: 3 known h. Cannabinol (CBN) type: 6 known i. Cannabinodiol (CBND) type: 2 known j. Cannabitriol (CBT) type: 6 known k. Miscellaneous types: 9 known 1. Other cannabinoids: 4 known 2. Nitrogenous compounds: 20 known 3. Amino acids: 18 known 4. Proteins, glycoproteins, and enzymes: 9 known 5. Sugars and related compounds: 34 known 6. Hydrocarbons: 50 known 7. Simple alcohols: 7 known 8. Simple aldehydes: 12 known 9. Simple ketones: 13 known 10. Simple acids: 20 known 11. Fatty acids: 12 known 12. Simple esters and lactones: 13 known 13. Steroids: 11 known 14. Terpenes: 103 known 15. Noncannabinoid phenols: 16 known 16. Flavanoid glycosides: 19 known 17. Vitamins: 1 known 18. Pigments: 2 known Source: Adapted from Turner, 1980. *Marijuana and Health Report of a Study by a Committee of the INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE National Academy Press Washington, DC 1982 188 pp Page 14 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information WT01-B22-62IA088-000636-B021-178http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/mjdrive.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103630 text/html 31544HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:36:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:09:00 GMTContent-length: 31326 Marijuana and Actual Driving Performance Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information MARIJUANA AND ACTUAL DRIVING PERFORMANCE NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION BY HINDRIK W.J. ROBBE AND JAMES F. O'HANLON Institute for Human PsychopharmacologyUniversity of Limburg Abstract 2A 6211 LS Maastricht -- TheNetherlands Sponsoring Agency: U.S. Department ofTransportation National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 400Seventh Street, S.W. Washington, DC 20590 Published November, 1993 (Government disclaimer) This publication is distributed by the U.S.Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic SafetyAdministration, in the interest of information exchange. Theopinions, findings and conclusions expressed in this publicationare those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of theDepartment of Transportation or the National Highway TrafficSafety Administration. [No Kidding] The United States Governmentassumes no liability for its contents or use thereof. If trade ormanufacturers' name or products are mentioned, it is because theyare considered essential to the object of the publication andshould not be construed as an endorsement. The United StatesGovernment does not endorse products or manufacturers. Abstract: This report concerns the effects ofmarijuana smoking on actual driving performance. It presents theresults of one pilot and three actual driving studies. The pilotstudy's major purpose was to establish the THC dose currentmarijuana users smoke to achieve their desired "high".From these results it was decided that the maximum THC dose forsubsequent driving studies would be 300 mcg / kg (0.3 mg / kg).The first driving study was conducted on a closed section of aprimary highway. After smoking marijuana delivering THC doses of0, 100, 200, and 300 mcg / kg, subjects drove a car whilemaintaining a constant speed and lateral position. This study wasreplicated with a new group of subjects, but now in the presenceof other traffic. In addition, a car following test was executed.The third driving study compared the effects of a modest dose ofTHC (100 mcg / kg) and alcohol )BAC of 0.04 g %) on city drivingperformance. This program of research has shown that marijuana,when taken alone, produces a moderate degree of drivingimpairment which is related to the consumed THC dose. Theimpairment manifests itself mainly in the ability to maintain asteady lateral position on the road, but its magnitude is notexceptional in comparison with changes produced by many medicinaldrugs and alcohol. Drivers under the influence of marijuanaretain insight in their performance and will compensate wherethey can, for example, by slowing down or increasing effort. As aconsequence, THC's adverse effects on driving performance appearrelatively small. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY This report concerns the effects of marijuanasmoking on actual driving performance. It presents the results ofone pilot and three actual driving studies which were conductedbetween April 1990 and March 1992. The program was funded by theU.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), withthe exception of the alcohol part of the city driving study whichwas sponsored by the Dutch Ministry of Transport and PublicWorks. The project was conducted by the Institute for Drugs,Safety and Behavior of the University of Limburg, Maastricht, TheNetherlands. The major objectives of the program were todetermine the dose-response relationship betweendelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), marijuana's main constituent,and objectively and subjectively measured aspects of real-worlddriving; and, to determine whether it is possible to correlatedriving performance impairment with plasma concentrations of thedrug or a metabolite. A variety of driving tests were employed,including: maintenance of a constant speed and lateral positionduring uninterrupted highway travel, following a leading car withvarying speed on a highway, and city driving. The purpose ofapplying different tests was to determine whether similar changesin performance under the influence of THC occur in all, therebyindicating a general drug effect on driving ability. Chapter One provides background informationabout the drug, its pharmacological properties, the prevalence ofits use, and a review of marijuana smoking and traffic safety.THC's effects on the ability of drivers to operate safely intraffic situations have traditionally been determined in twoways: from epidemiological surveys of users' involvement intraffic accidents and from empirical studies to measure thedrug's influence on skills related to driving, or driving itself.Epidemiology shows that people drive after marijuana use and thatdrivers involved in accidents often show the drug's presence. Theresults are, however, inconclusive because of the high proportionof cases which also involve alcohol use and the lack of propercontrol groups. There, the extent marijuana contributes totraffic accident causality remains obscure. Results from drivingsimulator and closed-course tests show that THC in single inhaleddoses up to about 250 mcg / kg has relatively minor effects ondriving performance, certainly less than blood alcoholconcentrations (BAC's) in the range of 0.08-0.10 g %. Chapter Two describes the studies of theprogram and certain procedures that were common to all. Thesewere subject recruiting, compliance with ethical and legalstandards, screening for the presence of other illicit drugs andalcohol, blood sampling procedures and quantitative analyses.Subjects in all studies were recreational users of cannabis, i.e.smoking marijuana or hashish more than once a month but notdaily. They were all healthy, between 21 and 40 years of age, hadnormal weight and binocular acuity, and were licensed to drive anautomobile. Subjects were accompanied in every driving test by alicensed driving instructor, experienced in supervising subjectswho operated under the influence of medicinal drugs in previousstudies. Redundant control system in the test vehicle wasavailable for controlling the car if emergency situations shouldarise. Marijuana and placebo marijuana cigarettes were suppliedby the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). [Isn't itcurious that a study done in the Netherlands used NIDA suppliedmarijuana? It is nearly IMPOSSIBLE to get NIDA supplied marijuanain the U.S. for these kind of studies or medical studies.] Chapter Three presents the results of the pilotstudy. It was conducted in a hospital under strict medicalsupervision to identify THC doses that recreational marijuanausers were likely to consume before driving. Twenty-foursubjects, twelve males and twelve females, participated. Theywere allowed to smoke part or all of the THC content in threecigarettes until achieving the desired psychological effect.Cigarettes were smoked through a plastic holder in a mannerdetermined by the subjects. The only requirement was to smokecontinuously for a perod not exceeding 15 minutes. When subjectsvoluntarily stopped smoking, cigarettes were carefullyextinguished and retained for subsequent gravimetric estimationof THC consumed. Six subjects consumed one cigarette, thirteensmoked two and four smoked three. The average amount of THCconsumed was 20.8 mg, after adjustment for body weight, 308 mcg /kg [of body weight]. There was no significant difference betweenmales and females with respect to the weight adjusted preferreddose. It was decided that the maximum dose for subsequent drivingstudies would be 300 mcg / kg. This is considerably higher thandoses that have usually been administered to subjects inexperimental studies (typically, 100-200 mcg / kg THC). The study provided the opportunity forobtaining valuable information about THC's pharmacokinetics andits pharmacodynamic effects after marijuana smoking. Bloodsamples were repeatedly taken for measuring plasma concentrationsof THC and its major inactive metabolite, THC-COOH. The subjectsrepeatedly performed certain simple laboratory tests, estimatedtheir levels of intoxication and indicated their willingnes todrive under several specified conditions of urgency. Heart ratewas measured at these times. The secondary purpose of the pilotstudy was that of specifying relationships between (THC) and(THC-COOH) with changes in the other physiological, performanceor subjective variables. Other results from the pilot studyshowed that perceived "high" and heart rate are verysensitive measures of marijuana intoxication which confirms priorfindings. Impairments in laboratory tests performance were foundat the time of peak subjective feelings but generally, objectiveimpairment dissipated more rapidly than lthe feelings themselves. The first driving study, described in ChapterFour, was conducted on a highway closed to other traffic. Oneobjective of the study was to determine whether it would be safeto repeat the study on a normal highway in the presence of othertraffic. The second objective was to define the dose-effectrelationship between inhaled THC dose and driving performance.The same twelve men and twelve women who participated in thepilot study served again as the subjects. They were treated onseparate occasions with THC doses of 0, 100, 200, 300 mcg / kg.Treatments were administered double-blind and in acounterbalanced order. On each occasion, subjects performed aroad tracking test beginning 40 minutes after initiation ofsmoking and repeated one hour later. The test, developed andstandardized by O'Hanlon et al. (1982, 1986), involvedmaintaining a constant speed at 90 km / h (56 mph) and a steadylateral position between the delineated boundaries of the trafficlane. Subjects drove 22 km (13.6 mi) on a primary highway andwere accompanied by a licensed driving instructor. The latter wascharged with responsibility for ensuring safety at all times andwas able to intervene, if necessary, using redundant vehicularcontrols. The primary dependent variable was the standarddeviation of lateral position (SDLP), which has been shown to beboth highly reliable and very sensitive to the influence ofsedative drugs and alcohol. Other dependent variables were meanspeed, and standard deviation of speed and steering wheel angle.Blood samples were taken prior to each driving test; and,performance in critical tracking and hand steadiness tests, heartrate, and blood pressure were measured after its termination.Questionnaires were repeatedly administered to estimate the"high" and other subjective feelings. All subjects were willing and able to finishthe driving tests without great difficulty. The studydemonstrated that marijuana impairs driving performance asmeasured by an increase in SDLP; all three THC dosessignificantly affected SDLP relative to placebo. The drivingperformance decrement after smoking marijuana persisted almostundiminished for two hours after smoking while drug plasmaconcentrations, perceived "high" and heart rateelevation had decreased. Marijuana's effects on SDLP werecompared to those of alcohol obtained in a very similar study byLouwerens et al. (1985, 1987). It appeared that THC's effects onSDLP were equivalent to those associated with BAC's in the rangeof 0.03-0.07 g %. Other driving performance measures were notsignificantly affected by THC. Intersubject correlations betweenplasma concentrations of the drug and driving performance afterevery dose were essentially nil. Thus, driving impairment cannotbe predicted by prevailing plasma concentrations of THC orTHC-COOH. Driving impairment was also not related to performancein the laboratory tests. Both the observed degree of drivingimpairment, and what subjects said and did, indicated that normalsafeguards would be sufficient for ensuring safety in furthertesting. Hence, the final conclusion was to repeat this study ona normal highway in the presence of other traffic. The second driving study, described in ChapterFive, was conducted to come a step closer to driving reality thanits predecessor. Driving tests were now conducted on a highway inthe presence of other traffic. The major objective of this studywas to confirm the relationship between inhaled THC dose andlateral position variability in the context of a standard roadtracking test. A secondary objective was to measure performancein another actual driving test, i.e. car following. The thirdobjective was to continue efforts to correlate plasmaconcentrations of THC and THC-COOH with driving performanceimpairment as measured in both tests. A new group of sixteen subjects, equallycomprised of men and women, participated in this study. Aconservative approach was chosen in designing the present studyin order to satisfy the series design where both active drug andplacebo conditions were administered, double-blind, at each ofthree THC dose levels. THC doses were the same as those used inthe previous study, namely 100, 200, and 300 mcg / kg. Cigarettesappeared identical at each level of treatment conditions and weresmoked through a plastic holder in a fashion determined by thesubject within a time limit of 10 minutes. If any subject wouldhave reacted in an unacceptable manner to a lower dose, he / shewould not have been permitted to receive a higher dose. Two subjects at a time commenced smoking.Thirty minutes after onset of smoking the subjects performed abattery of laboratory tests (tracking, hand steadiness and bodysway), yielded a blood sample, and rated their "high"and other subjective feelings. They were then transported to aprimary highway where the driving tests were performed. Twoinstrumented vehicles were employed. The subjects performed thecar following test on a 16 km (9.9 mi) segment of the highway forabout twelve minutes. After conclusion of the car following test,both subjects then commenced the road tracking test in separateinstrumented vehicles. The highway was the same as for the carfollowing test. Subjects drove 64 km (40 mi) without stopping inabout 50 minutes. At the conclusion of this test, both subjectsparticipated again in the car following test. Subjects were thentransported back to the laboratory where they rated subjectivefeelings, yielded a blood sample, and repeated the test battery.The subjects' heart rate was registered continuously during bothdriving tests. The road tracking test was the same as in theprevious study except for its duration and the presence of othertraffic. Subjects were instructed to maintain a constant speed of95 km / h (59 mph) and a steady lateral position between laneboundaries in the right traffic lane. They were allowed todeviate from this only if it would become necessary to pass aslower vehicle in the same lane. Data from the standart test wereanalyzed to yield the same performance measures as in theprevious study; i.e. SDLP, mean and standard deviation of speed,and standard deviation of steering wheel angle. The car followingtest measures drivers' ability to perceive changes in a precedingvehicle's speed and to react in a manner maintaining a constantheadway. It began as the preceding and the following vehicle,respectively driven by one of the driving instructors and thesubject, operated in tandem on the slower traffic lane whiletravelling at a speed of 100 km / h (62 mph). The subject wasinstructed to maintain a 50 m (164 ft) headway however thepreceding vehicle's speed might vary. After driving in thismanner for about one minute, the operator of the precedingvehicle released the accelerator pedal allowing its speed to fallto 80 km / h (50 mph). Immediately thereafter, the operator ofthe preceding vehicle accelerated to 100 km / (62 mph). Theduration of one deceleration and acceleration maneuver wasapproximately 50 seconds and six to eight, depending upon trafficdensity, were executed during one test. The subject's averagereaction time to the movements of the leading vehicle, meanheadway and coefficient of variation of headway during maneuverswere taken as the dependent variables from this. All subjects were able to complete the serieswithout suffering any untoward reaction while driving. Roadtracking performance in the standard test was impaired in adose-related manner by THC and confirmed the results obtained inthe previous closed highway study. The 100 mcg / kg dose produceda slight elevation in mean SDLP, albeit nearly significant. The200 mcg / kg dose produced a significant elevation, of dubiouspractical relevance. The 300 mcg / kg dose produced a highlysignificant elevation which may be viewed as practically relevantbut unexceptional in comparison with similarly measured effectsof many medicinal drugs. Following marijuana smoking subjectsdrove with an average speed that was only slightly lower thanafter placebo and very close to the prescribed level. In the car following test, subjects maintaineda headway of 45-50 m (148-164 ft) while driving in the successiveplacebo conditions. They lengthened mean headway by 8, 6 and 2 m(26.2, 19.7 and 6.6 ft) in the corresponding THC conditions after100, 200 and 300 mcg / kg, respectively. The initially largedrug-placebo difference and its subsequent decline is asurprising result. Our explanation for this observation is thatthe subjects' caution was greatest the first time they undertookthe test under the influence of THC and progressively lessthereafter. Reaction time to changes in the preceding vehicle'sspeed increased following THC treatment, relative to placebo. Theadministered THC dose was inversely related to the change inreaction time, as it was to headway. However, increased reactiontimes were partly due to longer headway. Statistical adjustmentfor this confounding resulted in smaller and non-significantincreases in reaction time following marijuana treatment, thegreatest impairment (0.32 s) being observed in the first testfollowing the lowest THC dose. Headway variability followed asimilar pattern as mean headway and reaction time; the greatestimpairment was found following the lowest dose. An important practical objective of this studywas to determine whether degrees of driving impairment can beaccurately predicted from either measured concentrations of THCin plasma or performance measured in potential roadside"sobriety" tests of tracking ability or hand andposture stability. The results, like many reported before,indicate that none of these measures accurately predicts changesin actual driving performance under the influence of THC. The program then proceeded into the thirddriving study, presented in Chapter Six, which involved testsconducted in high-density urban traffic. There were logical andsafety reasons for restricting the THC dose to 100 mcg / kg. Itwas given to a group of regular cannabis users, along withplacebo. For comparative purposes another group of regularalcohol users were treated with a modest dose of their preferredrecreational drug, and again placebo, before undertaking the samecity driving test. Two groups of sixteen new subjects apiece,equally comprised of men and women, participated. Subjects in thealcohol group were regular users of alcohol but not marijuana.Both groups were treated on separate occasions with active drugand placebo. Active marijuana was administered to deliver 100 mcg/ kg THC. The driving test commenced 30 minutes after smoking.The alcohol dose was chosen to yield a BAC approaching 0.05 g %when the driving test commenced 45 minutes after onset ofdrinking. Active drug and placebo conditions were administereddouble-blind and in a counterbalanced order in each group. Driving tests were conducted in daylight over aconstant 17.5 km (10.9 mi) route within the city limits ofMaastricht. Subjects drove their placebo and active drug ridesthrough heavy, medium and low density traffic on the same day ofthe week, and at the same time of day. Two scoring methods wereemployed in the present study. The first, "molar"approach, required the driving instructor acting as the safetycontroller during the tests to retrospectively rate the driver'sperformance using a standard scale. The second, a more"molecular" approach, involved the employment of aspecially trained observer who applied simple and strict criteriafor recording when the driver made or failed to make each in aseries of observable responses at predetermined points along achosen route. Immediately prior to and following the drivingtests subjects performed hand steadiness and time perceptiontests, yielded a blood sample, and were administered the samesubjective questionnaires used in the previous studies. The study showed that a modest dose of alcohol(BAC = 0.04 g %) produced a significant impairment in citydriving as measured by the molar approach, relative to placebo.More specifically, alcohol impaired vehicle handling and trafficmaneuvers. Marijuana, administered in a dose of 100 mcg / kg THC,on the other hand, did not signifcantly change mean drivingperformance as measured by this approach. Neither alcohol normarijuana significantly affected driving performance measuresobtained by the molecular approach indicating that it may berelatively insensitive to drug-induced changes. Driving quality as rated by the subjectscontrasted with observer ratings. Alcohol impaired drivingperformance according to the driving instructor but subjects didnot perceive it; marijuana did not impair driving performance butthe subjects themselves perceived their driving performance assuch. Both groups reported about the same amount of effort inaccomplishing the driving test following placebo Yet onlysubjects in the ;marijuana group reported significantly higherlevels of invested effort following the active drug. Thus, therewas evidence that subjects in the marijuana group were not onlyaware of their intoxicated condition but were also attempting tocompensate for it. These seem to be important findings. Theysupport both the common belief that drivers become overconfidentafter drinking alcohol and investigators' suspicions that theybecome more cautious and self-critical after consuming low THCdoses by smoking marijuana. The laboratory performance tests alsodiscriminated between the drugs' effects. Hand steadiness wasimpaired following THC and improved following alcohol, relativeto placebo. The difference between the drugs' effects wassignificant, both before and after the driving test. Impairmentafter THC was about as much as that produced by the same dose inthe previous study, indicating equivalent sensitivities of thepresent and previous groups. Production of time intervals was notaffected by alcohol, but THC significantly shortened intervalproduction, relative to placebo. Drug plasma concentrations were neither relatedto absolute driving performance scores nor to the changes thatoccurred from placebo to drug conditions. With respect to THC,these results confirm the findings in previous studies. They aresomewhat surprising for alcohol but may be due to the restrictedrange of ethanol concentrations in the plasma of differentsubjects. Chapter Seven concludes the report with ageneral discussion of the results of the program and ends withlist of conclusions and recommendations. It starts with adiscussion of the THC dose which marijuana users actually preferfor achieving their desired "high." Several questionsare raised and discussed, such as: how do people regulate theirTHC consumption, what role plays familiarization with the drug,and what would the preferred dose have been if marijuana of muchhigher potency were smoked. The discussion then continues with adescription of the differences between the driving tests in termsof the type of information processing each requires, automatic vscontrolled, and the relevance of each to traffic safety. Attention is further focussed on the effects ofTHC on driving performance. The results of the studiescorroborate those of previous driving simulator and closed-coursetests by indicating that THC in single inhaled doses up to 300mcg /kg has significant, yet not dramatic, dose-related impairingeffects on driving performance. Standard deviation of lateralposition in the road tracking test was the most sensitive measurefor revealing THC's adverse effects. This is because roadtracking is primarily controlled by an automatic informationprocessing system which operates outside of conscious control Theprocess is relatively impervious to environmental changes buthighly vulnerable to internal factors that retard the flow ifinformation through the system. THC and many other drugs areamong these factors. When they interfere with the process thatrestricts SDLP, there is little the afflicted individual can doby way of compensation to restore the situation. Car followingand, to a greater extent, city driving performance depend more oncontrolled information processing and are therefore moreaccesible for compensatory mechanisms that reduce the decrementsor abolish them entirely. It appears that performance is more affected byTHC in laboratory than actual driving tests. Several reasons thatmay account for the apparent discrepancy are discussed. First,laboratory tests are experimentally controlled by drasticsimplification which may affect a subjects motivation to performthe test by making it appear "unreal." Secondly, therestriction of response options in laboratory performance testsleave fewer possibilities for compensation. In real life, driversalways apply numerous skills in parallel and series. Should onebecome deficient, they are often able to compensate in a numberof ways to achieve a satisfactory level of proficiency. Finally,after learning to drive, subjects possess such skills inabundance and one can only demonstrate how they vary with drugeffects in the real task or a very close approximation thereof.Profound drug impairment constituting an obvious traffic safetyhazard could as easily be demonstrated in a laboratoryperformance test as anywhere else. But THC is not a profoundlyimpairing drug. It does affect automatic information processing,even after low doses, but not to any great extent after highdoses. It apparently affects controlled information processing ina variety of laboratory tests, but not to the extent which isbeyond the individual's ability to control when he is motivatedand permitted to do so in real driving. Marijuana's effects on driving performance werecompared to those of many other drugs. It was concluded thatTHC's effects after doses up to 300 mcg / kg never exceedalcohol's at BAC's of 0.08 g %; and were in no way unusualcompared to many medicinal drugs'. Yet THC's effects differqualitatively from many other drugs, especially alcohol. Evidencefrom the present and previous studies stronly suggests thatalcohol encourages risky driving whereas THC encourages greatercaution, at least in experiments. Another way THC seems to differqualitatively from many other drugs is that the former's usersseem better able to compensate for its adverse effects whiledriving under the influence. Still one can easily imaginesituations where the influence of marijuana smoking might have anexceedingly dangerous effect; i.e., emergency situations whichput high demands on the driver's information processing capacity,prolonged monotonous driving, and after THC has been taken withother drugs, especially alcohol Finally, the relation between drivingimpairment following marijuana smoking and plasma concentrationsof THC and THC-COOH is discussed. It appears not possible toconclude anything about a driver's impairment on the basis of his/ her plasma concentrations of THC and THC-COOH determined in asingle sample. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/Marijuana Information WT01-B22-63IA087-000625-B017-99http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hemprefs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043803 text/html 75650HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:37:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:46 GMTContent-length: 75432 Historical and Literary References to Hemp - Part 1 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information Historical and Literary References to Hemp A sampling of references to hemp (marijuana) throughout theages. Aesop's Fables, Aesop, 550bc The Swallow And The Other Birds It happened that a Countryman was sowing some hemp seeds in afield where a Swallow and some other birds were hopping aboutpicking up their food. "Beware of that man," quoth theSwallow. "Why, what is he doing?" said the others."That is hemp seed he is sowing; be careful to pick up everyone of the seeds, or else you will repent it." The birdspaid no heed to the Swallow's words, and by and by the hemp grewup and was made into cord, and of the cords nets were made, andmany a bird that had despised the Swallow's advice was caught innets made out of that very hemp. "What did I tell you?"said the Swallow. "Destroy The Seed Of Evil, Or It Will Grow Up To YourRuin." Title: History Of Herodotus Book: Fourth Book, Entitled Melpomene Author: Herodotus Part III 73. Such, then, is the mode in which the kings are buried: asfor the people, when any one dies, his nearest of kin lay himupon a wagon and take him round to all his friends in succession:each receives them in turn and entertains them with a banquet,whereat the dead man is served with a portion of all that is setbefore the others; this is done for forty days, at the end ofwhich time the burial takes place. After the burial, thoseengaged in it have to purify themselves, which they do in thefollowing way. First they well soap and wash their heads; then,in order to cleanse their bodies, they act as follows: they makea booth by fixing in the ground three sticks inclined towards oneanother, ^1 and stretching around them woolen felts, which theyarrange so as to fit as close as possible: inside the booth adish is placed upon the ground, into which they put a number ofred-hot stones, and then add some hemp-seed. 74. Hemp grows in Scythia: it is very like flax; only that itis a much coarser and taller plant: some grows wild about thecountry, some is produced by cultivation: ^2 the Thracians makegarments of it which closely resemble linen; so much so, indeed,that if a person has never seen hemp he is sure to think they arelinen, and if he has, unless he is very experienced in suchmatters, he will not know of which material they are. The Scythians, as I said, take some of this hemp-seed, and, creeping under the felt coverings, throw it upon the red-hot stones; immediately it smokes, and gives out such a vapour as no Grecian vapour- bath can exceed; the Scyths, delighted, shout for joy, and this vapour serves them instead of a water-bath; for they never by any chance wash their bodies with water. Their women make a mixture of cypress, cedar, and frankincense wood, which they pound into a paste upon a rough piece of stone, adding a little water to it. With this substance, which is of a thick consistency, they plaster their faces all over, and indeed their whole bodies. A sweet odour is thereby imparted to them, and when they take off the plaster on the day following, their skin is clean and glossy. Title: History Of The Conquest Of Mexico Book: Book VII. (Conclusion.) Subsequent Career Of Cortes. Author: Prescott, William H. Chapter V. Cortes Revisits Mexico, Part I. It was the place won by his own sword from the Aztecs previousto the siege of Mexico. It stood on the southern slope of theCordilleras, and overlooked a wide expanse of country, thefairest and most flourishing portion of his own domain. He haderected a stately palace on the spot, and henceforth made thiscity his favorite residence. It was well situated forsuperintending his vast estates, and he now devoted himself tobringing them into proper cultivation. He introduced thesugar-cane from Cuba, and it grew luxuriantly in the rich soil ofthe neighboring lowlands. He imported large numbers of merinosheep and other cattle, which found abundant pastures in thecountry around Tehuantepec. His lands were thickly sprinkled withgroves of mulberry-trees, which furnished nourishment for thesilk-worm. He encouraged the cultivation of hemp and flax, and,by his judicious and enterprising husbandry, showed the capacityof the soil for the culture of valuable products before unknownin the land; and he turned these products to the best account, bythe erection or sugar-mills, and other works for the manufactureof the raw material. He thus laid the foundation of an opulencefor his family, as substantial, if not as speedy, as that derivedfrom the mines. Yet this latter source of wealth was notneglected by him, and he drew gold from the region ofTehuantepec, and silver from that of Zacatecas. The amountderived from these mines was not so abundant as at a later day.But the expense of working them, on the other hand, was much lessin the earlier stages of the operation, when the metal lay somuch nearer the surface. Title: Rollin's Ancient History: Egypt Book: Chapter III. Author: Rollin, Charles Date: 1731 Sections IV - VII. Section IV: Of The Egyptian Soldiers And War "But let us imagine to ourselves a country where so greata difference is not made between the several conditions; wherethe life of a nobleman is not made to consist in idleness anddoing nothing, but in a careful preservation of his liberty, thatis, in a due subjection to the laws and the constitution; by aman's subsisting upon his estate without dependence on any one,and being contented to enjoy a little with liberty, rather than agreat deal at the price of mean and base compliances: a country,where sloth, effeminacy, and the ignorance of things necessaryfor life, are held in just contempt, and where pleasure is lessvalued than health and bodily strength: in such a country, itwill be much more for a man's reputation to plough, and keepflocks, than to waste all his hours in sauntering from place toplace, in gaming, and expensive diversions." But we need nothave recourse to Plato's commonwealth for instances of men whohave led these useful lives. It was thus that the greatest partof mankind lived during near four thousand years; and that notonly the Israelites, but the Egyptians, the Greeks, and theRomans, that is to say, nations the most civilized, and mostrenowned for arms and wisdom. They all inculcate the regard whichought to be paid to agriculture and the breeding of cattle; oneof which (without saying any thing of hemp and flax, so necessaryfor our clothing,) supplies us, by corn, fruits, and pulse, withnot only a plentiful but a delicious nourishment; and the other,besides its supply of exquisite meats to cover our tables, almostalone gives life to manufactures and trade, by the skins andstuffs it furnishes. Title: Narrative Of The Voyages Round The World Book: Chapter II: Narrative Of Captain Cook's First VoyageRound The World. Author: Cook, Captain James Date: 1779 Part V. In Eaheinomauwe there are no quadrupeds but dogs and rats; atleast, no other were seen by our voyagers, and the rats are soscarce, that they wholly escaped the notice of many on board. Ofbirds the species are not numerous; and of these no one kind,excepting perhaps the gannet, is exactly the same with those ofEurope. Insects are not in greater plenty than birds. The seamakes abundant recompense for this scarcity of animals upon theland. Every creek swarms with fish, which are not only wholesome,but equally delicious with those in our part of the world. TheEndeavour seldom anchored in any station, or with a light galepassed any place, that did not afford enough, with a hook andline, to serve the whole ship's company. If the seine was madeuse of, it seldom failed of producing a still more ample supply.The highest luxury of this kind, with which the English weregratified, was the lobster, or sea cray-fish. Among the vegetableproductions of the country, the trees claim a principal place;there being forests of vast extent, full of the straightest, thecleanest, and the largest timber Mr. Cook and his friends hadever seen. Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander were gratified by thenovelty, if not by the variety of the plants. Out of about fourhundred species, there were not many which had hitherto beendescribed by botanists. There is one plant that serves thenatives instead of hemp and flax, and which excels all that areapplied to the same purposes in other countries. Title: Political Works Of Thomas Paine Book: Common Sense Author: Paine, Thomas Part III On The Present Ability Of America. With Some MiscellaneousReflections. In almost every article of defence we abound. Hemp flourisheseven to rankness, so that we need not want cordage. Our iron issuperior to that of other countries. Our small arms are equal toany in the world. Cannon we can cast at pleasure. Saltpetre andgunpowder we are every day producing. Our knowledge is hourlyimproving. Resolution is our inherent character, and courage hathnever yet forsaken us. Wherefore, what is it that we want? Why isit that we hesitate? From Britain we can expect nothing but ruin.If she is once admitted to the government of America again, thiscontinent will not be worth living in. Jealousies will be alwaysarising, insurrections will be constantly happening; and who willgo forth to quell them? Who will venture his life to reduce hisown countrymen to a foreign obedience? The difference betweenPennsylvania and Connecticut, respecting some unlocated lands,shows the insignificance of a British government, and fullyproves that nothing but continental authority can regulatecontinental matters. Title: Origin Of Species Book: Chapter XII. Author: Darwin, Charles Date: 1859 Part II. Single Centres Of Supposed Creation Living birds can hardly fail to be highly effective agents inthe transportation of seeds. I could give many facts showing howfrequently birds of many kinds are blown by gales to vastdistances across the ocean. We may safely assume that under suchcircumstances their rate of flight would often be thirty-fivemiles an hour; and some authors have given a far higher estimate.I have never seen an instance of nutritious seeds passing throughthe intestines of a bird; but hard seeds of fruit pass uninjuredthrough even the digestive organs of a turkey. In the course oftwo months, I picked up in my garden twelve kinds of seeds, outof the excrement of small birds, and these seemed perfect, andsome of them, which were tried, germinated. But the followingfact is more important: the crops of birds do not secrete gastricjuice, and do not, as I know by trial, injure in the least thegermination of seeds; now, after a bird has found and devoured alarge supply of food, it is positively asserted that all thegrains do not pass into the gizzard for twelve or even eighteenhours. A bird in this interval might easily be blown to thedistance of five hundred miles, and hawks are known to look outfor tired birds, and the contents of their torn crops might thusreadily get scattered. Some hawks and owls bolt their prey whole,and, after an interval of from twelve to twenty hours, disgorgepellets, which, as I know from experiments made in the ZoologicalGardens, include seeds capable of germination. Some seeds of theoat, wheat, millet, canary, hemp, clover, and beet germinatedafter having been from twelve to twenty-one hours in the stomachsof different birds of prey; and two seeds of beet grew afterhaving been thus retained for two days and fourteen hours.Fresh-water fish, I find, eat seeds of many land and waterplants; fish are frequently devoured by birds, and thus the seedsmight be transported from place to place. I forced many kinds ofseeds into the stomachs of dead fish, and then gave their bodiesto fishing-eagles, storks, and pelicans; these birds, after aninterval of many hours, either rejected the seeds in pellets orpassed them in their excrement; and several of these seedsretained the power of germination. Certain seeds, however, werealways killed by this process. Title: History Of Religions Book: Religions Of China Author: Foot Moore, George Date: 1913 Chapter II Moral And Political Philosophy Wang Ch'ung, who wrote toward the end of the first century ofour era, occupies in some respects a place apart in the historyof Chinese thought. He may be described as a materialisticmonist, and his physical philosophy somewhat resembles that ofEpicurus and Lucretius. At the beginning there was a homogeneousvaporous or nebulous chaos. Out of this the lighter and theheavier elements "spontaneously" - that is, withoutintelligence or design - separated; the warm and light (elementalfire) above, the cold and dark, represented by water, below. Sohe adapts the old doctrines of Yang and Yin, fortifying himselfby quotations from the Yih-king and the Li-ki. The TaoistLieh-tsze developed a similar theory; but Wang Ch'ung, as purematerialist, has no use for the mystical Tao nor for the primalintelligence of Chu Hi and the Sung Confucianists. From thecombination and spontaneous interaction of these principles allthings arise. Man's body is of coarse matter, Yin; his vitalspirit and intelligence are of the fiery nature of the Yang.Heaven - that is, the sky - is material just as truly as theearth, only of a different composition, and its operations areequally without design. It does not take note of men's doings topunish the bad and reward the good. Heaven does not speak, nordoes it hear what men say; divination is absurd - how can theshell of a dead tortoise or the stalks of a withered weed elicita response from Heaven! "Some people think that Heavenproduces grain for the purpose of feeding mankind, and silk andhemp to clothe them. That would make Heaven man's farmer ormulberry-girl!" The philosopher is fond of pricking man'sself-importance. To this vast frame of nature we are no more thaninsects crawling on a human body. The struggle for existence isproof that there is no wise and good purpose in creation."If Heaven had produced its creatures on purpose, it oughtto have taught them to love one another, and not to prey upon anddestroy one another" - precisely the argument of Epicurus. Title: History Of Religions Book: Religions Of Japan Author: Foot Moore, George Date: 1913 Chapter I: Part II To ward off ills caused by demons, especially the demons ofdisease, the ancient Japanese sought the protection of aparticular group of gods, the Sahe no Kami, or "preventivedeities", who are invoked in an old liturgical text todefend the worshippers against the "hostile and savagebeings of the root country," such as the "hags ofHades" who pursued Izanagi. These deities were representedby phalli, often of gigantic size, which were set up alonghighways and especially at cross-roads to bar the passage againstmalignant beings who sought to pass. In the liturgy referred to,one of these gods is called "No Thoroughfare" (Kunado,or Funado), the name of the staff which Izanagi threw down toprevent his pursuing spouse from breaking out from Hades into theworld above; two others are the prince and princess of the eightcross-roads. They had no temples, and were worshipped at the endof the sixth and twelfth months - the time of the semiannuallustration - and on occasion at other times, for example, on theoutbreak of a pestilence. The phallic form of the end post of abalustrade or a bridge has a similar meaning; it keeps evilinfluence from passing. The apotropaic virtue of this symbol - avirtue which it has in many other countries, notably among theancient Greeks - is due to the association of virility with manlystrength, power to overcome invisible foes as well as visible,and to protect those in need of help. Standing as they did on theroadside and at cross-roads, these gods became the protectors ofthe wayfarers; travellers prayed to them before setting out on ajourney and made a little offering of hemp leaves and rice toeach one they passed. These gods had nothing to do, so far as theevidence shows, with fertility or the reproductive functions; nopeculiar rites were observed in their worship, and howeverobjectionable to the taste of a more refined age, the cult was inno sense immoral or conducive to immorality. In modern times, outof regard to the prejudices of Europeans who connected obscenenotions with them, they have been generally removed from theroads, remaining only in out-of-the-way corners of the empire. Title: History Of Religions Book: Religions Of Japan Author: Foot Moore, George Date: 1913 Chapter II: Part II From the 13th to the 15th of July an All-Souls feast is kept,at which time it is believed that the souls are permitted toreturn to their kindred and be entertained by them. A staging ofbamboo canes is erected in one of the rooms of the house, onwhich food and lanterns are placed for the spirits, and aBuddhist priest reads a mass before them. On the first eveningfires of hemp leaves are lighted before the entrance of thehouse, and incense strewed on the coals, as an invitation to thespirits. At the end of the three days the food that has been setout for the spirits is wrapped up in mats and thrown into ariver. Dances of a peculiar kind are a conspicuous feature of thecelebration, which is evidently an old Japanese custom; theBuddhist elements are adscititious. At this season the graves aredecorated, and frequent visits are paid by the kinsfolk. Forthose who have no relatives living a mass is said in all thetemples for "the hungry devils." Title: Australia And The Islands Of The Sea Author: Larkin, Dunton Chapter XXVIII. The Balearic Isles. Majorca is nearly square in form, the greatest distance fromeast to west being sixty miles and from north to south fifty. Itsarea is thirteen hundred square miles. The highest mountains ofthe group are those of Majorca, the loftiest peak attaining aheight of forty-eight hundred feet. The climate is mild andagreeable, and the extremes of heat and cold are seldom of longduration. Fires are rarely required, except in the coldestweather. The soil of these islands on the average is exceedinglyfertile, and produces good crops of wheat, barley, olives,almonds, grapes, figs, oranges, beans, and hemp. Besides these, agreat variety of other fruits and vegetables are grown for localconsumption. . . . . . . . . . . Minorca is situated about twenty-seven miles northeast ofMajorca and has an area of about two hundred and ninety squaremiles. The coast is much indented with bays on all sides exceptthe south, and the shore in most places is bold and steep. It hasseveral excellent harbors, the best one of which is Port Mahon,the capital of the island. The climate of Minorca is mild, butnot so equable as that of Majorca. The soil in general is notvery fertile, that on the plains being scanty and chalky. Thechief products are wheat, barley, wine, oil, potatoes, hemp,and flax. Fruits of all kinds abound, including melons,pomegranates, figs, and almonds. Cattle, sheep, and goats areraised. Stone is plentiful, and a soft kind is much used inbuilding. The population numbers about thirty-nine thousand. Title: Discovery Of America Book: Chapter VII: Mundus Novus Author: Fiske, John Date: 1892 Part VII This adventure of Cabral's had interesting consequences. Itset in motion the train of events which ended after some years inplacing the name "America" upon the map. On May 14,1501, Vespucius, who was evidently principal pilot and guidingspirit in this voyage under unknown skies, set sail from Lisbonwith three caravels. It is not quite clear who was chief captain,but M. Varnhagen has found reasons for believing that it was acertain Don Nuno Manuel. ^1 The first halt was made on theAfrican coast at Cape Verde, the first week in June; and therethe explorers met Cabral on his way back from Hindustan.According to the letter attributed to Vespucius and published in1827 by Baldelli, ^2 the wealth stowed away in Cabral's ships wasquite startling. "He says there was an immense quantity ofcinnamon, green and dry ginger, pepper, cloves, nutmegs, mace,musk, civet, storax, benzoin, porcelain, cassia, mastic, incense,myrrh, red and white sandalwood, aloes, camphor, amber,"Indian hemp and cypress, as well as opium and other drugs toonumerous to mention. "Of jewels he saw many diamonds,rubies, and pearls, and one ruby of a most beautiful colourweighed seven carats and a half, but he did not see all." ^3Verily, he says, God has prospered King Emanuel. Book: The Senate - 1789-1989 Author: Byrd, Robert C. Affiliation: US Senate Volume: Vol. 1 Date: 1989 Chapter 5 The Era of Good Feelings: 1817-1824 October 20, 1981. . . . . Everywhere there were contradictions andincompatibilities. And yet all were loosely bound together - theCreole aristocrat of New Orleans, the liberal nationalist ofSouth Carolina, the parvenu cotton-planter of Georgia, the hempgrower of Kentucky, the tobacco magnate of Virginia - all werebound together by the institution of slavery. The TallmadgeAmendment, like a powerful spell, conjured this loose bondageinto a tightness and coherence it was never afterwards to lose. Title: Australia And The Islands Of The Sea Author: Larkin, Dunton Chapter XXIX. Sardinia, Corsica, And Elba. Next to Sicily, Sardinia is the largest of the islands in theMediterranean Sea, having an area of nearly ninety-three hundredsquare miles. It lies directly south of Corsica, from which it isseparated by the Strait of Bonifacio, a channel which in itsnarrowest part is only seven miles wide. The country is mostlymountainous, and some of the peaks of the central chain have anelevation of over six thousand feet. Many of these peaks areextinct volcanoes. The coasts are as a rule steep and rugged.There are many streams of water on the island, but only one ofthem is even partially navigable, and none of them has a longcourse. The climate is mild, but in the low marshy lands, particularlyin the neighborhood of some of the lakes, a deadly malariaprevails, especially in autumn. The inhabitants of these parts,who can afford to do so, migrate annually during the unhealthymonths. Those who remain never leave their houses till an hourafter sunrise, and return before sunset, carefully closing alldoors and windows to prevent the entrance of the poisonous gas.Between the mountain ranges are several wide valleys noted fortheir beauty and fertility. The principal products are wheat, barley, maize, oranges andother fruits, all of which are esteemed for their excellentquality. Grapes are extensively raised; but from carelessness inthe process of making the wine, it is of an inferior quality.Olive trees are numerous. Cotton, linseed, flax, and hemp arealso produced. Among the trees which grow on the mountain sidesare cork, chestnut, oak, and pine, which form a considerable itemin the export trade. The manufactories of gunpowder, salt, andtobacco are also of importance. Sardinia is rich in minerals, butas yet its mines have been little developed. Book: The Senate - 1789-1989 Author: Byrd, Robert C. Affiliation: US Senate Volume: Vol. 1 Date: 1989 Chapter 6 The Era of Suspense: 1825-1829 Throughout the spring of 1828, debate on the tariff filled theHouse and Senate. Much of it was uninspired. Representative JohnTaylor complained that "day after day passes without anysensible advance in the public business. One dull prosing speechafter another & arguments for the fiftieth time repeated arehashed up & dished in new covers." And one can picturethe House as it looked to Taylor with, as historian ArthurSchlesinger, Jr., described it, members "lolling back inarmchairs, laughing, coughing, spitting, rattling newspapers,while some poor speaker tried to talk above the din." Through the din, Jacksonians obediently set about antagonizingthe northern manufacturers with a variety of bedevilingamendments increasing duties on pig iron, flax, hemp, and soforth. Everyone supposed that the New England senators would joinwith the southern anti-protectionists to kill the measure. DanielWebster, who had moved from the House to the Senate in the autumnelections, emerged, to the consternation of many, as one of theleaders of the pro-tariff forces. On May 9, he offered anextraordinary spectacle. He stood in front of his colleagues toexplain why he was about to repudiate all the free-tradearguments he had made in the House in 1824. He was not eloquent,not the "great cannon loaded to the lips," but he wasvery honest. He offered no moral or intellectual justificationsfor the switch. Book: The Senate - 1789-1989 Author: Byrd, Robert C. Affiliation: US Senate Volume: Vol. 1 Date: 1989 Chapter 19 Currency, Foreign Affairs, Party Structure:1893-1900 Even as the debate raged, disillusioned Filipinos rose inrevolt against the United States which, they believed, hadpromised them independence. The ruthless suppression of nativesby American troops and the crushing of the independence movementintensified congressional soul-searching over this latest stageof American expansionism. The most eloquent defender of thepresident's policy was Indiana's new Republican senator,thirty-seven-year-old Albert Beveridge, who, with his maidenspeech on the Philippine question, leapt to national fame."The Philippines are ours forever," began Beveridge: And just beyond the Philippines are China's illimitablemarkets. We will not retreat from either. We will not repudiateour duty in the archipelago. We will not abandon our opportunityin the Orient. We will not renounce our part in the mission ofour race, trustees under God, of the civilization of the world.God . . . . has marked us as His chosen people, henceforth tolead in the regeneration of the world . . . . He has made us themaster organizers of the world to establish system where chaosreigns. He has made us adept in government that we may administergovernment among savages and senile peoples. Beveridge went on to enumerate with zest the riches of theislands: rice, coffee, sugar, coconuts, hemp, tobacco,"mountains of coal" - all awaiting development byAmerican capital. He lightly brushed aside the objections of thenatives. "It is barely possible that a thousand men in thearchipelago are capable of self-government in the Anglo-Saxonsense." [See A Narrow-Sighted Senator: Young Albert Beveridge ofIndiana was an eloquent, outspoken imperialist on the Philippinequestion.] Book: Our Country: Volume 1 Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. Volume: Vol. 1 Date: 1905 Chapter XIII Northward from his anchorage after his vessel had entered NewYork Bay, Hudson saw a broad stream rising and falling with thetide, which the Indians told him came from beyond the pale bluemountain ranges in the distance. He believed it was a straitthrough which he might pass into the Indian Ocean so he sailed upthe stream a few miles, and anchored. Natives came to him incanoes from the shores with fruits and vegetables, and friendlygestures. The men were athletic the women were graceful and theyoung ones often beautiful. All were half-clad in mantles made ofskins or feathers depending from one shoulder and the waist, orin colored hempen tunics; and some of the women who came in thecanoes, whose hair, long and black, hung loosely over theirshoulders and bosoms, wore fillets ornamented with shells and thequills of the porcupine. They seemed anxious for friendlyintercourse, but Hudson repelled and offended them. Title: History Of The Decline And Fall Of The Roman Empire Book: Chapter XLII: State Of The Barbaric World. Author: Gibbon, Edward Date: 1782 (Written), 1845 (Revised) Part I. To the east, the Turks invaded China, as often as the vigor ofthe government was relaxed: and I am taught to read in thehistory of the times, that they mowed down their patient enemieslike hemp or grass; and that the mandarins applauded the wisdomof an emperor who repulsed these Barbarians with golden lances.This extent of savage empire compelled the Turkish monarch toestablish three subordinate princes of his own blood, who soonforgot their gratitude and allegiance. The conquerors wereenervated by luxury, which is always fatal except to anindustrious people; the policy of China solicited the vanquishednations to resume their independence and the power of the Turkswas limited to a period of two hundred years. The revival oftheir name and dominion in the southern countries of Asia are theevents of a later age; and the dynasties, which succeeded totheir native realms, may sleep in oblivion; since their historybears no relation to the decline and fall of the Roman empire. Title: Rollin's Ancient History: History Of The Persians AndGrecians Book: Chapter II. Author: Rollin, Charles Date: 1731 Sections II And III. Xerxes commanded two other bridges to be built, one for thearmy to pass over, and the other for the baggage and beasts ofburden. He appointed workmen more able and expert than theformer, who constructed it in the following manner: they placedthree hundred and sixty vessels across the strait, some of themhaving three benches of oars, and others fifty oars a piece, withtheir sides turned towards the Euxine sea; and on the side thatfaced the Aegean sea they put three hundred and fourteen. Theythen cast large anchors into the water on both sides, in order tofix and secure all these vessels against the violence of thewinds, and against the current of the water. On the east sidethey left three passages or vacant spaces between the vessels,that there might be room for small boats to pass easily, as therewas occasion, to and from the Euxine sea. After this, upon theland on both sides they drove large piles into the earth, withhuge rings fastened to them, to which were tied six vast cables,which went over each of the two bridges; two of which cables weremade of hemp, and four of a sort of reeds, called, which wereused in those times in the manufacture of cordage. Those thatwere made of hemp must have been of an extraordinary strength andthickness, since every cubit of those cables weighed a talent.The cables, laid over the whole extent of the vessels lengthwise,reached from one side of the sea to the other. When this part ofthe work was finished, quite over the vessels lengthwise, andover the cables we have been speaking of, they laid the trunks oftrees, cut purposely for that use, and flat boats again overthem, fastened and joined together, to serve as a kind of flooror solid bottom; all which they covered over with earth, andadded rails or battlements on each side, that the horses andcattle might not be frightened with seeing the sea in theirpassage. Such was the construction of those famous bridges builtby Xerxes. Title: Travels Of Marco Polo Book: Book First: Here The Book Begins; And First It Speaks OfThe Lesser Armenia Author: Polo, Marco Part III Chapter XXVI Of A Province Called Khotan Khotan is a province lying between northeast and east, and iseight days' journey in length. The people are subject to thegreat Khan, and are all worshippers of Mahommet. There arenumerous towns and villages in the country, but Khotan, thecapital, is the most noble of all, and gives its name to thekingdom. Everything is to be had there in plenty, includingabundance of cotton, with flax, hemp, wheat, wine, and the like.The people have vineyards and gardens and estates. They live bycommerce and manufactures, and are no soldiers. Title: Travels Of Marco Polo Book: Book Second: Of Kublai Khan, Great Khan Now Reigning,His Great Puissance Author: Polo, Marco Part IV Chapter XXXII Of The Charity Of The Emperor To The Poor He also provides the poor with clothes. For he lays a titheupon all wool, silk, hemp, and the like, from which clothing canbe made; and he has these woven and laid up in a building setapart for the purpose; and as all artisans are bound to give aday's labor weekly, in this way the Khan has these stuffs madeinto clothing for those poor families, suitable for summer orwinter, according to the time of year. He also provides theclothing for his troops, and has woolens woven for them in everycity, the material for which is furnished by the tithe aforesaid.You should know that the Tartars, before they were converted tothe religion of the idolaters, never practiced almsgiving.Indeed, when any poor man begged of them they would tell him,"Go with God's curse, for if He loved you as He loves me, Hewould have provided for you." But the sages of theidolaters, and especially the Bakshis mentioned before, told thegreat Khan that it was a good work to provide for the poor, andthat his idols would be greatly pleased if he did so. And sincethen he has taken to do for the poor so much as you have heard. Title: Travels Of Marco Polo Book: Book Second: Of Kublai Khan, Great Khan Now Reigning,His Great Puissance Author: Polo, Marco Part IX Now we will quit this matter and I will tell you of anothercity called Kwa-chau. But first I must mention a point I hadforgotten. You must know that the vessels on this river, in goingup stream, have to be tracked, for the current is so strong thatthey could not make head in any other manner. Now the towline,which is some three hundred paces in length, is made of nothingbut cane. It is in this way: they have those great canes of whichI told you before that they are some fifteen paces in length;these they take and split from end to end into many slenderstrips, and then they twist these strips together so as to make arope of any length they please. And the ropes so made arestronger than if they were made of hemp. . . . . .. They burn the bodies of the dead. And when any one dies thefriends and relations make a great mourning for the deceased, andclothe themselves in hempen garments, and follow the corpseplaying on a variety of instruments and singing hymns to theiridols. And when they come to the burning place, they takerepresentations of things cut out of parchment, such ascaparisoned horses, male and female slaves, camels, armor, suitsof cloth of gold, and money, in great quantities, and thesethings they put on the fire along with the corpse, so that theyare all burnt with it. And they tell you that the dead man shallhave all these slaves and animals of which the effigies areburnt, alive in flesh and blood, and the money in gold, at hisdisposal in the next world; and that the instruments which theyhave caused to be played at his funeral, and the idol hymns thathave been chanted, shall also be produced again to welcome him inthe next world; and that the idols themselves will come to do himhonor. Title: Travels Of Marco Polo Book: Book Third: Japan, The Archipelago, Southern India, TheCoasts And Islands Author: Polo, Marco Part I Chapter I Of The Merchant Ships Of Manzi That Sail Upon The Indian Seas The fastenings are all of good iron nails and the sides aredouble, one plank laid over the other, and caulked outside andin. The planks are not pitched, for those people do not have anypitch, but they daub the sides with other matter, deemed by themfar better than pitch; it is this. You see they take some limeand some chopped hemp, and these they knead together with acertain wood oil; and when the three are thoroughly amalgamated,they hold like any glue. And with this mixture they paint theirships. Title: True Stories Of The Great War Book: The Tale Of The "Tara" Off The African Coast Author: Freeman R. Lewis Date: 1915 Translation: Bevir, Grace E. The Tale Of The "Tara" Off The African Coast I - Story Of The British Packet And so they ran on. Fenton confessed to having had to"clout" one of the quartermasters, because the latter had been so"swanky" as to maintain that the torpedo that sank theTara was scarlet "when the bally thing was only red";and Birkby admitted to having closed his argument for thenegative on one of Lieutenant Tanner's Sunday texts with,"And if you still think that 'Love is the greatest thing inthe world' - take that!" And as we slid up the Liffey in thedrizzle of the Irish dawn, Barton just finished telling me howsomeone accused the first man to sight the rescuing motors witheating the "Arabs' hemp and 'seeing' things,'" addingthat the two were circling each other on tottering legs, lookingfor an opening, when the bout was interrupted by the arrival ofthe Red Cross ambulances. "Half a minute later," heconcluded, "the two of 'em was both guzzlin' over the samejam-tin." Title: World Civilizations: The Postclassical Era Book: Chapter 19: Spread Of Chinese Civilization - Korea,Japan, And Vietnam Author: Stearns, Peter N.;Adas, Michael;Schwartz, Stuart B. Date: 1992 The Era Of Warrior Dominance Despite the chaos and suffering of the warlord period, therewas much economic and cultural growth. Most of the daimyosclearly recognized the necessity of building up their pettystates if they were to be strong enough to survive in the longrun. Within the domains of the more able daimyos, attempts weremade to stabilize village life by introducing regular taxcollection, supporting the construction of irrigation systems andother public works, and building strong rural communities.Incentives were offered to encourage the settlement of unoccupiedareas, and new tools, the greater use of draft animals, and newcrops - especially soybeans - contributed to the well-being ofthe peasantry in the better-run domains. Peasants were alsoencouraged to produce items such as silk, hemp, paper, dyes, andvegetable oils, which were highly marketable and thus potentialsources of household income. Daimyos vied with each other toattract merchants to their growing castle towns, and a new andquite wealthy commercial class emerged as the purveyors of goodsfor the military elite and the intermediaries in trade betweenJapan and overseas areas, especially China. As in medievalEurope, guild organizations for both craftsmen (carpenters,thatchers, smiths, potters, etc.) and merchants were strong inthis era. They helped provide social solidarity and groupprotection in a time of political breakdown and insecurity. Title: World Civilizations: Industrialization And WesternGlobal Hegemony Book: Chapter 30: Industrialization And Imperialism Author: Stearns, Peter N.; Adas, Michael;Schwartz, Stuart B. Date: 1992 Introduction The Making Of The European Global Order In the industrial era, from roughly 1800 onward, the thingsthat Europeans sought in the outside world as well as the sourceof the insecurities that drove them there changed dramatically.Raw materials - metals, vegetable oils, dyes, cotton, and hemp -needed to feed the machines of Europe, not spices or manufacturedgoods, were the main products the Europeans sought overseas.Industrialization made Europe for the first time themanufacturing center of the world, and overseas markets formachine-made European products became a key concern of those whopushed for colonial expansion. Christian missionaries, by then aslikely to be Protestant as Roman Catholic, still sought to winconverts overseas. But unlike the rulers of Portugal and Spain inthe early centuries of expansion, European leaders in theindustrial age rarely took initiatives overseas to promoteChristian proselytization. In part this reflected the fact thatwestern Europe itself was no longer seriously threatened by theMuslims or any other non-European people. The fears that fueledEuropean imperialist expansion in the industrial age arose frominternal rivalries between the European powers. Overseaspeoplesmight resist the European advance, but the Europeans feared eachother far more than even the largest non- European empires. Title: World Civilizations: Industrialization And WesternGlobal Hegemony Book: Chapter 30: Industrialization And Imperialism Author: Stearns, Peter N.; Adas, Michael;Schwartz, Stuart B. Date: 1992 Patterns Of Dominance: Continuity And Change As increasing numbers of the colonized peoples were drawn intothe production of crops or minerals intended for export toEurope, colonized areas in Africa, India, and Southeast Asia werereduced to dependence on the industrializing European economies.Roads and railways were built primarily to facilitate themovement of farm produce and raw materials from the interior ofcolonized areas to port areas where they could be shipped toEurope. Benefiting from Europe's technological advances, miningsectors grew dramatically in most of the colonies. Vast areasthat were previously uncultivated or (more commonly) had beenplanted in food crops were converted to the production ofcommodities - such as cocoa, palm oil, rubber, and hemp - ingreat demand in the markets of Europe and, increasingly, theUnited States. Title: Australia And The Islands Of The Sea Author: Larkin, Dunton Chapter XXXIX. The Philippine Islands. The Philippine Islands form an important group in the northernpart of the Malay Archipelago. They belong to Spain, and, next toCuba, form its most important colonial possession. There are overfour hundred islands in the group, the two largest being Luzonand Mindanao. . . .. . Among plants cultivated for use are the palms, hemp, coffeetree, indigo, tobacco, cloves, nutmeg, and red and black peppervines. Rice, maize, wheat, yams, sweet potatoes, and many kindsof fruits are also raised. Title: World Civilizations: Industrialization And WesternGlobal Hegemony Book: Chapter 32: Ottoman Empire, Islamic Heartlands, And QingChina Author: Stearns, Peter N.; Adas, Michael;Schwartz, Stuart B. Date: 1992 Western Intrusions And The Crisis In The Arab IslamicHeartlands Though Muhammad Ali's efforts to introduce reforms patternedafter Western precedents were not confined to the military, theyfell far short of a fundamental transformation of Egyptiansociety. To shore up his economic base, he ordered the Egyptianpeasantry to expand their production of cotton, hemp, indigo, andother crops that were in growing demand in industrial Europe.Efforts to improve Egyptian harbors and extend irrigation worksmet with some success and led to modest increases in the revenuesthat could be devoted to the continuing modernization of themilitary. Attempts to reform education were ambitious but limitedin what was actually achieved. Many of the most significantinnovations in schooling were linked to Muhammad Ali's militaryprojects. His frequent schemes to build up an Egyptian industrialsector were eventually frustrated by the opposition of theEuropean powers and by the intense competition from imported,Western-manufactured goods. Title: Wealth Of Nations Book: Book II Author: Smith, Adam Date: 1776 Chapter V. Of the Different Employment of Capitals It is of more consequence that the capital of the manufacturershould reside within the country. It necessarily puts into motiona greater quantity of productive labour, and adds a greater valueto the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. Itmay, however, be very useful to the country, though it should notreside within it. The capitals of the British manufacturers whowork up the flax and hemp annually imported from the coasts ofthe Baltic, are surely very useful to the countries which producethem. Those materials are a part of the surplus produce of thosecountries which, unless it was annually exchanged for somethingwhich is in demand there, would be of no value, and would sooncease to be produced. The merchants who export it, replace thecapitals of the people who produce it, and thereby encourage themto continue the production; and the British manufacturers replacethe capitals of those merchants. . . . . . . The foreign goods for home-consumption may sometimes bepurchased, not with the produce of domestick industry, but withsome other foreign goods. These last, however, must have beenpurchased either immediately with the produce of domestickindustry, or with something else that had been purchased with it;for the case of war and conquest excepted, foreign goods cannever be acquired, but in exchange for something that had beenproduced at home, either immediately, or after two or moredifferent exchanges. The effects, therefore, of a capitalemployed in such a round-about foreign trade of consumption, are,in every respect, the same as those of one employed in the mostdirect trade of the same kind, except that the final returns arelikely to be still more distant, as they must depend upon thereturns of two or three distinct foreign trades. If the flax andhemp of Riga are purchased with the tobacco of Virginia, whichhad been purchased with British manufactures, the merchant mustwait for the returns of two distinct foreign trades before he canemploy the same capital in re-purchasing a like quantity ofBritish manufactures. If the tobacco of Virginia had beenpurchased, not with British manufactures, but with the sugar andrum of Jamaica which had been purchased with those manufactures,he must wait for the returns of three. If those two or threedistinct foreign trades should happen to be carried on by two orthree distinct merchants, of whom the second buys the goodsimported by the first, and the third buys those imported by thesecond, in order to export them again, each merchant indeed willin this case receive the returns of his own capital more quickly;but the final returns of the whole capital employed in the tradewill be just as slow as ever. Whether the whole capitalemployment in such a round-about trade belong to one merchant orto three, can make no difference with regard to the country,though it may with regard to the particular merchants. Threetimes a greater capital must in both cases be employed, in orderto exchange a certain value of British manufactures for a certainquantity of flax and hemp, than would have been necessary, hadthe manufactures and the flax and hemp been directly exchangedfor one another. The whole capital employed, therefore, in such around-about foreign trade of consumption, will generally giveless encouragement and support to the productive labour of thecountry, than an equal capital employed in a more direct trade ofthe same kind. Title: Wealth Of Nations Book: Book IV Author: Smith, Adam Date: 1776 Chapter VIII, Section I. Conclusion of the Mercantile System The first bounties of this kind were those granted, about thebeginning of the present century, upon the importation of navalstores from America. Under this denomination were comprehendedtimber fit for masts, yards, and bowsprits; hemp; tar, pitch, andturpentine. The bounty, however, of one pound the ton uponmasting-timber, and that of six pounds the ton upon hemp, wereextended to such as should be imported into England fromScotland. Both these bounties continued without any variation, atthe same rate, till they were severally allowed to expire; thatupon hemp on the 1st of January 1741, and that uponmasting-timber at the end of the session of parliamentimmediately following the 24th June 1781. ……… The third bounty of this kind was that granted (much about thetime that we were beginning sometimes to court and sometimes toquarrel with our American colonies) by the 4 Geo. III. chap. 26.upon the importation of hemp, or undressed flax, from the Britishplantations. This bounty was granted for twenty-one years, fromthe 24th June 1764, to the 24th June 1785. For the first sevenyears it was to be at the rate of eight pounds the ton, for thesecond at six pounds, and for the third at four pounds. It wasnot extended to Scotland, of which the climate (although hemp issometimes raised there, in small quantities and of an inferiorquality) is not very fit for that produce. Such a bounty upon theimportation of Scotch flax into England would have been too greata discouragement to the native produce of the southern part ofthe united kingdom. ………………….. The seventh and last bounty of this kind, was that granted bythe 19 Geo. III. chap. 37. upon the importation of hemp fromIreland. It was granted in the same manner as that for theimportation of hemp and undressed flax from America, fortwenty-one years, from the 24th June 1779, to the 24th June 1800.This term is divided, likewise, into three periods of seven yearseach; and in each of those periods, the rate of the Irish bountyis the same with that of the American. It does not, however, likethe American bounty, extend to the importation of undressed flax.It would have been too great a discouragement to the cultivationof that plant in Great Britain. When this last bounty wasgranted, the British and Irish legislatures were not in muchbetter humour with one another, than the British and American hadbeen before. But this boon to Ireland, it is to be hoped, hasbeen granted under more fortunate auspices, than all those toAmerica. Title: Autobiography Of Benvenuto Cellini Book: Book First Author: Cellini, Benvenuto Date: 1566 Translation: Symonds, John Addington Part XVII So I was taken into a gloomy dungeon below the level of agarden, which swam with water, and was full of big spiders andmany venomous worms. They flung me a wretched mattress of coursehemp, gave me no supper, and locked four doors upon me. In thatcondition I abode until the nineteenth hour of the following day.Then I received food, and I requested my jailers to give me someof my books to read. None of them spoke a word, but they referredmy prayer to the unfortunate castellan, who had made inquiriesconcerning what I said. Next morning they brought me an ItalianBible which belonged to me, and a copy of the Chronicles ofGiovanni Villani. When I asked for certain other of my books, Iwas told that I could have no more, and that I had got too manyalready. [Footnote 1: This mention of an Italian Bible shows that weare still in the days before the Council of Trent.] Title: Apocrypha, The Book: Ecclesiasticus Author: Various Date: 1611 Chapter 40 Great travail is created for every man, And a heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, From the day of their coming forth from their mother's womb, Until the day for their burial in the mother of all things. The expectation of things to come, and the day of death, ^1 Trouble their thoughts, and cause fear of heart; From him that sitteth on a throne of glory, Even unto him that is humbled in earth and ashes; From him that weareth purple and a crown, Even unto him that is clothed with a hempen frock. There is wrath, and jealousy, and trouble, and disquiet, And fear of death, and anger, and strife; And in the time of rest upon his bed His night sleep doth change his knowledge. A little or nothing is his resting, And afterward in his sleep, as in a day of keeping watch, He is troubled in the vision of his heart, As one that hath escaped from the front of battle. In the very time of his deliverance he awaketh, And marvelleth that the fear is nought. Title: Castilian Days Book: A Miracle Play Author: Hay, John Date: 1903 The sinister procession moves on. The audience, which had beensomewhat cheered by the prompt and picturesque punishmentinflicted upon the inhospitable Samuel, was still furtherexhilarated by the spectacle of the impenitent traitor Gestas,staggering under an enormous cross, his eyes and teeth glaringwith abject fear, with an athletic Roman haling him up to Calvarywith a new hempen halter. Title: Travels Of Marco Polo Book: Book First: Here The Book Begins; And First It Speaks OfThe Lesser Armenia Author: Polo, Marco Part V Then there is another kind of devotees called Sensin, who aremen of extraordinary abstinence after their fashion, and lead alife of such hardship as I will describe. All their life longthey eat nothing but bran, which they take mixed with hot water.That is their food: bran, and nothing but bran; and water fortheir drink. 'Tis a lifelong fast! so that I may well say theirlife is one of extraordinary asceticism. They have great idols,and plenty of them; but they sometimes also worship fire. Theother idolaters who are not of this sect call these peopleheretics - Patarins as we should say - because they do notworship their idols in their own fashion. Those of whom I amspeaking would not take a wife on any consideration. They weardresses of hempen stuff, black and blue, and sleep upon mats; infact their asceticism is something astonishing. Their idols areall female, that is to say, they have women's names. Title: Wealth Of Nations Book: Book I Author: Smith, Adam Date: 1776 Chapter X, Section II. In Scotland there is no general law which regulatesuniversally the duration of apprenticeships. The term isdifferent in different corporations. Where it is long, a part ofit may generally be redeemed by paying a small fine. In mosttowns, too, a very small fine is sufficient to purchase thefreedom of any corporation. The weavers of linen and hempencloth, the principal manufactures of the country, as well as allother artificers subservient to them, wheel-makers, reel-makers,&c. may exercise their trades in any town corporate withoutpaying any fine. In all towns corporate all persons are free tosell butcher's meat upon any lawful day of the week. Three yearsis in Scotland a common term of apprenticeship, even in some verynice trades; and in general I know of no country in Europe inwhich corporation laws are so little oppressive. Title: Benjamin Franklin Experiments With Electricity Author: Bigelow, John;Franklin, Benjamin Date: 1747 "It was not till the summer of 1752 that he was enabledto complete his grand and unparalleled discovery by experiment.The plan which he had originally proposed was to erect, on somehigh tower or other elevated place, a sentry-box, from whichshould rise a pointed iron rod, insulated by being fixed in acake of resin. Electrified clouds passing over this would, heconceived, impart to it a portion of their electricity, whichwould be rendered evident to the senses by sparks being emittedwhen a key, the knuckle, or other conductor was presented to it.Philadelphia at this time afforded no opportunity of trying anexperiment of this kind. While Franklin was waiting for theerection of a spire, it occurred to him that he might have moreready access to the region of clouds by means of a common kite.He prepared one by fastening two cross sticks to a silkenhandkerchief, which would not suffer so much from the rain aspaper. To the upright stick was affixed an iron point. The stringwas, as usual, of hemp, except the lower end, which was silk.Where the hempen string terminated, a key was fastened. With thisapparatus, on the appearance of a thunder-gust approaching hewent out into the commons, accompanied by his son, to whom alonehe communicated his intentions, well knowing the ridicule which,too generally for the interest of science, awaits unsuccessfulexperiments in philosophy. He placed himself under a shed, toavoid the rain; his kite was raised, a thunder-cloud passed overit, no sign of electricity appeared. He almost despaired ofsuccess, when suddenly he observed the loose fibres of his stringto move toward an erect position. He now presented his knuckle tothe key and received a strong spark. How exquisite must hissensations have been at this moment! On this experiment dependedthe fate of his theory. If he succeeded, his name would rank highamong those who had improved science; if he failed, he mustinevitably be subjected to the derision of mankind, or, what isworse, their pity, as a well-meaning man, but a weak, sillyprojector. The anxiety with which he looked for the result of hisexperiment may be easily conceived. Doubts and despair had begunto prevail, when the fact was ascertained, in so clear a mannerthat even the most incredulous could no longer withhold theirassent. Repeated sparks were drawn from the key, a vial wascharged, a shock given, and all the experiments made which areusually performed with electricity. Title: Buddhist Doctrine Author: Buddhist Sources Date: c500bc Translation: Warren, Henry Clarke Good And Bad Karma Translated from the Samyutta-Nikaya On a certain occasion The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthiin Jitavana monastery in Anathapindika's Park. Then drew nearking Pasenadi the Kosalan, at an unusual time of day, to whereThe Blessed One was; and having drawn near and greeted TheBlessed One, he sat down respectfully at one side. And kingPasenadi the Kosalan being seated respectfully at one side, TheBlessed One spoke to him as follows: "Pray, whence have you come, great king, at this unusualtime of day?" "Reverend Sir, a householder who was treasurer inSavatthi has just died leaving no son, and I have come fromtransferring his property to my royal palace; and, Reverend Sir,he had ten million pieces of gold, and silver beyond allreckoning. But this householder, Reverend Sir, would eat sourgruel and kanajaka, and the clothes he wore were made of hemp . .., and the conveyance in which he rode was a broken-down chariotwith an umbrella of leaves." Title: Sir Francis Drake's Famous Voyage Round The World Author: Francis Pretty, One of Drake's Gentlemen at arms. Date: 1580 Sir Francis Drake's Famous Voyage Round The World, Part I. The Famous Voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the South Sea, andtherehence about the whole Globe of the Earth, begun in the yearof our Lord 1577. The fifth of June, being in 43 degrees towards the poleArctic, we found the air so cold, that our men being grievouslypinched with the same, complained of the extremity thereof; andthe further we went, the more the cold increased upon us.Whereupon we thought it best for that time to seek the land, anddid so; finding it not mountainous, but low plain land, till wecame within 38 degrees towards the line. In which height itpleased God to send us into a fair and good bay, with a good windto enter the same. In this bay we anchored; and the people of thecountry, having their houses close by the water's side, shewedthemselves unto us, and sent a present to our General. When theycame unto us, they greatly wondered at the things that webrought. But our General, according to his natural and accustomedhumanity, courteously intreated them, and liberally bestowed onthem necessary things to cover their nakedness; whereupon theysupposed us to be gods, and would not be persuaded to thecontrary. The presents which they sent to our General, werefeathers, and cauls of network. Their houses are digged roundabout with earth, and have from the uttermost brims of thecircle, clifts of wood set upon them, joining close together atthe top like a spire steeple, which by reason of that closenessare very warm. Their bed is the ground with rushes strowed on it;and lying about the house, [they] have the fire in the midst. Themen go naked; the women take bulrushes, and kemb them after themanner of hemp, and thereof make their loose garments, whichbeing knit about their middles, hang down about their hips,having also about their shoulders a skin of deer, with the hairupon it. These women are very obedient and serviceable to theirhusbands. Title: Life Of King Henry The Fifth, The Book: Act III. Author: Shakespeare, William Date: 1599 Scene VI. The English Camp in Picardy. Pist. Fortune is Bardolph's foe, and frowns on him; For he hath stolen a pax, and hanged must a' be, A damned death! Let gallows gape for dog, let man go free And let not hemp his wind-pipe suffocate. But Exeter hath given the doom of death For pax of little price. Therefore, go speak; the duke will hear thy voice; And let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut With edge of penny cord and vile reproach: Speak, captain, for his life, and I will thee requite. Title: Holy Grail From The Book Of King Arthur Book: Seventeenth Book Author: Traditional Date: c1175 Translation: Malory, Thomas Part I Chapter I How Sir Galahad Fought At A Tournament, And How He Was KnownOf Sir Gawaine And Sir Ector De Maris And when the ship was ready in the sea to sail, the lady letmake a great bed and marvellous rich, and set her upon the bed'shead, covered with silk, and laid the sword at the feet, and thegirdles were of hemp, and therewith the king was angry. Sir, witye well, said she, that I have none so high a thing which wereworthy to sustain so high a sword, and a maid shall bring otherknights thereto, but I wot not when it shall be, nor what time.And there she let make a covering to the ship, of cloth of silkthat should never rot for no manner of weather. Title: Poems And Songs Of Robert Burns Book: Part III Author: Burns, Robert Date: 1786 Part III Death And Dying Words Of Poor Mailie, The Author's Only PetYowe., The An Unco Mournfu' Tale "Tell him, if e'er again he keep As muckle gear as buy a sheep- O, bid him never tie them mair, Wi' wicked strings o' hemp or hair! But ca' them out to park or hill, An' let them wander at their will: So may his flock increase, an' grow To scores o' lambs, an' packs o' woo'! Title: Poems And Songs Of Robert Burns Book: Part X Author: Burns, Robert Date: 1786 Part X Halloween^1 "Our stibble-rig was Rab M'Graen, A clever, sturdy fallow; His sin gat Eppie Sim wi' wean, That lived in Achmacalla: He gat hemp-seed,^11 I mind it weel, An'he made unco light o't; But mony a day was by himsel', He was sae sairly frighted That vera night." [Footnote 11: Steal out, unperceived, and sow a handful ofhemp-seed, harrowing it with anything you can conveniently drawafter you. Repeat now and then: "Hemp-seed, I saw thee,hemp-seed, I saw thee; and him (or her) that is to be my truelove, come after me and pou thee." Look over your leftshoulder, and you will see the appearance of the person invoked,in the attitude of pulling hemp. Some traditions say, "Comeafter me and shaw thee," that is, show thyself; in whichcase, it simply appears. Others omit the harrowing, and say:"Come after me and harrow thee."-R.B.] Then up gat fechtin Jamie Fleck, An' he swoor by his conscience, That he could saw hemp-seed a peck; For it was a' but nonsense: The auld guidman raught down the pock, An' out a handfu' gied him; Syne bad him slip frae' mang the folk, Sometime when nae ane see'd him, An' try't that night. He marches thro' amang the stacks, Tho' he was something sturtin; The graip he for a harrow taks, An' haurls at his curpin: And ev'ry now an' then, he says, "Hemp-seed I saw thee, An' her that is to be my lass Come after me, an' draw thee As fast this night." Title: Poems And Songs Of Robert Burns Book: Part XLV Author: Burns, Robert Date: 1786 Part XLV The Epitaph Epistle From Esopus To Maria From those drear solitudes and frowsy cells, Where Infamy with sad Repentance dwells; Where turnkeys make the jealous portal fast, And deal from iron hands the spare repast; Where truant 'prentices, yet young in sin, Blush at the curious stranger peeping in; Where strumpets, relics of the drunken roar, Resolve to drink, nay, half, to whore, no more; Where tiny thieves not destin'd yet to swing, Beat hemp for others, riper for the string: From these dire scenes my wretched lines I date, To tell Maria her Esopus' fate. Title: I Promessi Sposi Or The Betrothed Book: Chapter III Author: Manzoni, Alessandro Date: 1826 Chapter III 'Well,' continued Agnese, 'he is a man! I have seen more thanone person, bothered like a chicken in a bundle of hemp, and whodid not know where to put his head, and after being an hour noseto nose with the Dr Azzecca - Garbugli, (take good care you don'tcall him so) - I have seen him, I say, make a joke of it. Takethese four capons, poor creatures! whose necks I ought to havewrung for tonight's supper, and carry them to him; because wemust never go empty - handed to these gentlemen. Relate to himall that has happened, and you'll see he will tell you, in atwinkling, things which would not come into our heads if we wereto think about them for a year.' Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-64IA087-000625-B017-125http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hempref2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043818 text/html 37368HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:38:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:55 GMTContent-length: 37150 Historical and Literary References to Hemp - Part 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information Historical and Literary References to Hemp A sampling of references to hemp (marijuana) throughout theages. Part 2 The Gilded Age Volume I Chapter XVII: Stone's Landing Becomes City Of Napoleon - OnPaper Twain, Mark; Warner, Charles Dudley , 1873 About the chief cabin, which was the store and grocery of thismart of trade, the mud was more liquid than elsewhere, and therude platform in front of it and the dry-goods boxes mountedthereon were places of refuge for all the loafers of the place.Down by the stream was a dilapidated building which served for a hempwarehouse, and a shaky wharf extended out from it into the water.In fact, a flat-boat was there moored by it, its setting poleslying across the gunwales. Above the town the stream was crossedby a crazy wooden bridge, the supports of which leaned all waysin the soggy soil; the absence of a plank here and there in theflooring made the crossing of the bridge faster than a walk anoffense not necessary to be prohibited by law. "This, gentlemen," said Jeff, "is ColumbusRiver, alias Goose Run. If it was widened, and deepened, andstraightened, and made long enough, it would be one of the finestrivers in the Western country." ……………. When the conveyance at length drew up to Mr. Thompson's door,the gentleman descended with great deliberation, straightenedhimself up, rubbed his hands, and, beaming satisfaction fromevery part of his radiant frame, advanced to the group that wasgathered to welcome him, and which had saluted him by name assoon as he came within hearing. "Welcome to Napoleon, gentlemen, welcome. I am proud tosee you here Mr. Thompson. You are looking well Mr. Sterling.This is the country, sir. Right glad to see you Mr. Brierly. Yougot that basket of champagne? No? Those blasted river thieves!I'll never send anything more by 'em. The best brand, Roederer.The last I had in my cellar, from a lot sent me by Sir GeorgeGore - took him out on a buffalo hunt, when he visited ourcountry. Is always sending me some trifle. You haven't lookedabout any yet, gentlemen? It's in the rough yet, in the rough.Those buildings will all have to come down. That's the place forthe public square, court- house, hotels, churches, jail - allthat sort of thing. About where we stand, the deepo. How doesthat strike your engineering eye, Mr. Thompson? Down yonder thebusiness streets, running to the wharves. The University upthere, on rising ground, sightly place, see the river for miles.That's Columbus River, only forty-nine miles to the Missouri. Yousee what it is, placid, steady, no current to interfere withnavigation, wants widening in places and dredging, dredge out theharbor and raise a levee in front of the town; made by nature onpurpose for a mart. Look at all this country, not anotherbuilding within ten miles, no other navigable stream, lay of theland points right here; hemp, tobacco, corn, must comehere. The railroad will do it, Napoleon won't know itself in ayear." The Gilded Age Volume I Chapter XVI: Model Railroad Engineer. Survey To Stone'sLanding The Colonel hitched up his chair close to Harry, laid his handon his knee, and, first looking about him, said in a low voice,"The Salt Lick Pacific Extension is going to run throughStone's Landing! The Almighty never laid out a cleaner piece oflevel prairie for a city; and it's the natural center of all thatregion of hemp and tobacco." A Tramp Abroad Volume I Chapter XXII: The Black Forest Author: Twain, Mark, 1879 We found the Black Forest farmhouses and villages all that theBlack Forest stories have pictured them. The first genuinespecimen which we came upon was the mansion of a rich farmer andmember of the Common Council of the parish or district. He was animportant personage in the land and so was his wife also, ofcourse. His daughter was the "catch" of the region, andshe may be already entering into immortality as the heroine ofone of Auerbach's novels, for all I know. We shall see, for if heputs her in I shall recognize her by her Black Forest clothes,and her burned complexion, her plump figure, her fat hands, herdull expression, her gentle spirit, her generous feet, herbonnetless head, and the plaited tails of hemp-coloredhair hanging down her back. Roughing It Volume II Chapter XXVII: The End Of Great Kamehameha Twain, Mark, 1871 He was dressed entirely in black - dress-coat and silk hat -and looked rather democratic in the midst of the showy uniformsabout him. On his breast he wore a large gold star, which washalf hidden by the lapel of his coat. He remained at the door ahalf-hour, and occasionally gave an order to the men who wereerecting the kahilis before the tomb. He had the good taste tomake one of them substitute black crape for the ordinary hempenrope he was about to tie one of them to the framework with.Finally he entered his carriage and drove away, and the populaceshortly began to drop into his wake. While he was in view therewas but one man who attracted more attention than himself, andthat was Harris (the Yankee Prime Minister). This feeblepersonage had crape enough around his hat to express the grief ofan entire nation, and as usual he neglected no opportunity ofmaking himself conspicuous and exciting the admiration of thesimple Kanakas. Oh! noble ambition of this modern Richelieu! Title: I Promessi Sposi Or The Betrothed Book: Chapter XXIII Author: Manzoni, Alessandro Date: 1826 Lucia replied with a look which expressed assent as clearly aswords could have done, and with a sweetness which words could nothave conveyed. 'Noble girl!' rejoined the woman. 'And your Curate, too, beingat our village, (for there are numbers assembled from all thecountry round to elect four public officers,) the Signor Cardinalthought it better to send him with us; but he has been of littleuse: I had before heard that he was a poor - spirited creature;but, on this occasion, I couldn't help seeing that he was asfrightened as a chicken in a bundle of hemp.' Title: Samuel Pepys Author: Stevenson, Robert Louis Date: c1886 A Liberal Genius The whole world, town or country, was to Pepys a garden ofArmida. Wherever he went, his steps were winged with the mosteager expectation; whatever he did, it was done with the mostlively pleasure. An insatiable curiosity in all the shows of theworld and all the secrets of knowledge, filled him brimful of thelonging to travel, and supported him in the toils of study. Romewas the dream of his life; he was never happier than when he reador talked of the Eternal City. When he was in Holland, he was"with child" to see any strange thing. Meeting somefriends and singing with them in a palace near The Hague, his penfails him to express his passion of delight, "the more sobecause in a heaven of pleasure and in a strange country."He must go to see all famous executions. He must needs visit thebody of a murdered man, defaced "with a broad wound,"he says, "that makes my hand now shake to write of it."He learned to dance, and was "like to make a dancer."(He learned to sing, and walked about Gray's Inn Fields"humming to myself (which is now my constant practice) thetrillo." He learned to play the lute, the flute, theflageolet, and the theorbo, and it was not the fault of hisintention if he did not learn the harpsichord or the spinet. Helearned to compose songs, and burned to give forth" a schemeand theory of music not yet ever made in the world." When heheard "a fellow whistle like a bird exceeding all," hepromised to return another day and give an angel for a lesson inthe art. Once, he writes, "I took the Bezan back with me,and with a brave gale and tide reached up that night to the Hope,taking great pleasure in learning the seamen's manner of singingwhen they sound the depths." If he found himself rusty inhis Latin grammar, he must fall to it like a schoolboy. He was amember of Harrington's Club till its dissolution, and of theRoyal Society before it had received the name. Boyle'sHydrostatics was "of infinite delight" to him, walkingin Barnes Elms. We find him comparing Bible concordances, acaptious judge of sermons, deep in Descartes and Aristotle. Wefind him, in a single year, studying timber and the measurementof timber; tar and oil, hemp, and the process of preparingcordage; mathematics and accounting; the hull and the rigging ofships from a model; and "looking and improving himself ofthe (naval) stores with" - hark to the fellow! - "greatdelight." His familiar spirit of delight was not the samewith Shelley's; but how true it was to him through life! He isonly copying something, and behold, he "takes great pleasureto rule the lines, and have the capital words wrote with redink"; he has only had his coal - cellar emptied and cleaned,and behold, "it do please him exceedingly." A hog'sharslett is "a piece of meat he loves." He cannot ridehome in my Lord Sandwich's coach, but he must exclaim, withbreathless gusto, "his noble, rich coach." When he isbound for a supper party, he anticipates a "glut ofpleasure." When he has a new watch, "to see mychildishness," says he, "I could not forbear carryingit in my hand and seeing what o'clock it was an hundredtimes." To go to Vauxhall, he says, and "to hear thenightingales and other birds, hear fiddles, and there a harp andhere a Jew's trump, and here laughing, and there fine peoplewalking, is mighty divertising." And the nightingales, Itake it, were particularly dear to him; and it was again"with great pleasure" that he paused to hear them as hewalked to Woolwich, while the fog was rising and the April sunbroke through. Title: Sir Humphrey Gilbert's Voyage To Newfoundland Author: Haies, Edward Date: 1583 Part II. Concerning the inland commodities, as well to be drawn fromthis land, as from the exceeding large countries adjoining, thereis nothing which our east and northerly countries of Europe doyield, but the like also may be made in them as plentifully, bytime and industry; namely, resin, pitch, tar, soap-ashes,deal-board, masts for ships, hides, furs, flax, hemp,corn, cables, cordage, linen cloth, metals, and many more. Allwhich the countries will afford, and the soil is apt to yield. Title: Study Of Poetry Author: Arnold, Matthew Date: 1880 The Study Of Poetry, Part II. 'Thus amongst ourselves we regret the good time, poor sillyold things, low - seated on our heels, all in a heap like so manyballs; by a little fire of hemp - stalks, soon lighted,soon spent. And once we were such darlings! So fares it with manyand many a one.'] Title: Thousand And One Nights Book: Story Of The Young King Of The Black Islands Author: Traditional Date: c1200 Translation: Lane, Edward William My father was king of the city which was here situate: hisname was Mahmud, and he was lord of the Black Islands, and of thefour mountains. After a reign of seventy years, he died, and Isucceeded to his throne; whereupon I took as my wife the daughterof my uncle; and she loved me excessively, so that when Iabsented myself from her, she would neither eat nor drink tillshe saw me again. She remaine under my protection five years.After this, she went one day to the bath; and I had commanded thecook to prepare the supper, and entered this palace, and slept inmy usual place. I had ordered two maids to fan me; and one ofthem sat at my head, and the other at my feet; but I wasrestless, because my wife was not with me; and I could not sleep.My eyes were closed, but my spirit was awake; and I heard themaid at my head say to her at my feet, O Mes'udeh, verily ourlord is unfortunate in his youth, and what a pity is it that itshould be passed with our depraved, wicked mistress! - Perditionto unfaithful wives! replied the other: but (added she) such aperson as our lord, so endowed by nature, is not suited to thisprofligate woman, who passes every night absent from his bed. -Verily, rejoined she at my head, our lord is careless in notmaking any inquiry respecting her. - Woe to thee! said the other:hath our lord any knowledge of her conduct, or doth she leave himto his choice? Nay, on the contrary, she contriveth to defraudhim by means of the cup of wine which he drinketh every nightbefore he sleepeth, putting bhang (hemp) into it; inconsequence of which he sleepeth so soundly that he knoweth notwhat happeneth, nor whither she goeth, nor what she doeth; for,after she hath given him the wine to drink, she dresseth herself,and goeth out from him, and is absent until daybreak, when shereturneth to him, and burneth a perfume under his nose, uponwhich he awaketh from his sleep. Title: Life Of King Henry The Fifth, The Book: Act III. Author: Shakespeare, William Date: 1599 Chor. Thus with imagined wing our swift Scene flies In motion of no less celerity Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen The well-appointed king of Hampton pier Embark his royalty; and his brave fleet With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning; Play with your fancies, and in them behold Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing; Title: Burning Of Rome Under Nero Book: By Henry Sienkiewicz Author: Sienkiewicz, Henryk By Henry Sienkiewicz A.D. 64 Introduction The destruction seemed as irresistible, perfect, and pitilessas Predestination itself. Around Pompey's Amphitheatre stores of hempcaught fire, and ropes used in circuses, arenas, and every kindof machine at the games, and with them the adjoining buildingscontaining barrels of pitch with which ropes were smeared. Title: King Henry the Sixth, Part 2 Book: Act IV. Author: Shakespeare, William Date: 1591 Scene VII. The Same. Smithfield. Say. Those cheeks are pale for watching for your good. Cade. Give him a box o' the ear, and that will make em redagain. Say. Long sitting, to determine poor men's causes, Hath made me full of sickness and diseases. Cade. Ye shall have a hempen caudle then, and the helpof hatchet. Title: (A) Midsummer-Night's Dream Book: Act III Author: Shakespeare, William Date: 1596 Scene I. The Wood. Titania lying asleep. Enter Puck behind. Puck. What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering here, So near the cradle of the fairy queen? What! a play toward; I'll be an auditor; An actor too perhaps, if I see cause. Title: New Way To Pay Old Debts Book: Act V Author: Massinger, Philip Date: 1625 Scene I. [A room in Lady Allworth's house] Over. I am o'erwhelm'd with wonder! What prodigy is this? What subtle devil Hath raz'd out the inscription, the wax Turned into dust? The rest of my deeds whole As when they were deliver'd, and this only Made nothing! Do you deal with witches, rascal? There is a statute^6 for you, which will bring Your neck in an hempen circle; yes, there is; And now 'tis better thought for, cheater, know This juggling shall not save you. [Footnote 6: The law against witchcraft.] Title: William Tell Book: Act II Author: Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich Von Date: 1804 Scene II. Melch. The Rossberg I will undertake to scale. I have a sweetheart in the garrison, Whom with some tender words I could persuade To lower me at night a hempen ladder. Once up, my friends will not be long behind. Title: Civilizations Past And Present Book: Chapter 33: Asia And Africa In The Interwar World Author: Wallbank;Taylor;Bailkey;Jewsbury;Lewis;Hackett Date: 1992 Nationalism In Southeast Asia Economic developments, however, constricted Philippineindependence at the same time that the islands were beingprepared for self-rule. Before the outbreak of World War II,four-fifths of Philippine exports went to the United States andthree-fifths of its imports came from America. Like mostunderdeveloped economies, the export trade was dominated by avery few products: hemp, sugar, coconuts, and tobacco.Independence, with its accompanying imposition of tariffs wouldhave been economically difficult. The United States had preventedthe development of a colonial-type plantation economy byforbidding non-Filipinos to own plantation lands, but nativelandlordism was rampant, and the oppressed peasants launched abrief uprising in the mid-1930s. Title: Japan Book: Japan, A Country Study Author: Jane T. Griffin Affiliation: HQ, Department of the Army Date: 1981 Chapter 3D. Visual Arts The many and varied traditional handicrafts of Japan enjoyedofficial recognition and protection and, owing to the folk artmovement, were much in demand. Each craft carried a group ofspecialized skills with it. Textiles, for example, includedweaving silk, hemp, or cotton following the spinning anddyeing process in a range from timeless folk designs to complexcourt patterns. Village crafts evolving from ancient folktraditions also survived in weaving and indigo dyeing by remotefarming families in northern Japan and in Hokkaido by the Ainupeoples, whose distinctive designs had prehistoric prototypes.Silk weaving families can be traced to the fifteenth century inthe famous Nishijin weaving center of Kyoto where they producedthe elegant fabrics worn by the emperor and the aristocracy. Title: Romania Book: Romania, A Country Study Author: Eugene K. Keefe Affiliation: HQ, Department of the Army Date: 1972 Chapter 6A. Artistic and Intellectual Expression Particularly well known outside the country are the wovenrugs, tablecloths, and tapestries that decorate all rural homesand many urban ones. Designs are mostly geometric, and particulardesigns and color combinations are associated with particularregions. Well known for their unusual design and warm colors areOltenian textiles in which a central animal, human, or floraldesign is surrounded by several frames of different colors.Muntenian textiles, on the other hand, have small geometricdesigns spread over the whole surface. Moldavian andTransylvanian textiles vary a great deal from one location toanother and include both geometric and figurative designs. At onetime, wool was used exclusively for weaving rugs and tapestries,but since the mid-nineteenth century cotton or hemp warphas been used in combination with wool. All-cotton and all-hemprugs and wall hangings are also produced. Title: Romania Book: Doing Business with the New Romania Author: Donald E. deKieffer Affiliation: Embassy of Romania, Washington DC Date: 1990 Chapter 2A. Economic Scene ECONOMY Vegetables Vegetables are grown in a relatively small area (some 632,000acres). Peas are the predominant crop; capable of an earlyharvest, they allow a second crop, usually of fodder plants, tobe grown on the same ground. Vegetable cultivation isparticularly marked around Bucharest; there is specialization inthe production of early potatoes, tomatoes, onions, cabbages andgreen peppers. Similar peripheral areas are found aroundTimisoara, Arad, Craiova, Galati, Braila and other cities. Themost important potato-growing area in the country is found in theBrasov, Sibiu, Harghita and Mures districts. Other related cropsinclude sugar beets (475,000 acres) and sunflowers (10,300,000acres), mostly on the Danube, Tisa and Jijia plains. Hemp,flax, rapeseed, soybeans and tobacco are also grown. Title: Discovery Of America Book: Chapter II: Pre-Columbian Voyages Author: Fiske, John Date: 1892 Part II The ship preserved at Christiania is described as having hadbut a single mast, set into a block of wood so large that it issaid no such block could now be cut in Norway. Probably the sailwas much like those still carried by large open boats in thatcountry, - a single square on a mast forty feet long. ^1 Thesemasts have no standing rigging, and are taken down when not inuse; and this was probably the practice of the Vikings." [Footnote 1: Perhaps it may have been a square-headed lug,like those of the Deal galley-punts; see Leslie's Old Sea Wings,Ways, and Words, in the Days of Oak and Hemp, London,1890, p. 21.] Book: Patent and Trademark Office Author: Verity, C. William Affiliation: US Department Commerce Date: 1988 The Story of the Patent and Trademark Office - Before 1900 Although he never took out a patent, Thomas Jefferson made anumber of inventions, one of which - an improvement in the moldboard of the plough - had a significant effect on theagricultural development of this country and earned him adecoration from the French Institute. He also invented arevolving chair which his enemies accused him of designing"so as to look all ways at once," a folding chair orstool which could be used as a walking stick, a machine fortreating hemp, and a pedometer. Book: Our Country: Volume 1 Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. Volume: Vol. 1 Date: 1905 Chapter III (speaking of Native Americans) In the colder weather of the winter, the common men wore amantle made of a sort of cloth manufactured of the soft innerbark of trees interwoven with hemp or a species of flax.This was thrown gracefully over the shoulder, leaving the rightarm exposed. . . . .. Hunting, fishing and the cultivation of the rich land were thechief employments of these people. The cotton plant was unknownto them, but hemp and flax were quite abundant. The womenassisted the men in the fields, in the cultivation of corn,beans, peas, squashes, and pumpkins, which yielded enormousreturns for the little labor bestowed. Book: Our Country: Volume 1 Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. Volume: Vol. 1 Date: 1905 Chapter IX Verazzani then went further up the coast, probably as far asthe vicinity of Albemarle Sound, where he landed, with twentymen. A short distance from the sea, the land was covered withlarge trees, among which were noble cypresses. From these foresttrees trailed luxuriant vines which were clustered with deliciousgrapes, the natives said, in early autumn. The people fled infear to the woods. They were fairer than those further south, andwere covered with a light drapery made of "certain plantswhich hung down from the branches" - Spanish moss - tied bythreads of wild hemp. Their heads were uncovered. Theylived in huts made of saplings and shrubbery, and navigatedcanoes dug out of a single log without any iron instrumentwhatever. Book: Our Country: Volume 2 Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. Volume: Vol. 2 Date: 1905 Chapter XXXIX In 1719, the House of Commons declared that erecting anymanufactories in the colonies tended to lessen their dependenceon Great Britain, and they were discouraged. A little earlier aBritish author had written "There be fine iron works whichcast no guns no house in New England has above twenty rooms; nottwenty in Boston have ten rooms each; a dancing-school was set uphere but put down; a fencing-school is allowed. There be nomusicians by trade. All cordage, sail-cloth and mats, come fromEngland; no cloth made there worth four shillings per yard; noalum, no salt made by their sun. Later, woolen-goods, paper and hemp were manufacturedin New England, and almost every family made coarse cloth fordomestic use. Book: Our Country: Volume 6 Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. Volume: Vol. 6 Date: 1905 Chapter CXXXVIII In 1776, almost the whole agricultural products of ourcountry, including live-stock, were used for the support of themillion and a half inhabitants; 1876 42,000,000 were fed andlargely clothed from the products of our soil, while a vastsurplus of our cereal and fibrous productions were sent to othercountries. In 1870, there were 189,000,000 acres of improved farmland in our country, which produced in cereals (in round numbers)wheat, 288,000,000 bushels rye, 17,000,000 Indian corn,761,000,000; oats, 282,000,000; barley, 30,000,000; buckwheat,10,000,000 bushels; and rice, 74,000,000 pounds. Of the commonpotato, there were raised 143,000,000 bushels, and of the sweetpotato, 22,000,000 bushels. The hay crop amounted to 28,000,000tons, and the tobacco crop to 363,000,000 pounds. Of theprincipal fibrous products there were raised that year over1,200,000,000 pounds of cotton. The average annual product, as wehave observed, is now greater. The amount of flax raised was27,000,000 pounds; wool, 100,000,000 pounds; silk cocoons about4,000 pounds, and 13,000 tons of hemp. Book: Our Country: Volume 7 Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. Volume: Vol. 7 Date: 1905 Chapter CL . The Philippines have a fine, though tropical, climate, whilethe soil is very fertile, but lacks labor for its propercultivation. The chief article of commerce is hemp, ofwhich $21,800,000 worth was exported in 1904; the other principalexports are sugar, tobacco, oil-nuts, and copra. . . . . Gratifying as are these statistics representing the tradeexpansion of the Philippine Islands within the brief period ofAmerican possession of them, there are indications that theeconomic situation will be vastly improved in the next few years. The justification for this surmise arises from the knownwealth of the Islands, not only in valuable forest timber, gum,and dye woods, but in lignite coal of the best grade, iron ore,and other minerals, which, like agriculture, are hardly as yetdeveloped. It is also justified by what is reported of theefforts being made by the local bureaus, agricultural andforestry, in establishing experimental farms and distributing forgeneral cultivation improved quantities of plants, seeds, roots,etc.; while giving instruction in combating destructive insects,in raising the grade of live stock, and in suggesting morescientific methods of curing tobacco and producing a betterquality of hemp. Book: At Home in the Smokies Author: US Department of the Interior Affiliation: National Park Service Volume: Handbook 125 Date: 1984 Chapter 2 Highland Homeland Homecoming The tepee of Indian lore did not exist here. The Cherokeehouse was a rough log structure with one door and no windows. Asmall hole in the bark roof allowed smoke from a central fire toescape. Furniture and decorations included cane seats and paintedhemp rugs. A good-sized village might number 40 or 50houses. Book: United States Army in the Korean War - The Medics' War Author: Cowdrey, Albert E. Affiliation: US Army Date: 1987 Chapter 10 Victims of War Under these stresses American soldiers often did not show upwell by comparison with marines, or with men from theprofessional military units sent to Korea by other U.N. nations.Many soldiers had become POWs shortly after their arrival. Almostnone had strong feelings of belonging to any unit. The enemy'spractice of shuffling men back and forth from camp to camp andhis deliberate policy of breaking down structures of loyalty andcommand among the prisoners increased each man's isolation.Escape from intolerable conditions through fantasy was common,aided by the widespread smoking of hemp (Cannabis). So wasapathy. Cases were seen of men who apparently willed themselvesto die. "The people who died," recalled a doctor,"would first become despondent, then would lie down or covertheir heads with their blankets, then wanted ice water to drinkwith their food, eventually no food only water and eventually -death." Book: The American Home Front Author: Abrahamson, James L. Affiliation: National Defense Univ. Date: 1984 The Revolutionary War Economy Because 90 percent of all Americans engaged in farming, thewar's impact on agriculture produced the most widespread results.Nowhere was that more dramatically true than in the Southerncolonies. The prewar boycotts and the outbreak of hostilitiescaused a precipitous drop in Southern exports to England andScotland by 1778. As military operations shifted to the SouthernStates after 1778, agriculture there suffered further fromcapital destruction and the loss of slaves. The profitability ofindigo production collapsed with the termination of the Britishbounty, and rice growers, who had much of their capital sunk inpaddy systems, found it difficult to convert to raising sheep, hemp,or flax - for which there was a great wartime demand. In theupper South, however, the war stimulated the prewar trend towardconverting from tobacco to grain and livestock (for which the warincreased the domestic demand), and the remaining tobacco cropsoon found ways around the British blockade to profitableoverseas markets. While the lower South therefore sufferedmodestly, the Chesapeake area adjusted to new wartime demands andreestablished good overseas markets. Book: Presidential Proclamations & Executive Orders Author: National Archives and Records Administration Affiliation: National Archives Date: 1989 Chapter 15A Commerce and Foreign Trade (b). For the purposes of this order, the term"agricultural commodities" means all commodities andproducts, simple, mixed, or compound, or complements to suchcommodities or products that are or may be eaten or drunk byhuman beings or animals, irrespective of other uses to which suchcommodities or products may be put, and at all stages ofprocessing from the raw commodity, to the product thereof in avendible form for immediate human or animal consumption, butexclusive of such commodities and products as the Secretary ofAgriculture shall determine. For the purposes of this order, theterm "agricultural commodities" shall also include allstarches, sugars, fats and oils of animal, vegetable, or marineorigin (including oil seeds and other oil bearing materials,fatty acids, soap and soap powder), cotton, tobacco, wool, hemp,flax fiber, and alcohol, and also such other commodities andproducts as the President may designate. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-65IA087-000625-B017-154http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/downs2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043835 text/html 14789HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:38:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:40 GMTContent-length: 14571 Hugh Downs commentary on hemp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information Hugh Downs commentary on hemp ABC News, NY, 11/90: Voters in the state of Alaska recently made marijuana illegalagain for the first time in 15 years. If Alaska turns out to belike the other 49 states, the law will do little to curb use orproduction. Even the drug czar himself, William Bennett, hasabandoned the drug war now that his "test case" ofWashington, D.C., continues to see rising crime figures connectedwith the drug industry. Despite the legal trend against marijuana, many Americanscontinue to buck the trend. Some pro-marijuana organizations infact tell us that marijuana, also known as hemp, could, as a rawmaterial, save the U.S. economy. That's some statement. Not bysmoking it--that's a minor issue. Would you believe thatmarijuana could replace most oil and energy needs? That marijuanacould revolutionize the textile industry and stop foreignimports? Those are the claims. Some people think marijuana, or hemp, may be the epitome ofyankee ingenuity. Mr. Jack Herer, for example, is the nationaldirector and founder of an organization called HEMP (that's anacronym for "Help End Marijuana Prohibition") locatedin Van Nuys, California. Mr. Herer is the author of a remarkablelittle book called, "The Emperor Wears No Clothes,"wherein, not surprisingly, Mr. Herer urges the repeal ofmarijuana prohibition. Mr. Herer is not alone. Throughout the war on drugs, severalorganizations have consistently urged the legalization ofmarijuana. "High Times" magazine for example, TheNational Organization to Reform Marijuana Laws or NORML forshort, and an organization called BACH-the Business Alliance forCommerce in Hemp. But the reason the pro-marijuana lobby want marijuana legalhas little to do with getting high, and a great deal to do withfighting oil giants like Saddam Hussein, Exxon and Iran. Thepro-marijuana groups claim that hemp is such a versatile rawmaterial, that its products not only compete with petroleum, butwith coal, natural gas, nuclear energy, pharmaceutical, timberand textile companies.[1] It is estimated that methane and methanol production alonefrom hemp grown as biomass could replace 90% of the world'senergy needs.[2] If they are right, this is not good news for oilinterests and could account for the continuation of marijuanaprohibition. The claim is that the threat hemp posed to naturalresource companies back in the thirties accounts for its originalban. At one time marijuana seemed to have a promising future as acornerstone of industry. When Rudolph Diesel produced his famousengine in 1896, he assumed that the diesel engine would bepowered by a variety of fuels, especially vegetable and seedoils. Rudolph Diesel, like most engineers then, believedvegetable fuels were superior to petroleum. Hemp is the mostefficient vegetable. In the 1930s the Ford Motor Company also saw a future inbiomass fuels. Ford operated a successful biomass conversionplant, that included hemp, at their Iron Mountain facility inMichigan. Ford engineers extracted methanol, charcoal fuel, tar,pitch, ethyl-acetate and creosote. All fundamental ingredientsfor modern industry and now supplied by oil-relatedindustries.[2] The difference is that the vegetable source is renewable,cheap and clean, and the petroleum or coal sources are limited,expensive and dirty. By volume, 30% of the hemp seed contains oilsuitable for high-grade diesel fuel as well as aircraft engineand precision machine oil. Henry Ford's experiments with methanol promised cheap, readilyrenewable fuel. And if you think methanol means compromise, youshould know that many modern race cars run on methanol. About thetime Ford was making biomass methanol, a mechanical device[3] tostrip the outer fibers of the hemp plant appeared on the market.These machines could turn hemp into paper and fabrics[4] quicklyand cheaply. Hemp paper is superior to wood paper. The first twodrafts of the U.S. constitution were written on hemp paper. Thefinal draft is on animal skin. Hemp paper contains no dioxin, orother toxic residue, and a single acre of hemp can produce thesame amount of paper as four acres of trees.[5] The trees take 20years to harvest and hemp takes a single season. In warm climateshemp can be harvested two even three times a year. It also growsin bad soil and restores the nutrients. Hemp fiber-strippingmachines were bad news to the Hearst paper manufacturingdivision, and a host of other natural resource firms.Coincidentally, the DuPont Chemical Company had, in 1937, beengranted a patent on a sulfuric acid process to make paper fromwood pulp. At the time DuPont predicted their sulfuric acidprocess would account for 80% of their business for the next 50years. Hemp, once the mainstay of American agriculture, became athreat to a handful of corporate giants. To stifle the commercialthreat that hemp posed to timber interests, William RandolphHearst began referring to hemp in his newspapers, by its Spanishname, "marijuana." This did two things: it associatedthe plant with Mexicans and played on racist fears, and it misledthe public into thinking that marijuana and hemp were differentplants. Nobody was afraid of hemp--it had been cultivated andprocessed into usable goods, and consumed as medicine, and burnedin oil lamps, for hundreds of years. But after a campaign todiscredit hemp in the Hearst newspapers, Americans became afraidof something called marijuana. By 1937, the Marijuana Tax Act was passed which marked thebeginning of the end of the hemp industry. In 1938, "PopularMechanics" ran an article about marijuana called, "NewBillion Dollar Crop."[6] It was the first time the words"billion dollar" were used to describe a U.S.agricultural product. "Popular Mechanics" said, . . . amachine has been invented which solves a problem more than 6,000years old. . . . The machine . . . is designed for removing thefiber- bearing cortex from the rest of the stalk, making hempfiber available for use without a prohibitive amount of humanlabor. Hemp is the standard fiber of the world. It has greattensile strength and durability. It is used to produce more than5,000 textile products ranging from rope, to fine laces, and thewoody "hurds" remaining after the fiber has beenremoved, contain more than seventy-seven per cent cellulose, andcan be used to produce more than 25,000 products ranging fromdynamite to cellophane. Well since the "Popular Mechanics" article appearedover half a century ago, many more applications have come tolight. Back in 1935, more than 58,000 tons of marijuana seed wereused just to make paint and varnish (all non-toxic, by the way).When marijuana was banned, these safe paints and varnishes werereplaced by paints made with toxic petrochemicals. In the 1930sno one knew about poisoned rivers or deadly land-fills orchildren dying from chemicals in house paint. People did know something about hemp back then, because theplant and its products were so common. All ships lines were made from hemp and much of the sailcanvas. (In fact the word "canvas" is the Dutchpronunciation of the Greek word for hemp, "cannabis.")All ropes, fozzers (sp?) and lines aboard ship, all rigging,nets, flags and pennants were also made from marijuana stalks.And so were all charts, logs and bibles. Today many of theseitems are made, in whole or in part, with syntheticpetro-chemicals and wood. All oil lamps used to burn hemp- seedoil until the whale oil edged it out of first place in the mid-nineteenth century. And then, when all the whales were dead,lamplights were fueled by petroleum, and coal, and recentlyradioactive energy.[7] This may be hard to believe in the middle of a war on drugs,but the first law concerning marijuana in the colonies atJamestown in 1619, ordered farmers to grow Indian hemp.Massachussetts passed a compulsory grow law in 1631. Connecticutfollowed in 1632. The Chesapeake colonies ordered their farmers,by law, to grow marijuana in the mid-eighteenth century. Nameslike Hempstead or Hemphill dot the American landscape and reflectareas of intense marijuana cultivation. During World War II, domestic hemp production became crucialwhen the Japanese cut off Asian supplies to the U.S. Americanfarmers (and even their sons), who grew marijuana, were exemptfrom military duty during World War II. A 1942 U.S. Department ofAgriculture film called "Hemp For Victory" extolled theagricultural might of marijuana and called for hundreds ofthousands of acres to be planted.[8] Despite a rather vigorousdrug crackdown, 4-H clubs were asked by the government to growmarijuana for seed supply. Ironically, war plunged the governmentinto a sober reality about marijuana and that is that it's veryvaluable. In today's anti-drug climate, people don't want to hear aboutthe commercial potential of marijuana. The reason is that theflowering top of a female hemp plant contains a drug. But from1842 through the 1890s a powerful concentrated extract ofmarijuana was the second most prescribed drug in the UnitedStates. In all that time the medical literature didn't list anyof the ill effects claimed by today's drug warriors.[9] Today, there are anywhere from 25 to 30 million Americans whosmoke marijuana regularly. As an industry, marijuana clears wellmore than $4 billion a year. [This must have been a misreading ofhis notes--for 1990, the minimum figure would have been at least$40 billion for the entire nation. (phone interview with JackHerer)] Obviously, as an illegal business, none of that moneygoes to taxes. But the modern marijuana trade only sells oneproduct, a drug. Hemp could be worth considerably more than $4[$40] billion a year, if it were legally supplying the 50,000safe products the proponents claim it can. If hemp could supply the energy needs of the United States,its value would be inestimable. Now that the drug czar is infinal retreat, America has an opportunity to, once and for all,say farewell to the Exxon Valdez, Saddam Hussein and aprohibitively expensive brinkmanship in the desert sands of SaudiArabia. This is Hugh Downs, ABC News, New York. ----- Footnotes: [1] If you are unfamiliar with the facts about hemp, theworld's premier renewable natural resource, a great place tostart is Jack Herer's information-compressed, "Hemp and theMarijuana Conspiracy: The Emperor Wears No Clothes," (c)1985, 1986, 1990, 1991, 1992, available in many bookstores, orfrom H.E.M.P., 5632 Van Nuys Blvd., Suite 210, Van Nuys, CA91401. From the Introduction: The purpose of this book is to revive the authoritativehistorical, social and economic perspective needed to ensurecomprehensive legal reforms, abolish cannabis hemp/marijuanaprohibition laws, and save the Earth's life systems. Another book going to press at this time is "Hemp:Lifeline To The Future, Unexpected Answers To Our Environment AndEconomic Crises," written by Chris Conrad, the founder andinternational director of BACH, the Business Alliance forCommerce in Hemp, Box 71093, LA, CA 90071-0093, 213/288-4152. [2] "About 6% of contiguous United States land area putinto cultivation for biomass could supply all current demands foroil and gas." Very few people know what "biomass conversion" or"pyrolysis" mean-not only in terms of their dictionarydefinitions, but in terms of what they mean as alternativesources of energy, to the limited, expensive and dirtypetro-chemical, nuclear, or coal sources. The only reason theU.S.--and every other nation on earth--can't once again becomeenergy independent and smog free is because people are noteducated concerning the facts about solutions to theenvironment/energy "crises" continuously lamented andtepidly addressed "leaders," claiming they are the bestinformed to decide what to do. The knowledge exists right now forour lifeline to the future and the health and well-being of theSeventh Generation yet unborn. Everyone of us must learn aboutthis existent lifeline and teach everyone else we know what thefacts are for THE way out of the current "crisis". Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-66IA087-000625-B017-182http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hemp4v.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043852 text/html 9781HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:38:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:34 GMTContent-length: 9564 Hemp for Victory transcript By the US Department ofAgriculture - 1942 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information HEMP FOR VICTORY By the US Department of Agriculture -- 1942 -- This is the transcript of the film done by the USDA toencourage farmers to grow hemp (marijuana) during World War II,because it was a vital resource for such uses as ropes, heavycloth, etc. Long ago when these ancient Grecian temples were new, hemp wasalready old in the service of mankind. For thousands of years,even then, this plant had been grown for cordage and cloth inChina and elsewhere in the East. For centuries prior to about1850 all the ships that sailed the western seas were rigged withhempen rope and sails. For the sailor, no less than the hangman, hemp wasindispensable. A 44-gun frigate like our cherished Old Ironsidestook over 60 tons of hemp for rigging, including an anchor cable25 inches in circumference. The Conestoga wagons and prairieschooners of pioneer days were covered with hemp canvas. Indeedthe very word canvas comes from the Arabic word for hemp. Inthose days hemp was an important crop in Kentucky and Missouri.Then came cheaper imported fibers for cordage, like jute, sisaland Manila hemp, and the culture of hemp in America declined. But now with Philippine and East Indian sources of hemp in thehands of the Japanese, and shipment of jute from India curtailed,American hemp must meet the needs of our Army and Navy as well asof our Industry. In 1942, patriotic farmers at the government'srequest planted 36,000 acres of seed hemp, an increase of severalthousand percent. The goal for 1943 is 50,000 acres of seed hemp. In Kentucky much of the seed hemp acreage is on river bottomland such as this. Some of these fields are inaccessible exceptby boat. Thus plans are afoot for a great expansion of a hempindustry as a part of the war program. This film is designed totell farmers how to handle this ancient crop now little knownoutside Kentucky and Wisconsin. This is hemp seed. Be careful how you use it. For to grow hemplegally you must have a federal registration and tax stamp. Thisis provided for in your contract. Ask your county agent about it.Don't forget. Hemp demands a rich, well-drained soil such as is found herein the Blue Grass region of Kentucky or in central Wisconsin. Itmust be loose and rich in organic matter. Poor soils won't do.Soil that will grow good corn will usually grow hemp. Hemp is not hard on the soil. In Kentucky it has been grownfor several years on the same ground, though this practice is notrecommended. A dense and shady crop, hemp tends to choke outweeds. Here's a Canada thistle that couldn't stand thecompetition, dead as a dodo. Thus hemp leaves the ground in goodcondition for the following crop. For fiber, hemp should be sewn closely, the closer the rows,the better. These rows are spaced about four inches. This hemphas been broadcast. Either way it should be sewn thick enough togrow a slender stalk. Here's an ideal stand: the right height tobe harvested easily, thick enough to grow slender stalks that areeasy to cut and process. Stalks like these here on the left wield the most fiber andthe best. Those on the right are too coarse and woody. For seed,hemp is planted in hills like corn. Sometimes by hand. Hemp is adioecious plant. The female flower is inconspicuous. But the male flower iseasily spotted. In seed production after the pollen has beenshed, these male plants are cut out. These are the seeds on afemale plant. Hemp for fiber is ready to harvest when the pollenis shedding and the leaves are falling. In Kentucky, hemp harvest comes in August. Here the oldstandby has been the self-rake reaper, which has been used for ageneration or more. Hemp grows so luxuriantly in Kentucky thatharvesting is sometimes difficult, which may account for thepopularity of the self-rake with its lateral stroke. A modifiedrice binder has been used to some extent. This machine works wellon average hemp. Recently, the improved hemp harvester, used formany years in Wisconsin, has been introduced in Kentucky. Thismachine spreads the hemp in a continuous swath. It is a far cryfrom this fast and efficient modern harvester, that doesn't stallin the heaviest hemp. In Kentucky, hand cutting is practicing in opening fields forthe machine. In Kentucky, hemp is shucked as soon as safe, aftercutting, to be spread out for retting later in the fall. In Wisconsin, hemp is harvested in September. Here the hempharvester with automatic spreader is standard equipment. Note howsmoothly the rotating apron lays the swaths preparatory toretting. Here it is a common and essential practice to leave headlandsaround hemp fields. These strips may be planted with other crops,preferably small grain. Thus the harvester has room to make itsfirst round without preparatory hand cutting. The other machineis running over corn stubble. When the cutter bar is much shorterthan the hemp is tall, overlapping occurs. Not so good forretting. The standard cut is eight to nine feet. The length of time hemp is left on the ground to ret dependson the weather. The swaths must be turned to get a uniform ret.When the woody core breaks away readily like this, the hemp isabout ready to pick up and bind into bundles. Well-retted hemp islight to dark grey. The fiber tends to pull away from the stalks. The presence ofstalks in the bough-string stage indicates that retting is wellunderway. When hemp is short or tangled or when the ground is toowet for machines, it's bound by hand. A wooden bucket is used.Twine will do for tying, but the hemp itself makes a good band.When conditions are favorable, the pickup binder is commonlyused. The swaths should lie smooth and even with the stalksparallel. The picker won't work well in tangled hemp. Afterbinding, hemp is shucked as soon as possible to stop furtherretting. In 1942, 14,000 acres of fiber hemp were harvested in theUnited States. The goal for the old standby cordage fiber, isstaging a strong comeback. This is Kentucky hemp going into thedryer over mill at Versailles. In the old days braking was done by hand. One of the hardestjobs known to man. Now the power braker makes quick work of it.Spinning American hemp into rope yarn or twine in the oldKentucky river mill at Frankfort, Kentucky. Another pioneer plantthat has been making cordage for more than a century. All suchplants will presently be turning out products spun fromAmerican-grown hemp: twine of various kinds for tying andupholster's work; rope for marine rigging and towing; for hayforks, derricks, and heavy duty tackle; light duty firehose;thread for shoes for millions of American soldiers; and parachutewebbing for our paratroopers. As for the United States Navy, every battleship requires34,000 feet of rope. Here in the Boston Navy Yard, where cablesfor frigates were made long ago, crews are now working night andday making cordage for the fleet. In the old days rope yarn wasspun by hand. The rope yarn feeds through holes in an iron plate.This is Manila hemp from the Navy's rapidly dwindling reserves.When it is gone, American hemp will go on duty again: hemp formooring ships; hemp for tow lines; hemp for tackle and gear; hempfor countless naval uses both on ship and shore. Just as in thedays when Old Ironsides sailed the seas victorious with herhempen shrouds and hempen sails. Hemp for victory. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-67IA087-000625-B017-200http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/popmech1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043906 text/html 9190HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:38:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:55 GMTContent-length: 8973 Hemp: The New Billion-Dollar Crop - Popular Mechanics -1938 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information NEW BILLION-DOLLAR CROP Popular Mechanics February, 1938 Note: There was so little public attention and notice to theneed for a ban on marijuana, or the resulting legislation (Marihuana Tax Act of 1937), that theeditors apparently did not realize that it had already beenoutlawed when they published this article. AMERICAN farmers are promised a new cash crop with an annualvalue of several hundred million dollars, all because a machinehas been invented which solves a problem more than 6,000 yearsold. It is hemp, a crop that will not compete with other Americanproducts. Instead, it will displace imports of raw material andmanufactured products produced by underpaid coolie and peasantlabor and it will provide thousands of jobs for American workersthroughout the land. The machine which makes this possible is designed for removingthe fiber-bearing cortex from the rest of the stalk, making hempfiber available for use without a prohibitive amount of humanlabor. Hemp is the standard fiber of the world. It has greattensile strength and durability. It is used to produce more than5,000 textile products, ranging from rope to fine laces, and thewoody "hurds" remaining after the fiber has beenremoved contain more than seventy-seven per cent cellulose, andcan be used to produce more than 25,000 products, ranging fromdynamite to Cellophane. Machines now in service in Texas, Illinois, Minnesota andother states are producing fiber at a manufacturing cost of halfa cent a pound, and are finding a profitable market for the restof the stalk. Machine operators are making a good profit incompetition with coolie-produced foreign fiber while payingfarmers fifteen dollars a ton for hemp as it comes from thefield. From the farmers' point of view, hemp is an easy crop to growand will yield from three to six tons per acre on any land thatwill grow corn, wheat, or oats. It has a short growing season, sothat it can be planted after other crops are in. It can be grownin any state of the union. The long roots penetrate and break thesoil to leave it in perfect condition for the next year's crop.The dense shock of leaves, eight to twelve feet above the ground,chokes out weeds. Two successive crops are enough to reclaim landthat has been abandoned because of Canadian thistles or quackgrass. Under old methods, hemp was cut and allowed to lie in thefields for weeks until it "retted" enough so the fiberscould be pulled off by hand. Retting is simply rotting as aresult of dew, rain and bacterial action. Machines were developedto separate the fibers mechanically after retting was complete,but the cost was high, the loss of fiber great, and the qualityof fiber comparatively low. With the new machine, known as a decorticator, hemp is cutwith a slightly modified grain binder. It is delivered to themachine where an automatic chain conveyor feeds it to thebreaking arms at the rate of two or three tons per hour. Thehurds are broken into fine pieces which drop into the hopper,from where they are delivered by blower to a baler or to truck orfreight car for loose shipment. The fiber comes from the otherend of the machine, ready for baling. From this point on almost anything can happen. The raw fibercan be used to produce strong twine or rope, woven into burlap,used for carpet warp or linoleum backing or it may be bleachedand refined, with resinous by-products of high commercial value.It can, in fact, be used to replace the foreign fibers which nowflood our markets. Thousands of tons of hemp hurds are used every year by onelarge powder company for the manufacture of dynamite and TNT. Alarge paper company, which has been paying more than a milliondollars a year in duties on foreign-made cigarette papers, now ismanufacturing these papers from American hemp grown in Minnesota.A new factory in Illinois is producing fine bond papers fromhemp. The natural materials in hemp make it an economical sourceof pulp for any grade of paper manufactured, and the highpercentage of alpha cellulose promises an unlimited supply of rawmaterial for the thousands of cellulose products our chemistshave developed. It is generally believed that all linen is produced from flax.Actually, the majority comes from hemp--authorities estimate thatmore than half of our imported linen fabrics are manufacturedfrom hemp fiber. Another misconception is that burlap is madefrom hemp. Actually, its source is usually jute, and practicallyall of the burlap we use is woven by laborers in India whoreceive only four cents a day. Binder twine is usually made fromsisal which comes from Yucatan and East Africa. All of these products, now imported, can be produced fromhome- grown hemp. Fish nets, bow strings, canvas, strong rope,overalls, damask tablecloths, fine linen garments, towels, bedlinen and thousands of other everyday items can be grown onAmerican farms. Our imports of foreign fabrics and fibers average about$200,000,000 per year; in raw fibers alone we imported over$50,000,000 in the first six months of 1937. All of this incomecan be made available for Americans. The paper industry offers even greater possibilities. As anindustry it amounts to over $1,000,000,000 a year, and of thateighty per cent is imported. But hemp will produce every grade ofpaper, and government figures estimate that 10,000 acres devotedto hemp will produce as much paper as 40,000 acres of averagepulp land. One obstacle in the onward march of hemp is the reluctance offarmers to try new crops. The problem is complicated by the needfor proper equipment a reasonable distance from the farm. Themachine cannot be operated profitably unless there is enoughacreage within driving range and farmers cannot find a profitablemarket unless there is machinery to handle the crop. Anotherobstacle is that the blossom of the female hemp plant containsmarijuana, a narcotic, and it is impossible to grow hemp withoutproducing the blossom. Federal regulations now being drawn uprequire registration of hemp growers, and tentative proposals forpreventing narcotic production are rather stringent. However, the connection of hemp as a crop and marijuana seemsto be exaggerated. The drug is usually produced from wild hemp orlocoweed which can be found on vacant lots and along railroadtracks in every state. If federal regulations can be drawn toprotect the public without preventing the legitimate culture ofhemp, this new crop can add immeasurably to American agricultureand industry. "Popular Mechanics Magazine" can furnish the nameand address of the maker of, or dealer in, any article describedin its pages. If you wish this information, write to the Bureauof Information, enclosing a stamped, self-addressed envelope. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-68IA087-000625-B017-222http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/popmech2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043956 text/html 3948HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:39:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:51 GMTContent-length: 3731 Hemp: Pinch Hitters for Defense - Popular Mechanics, 1941 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information Pinch Hitters for Defense Popular Mechanics, December, 1941 Over in England it's saccharine for sugar; on the continentit's charcoal "gasogenes" in the rumble seat instead ofgasoline in the tank. Here in America there's plenty of sugar,plenty of gasoline. Yet there's an industrial revolution inprogress just the same, a revolution in materials that willaffect every home. After twelve years of research, the Ford MotorCompany has completed an experimental automobile with a plasticbody. Although its design takes advantage of the properties ofplastics, the streamline car does not differ greatly inappearance from its steel counterpart. The only steel in thehand-made body is found in the tubular welded frame on which aremounted 14 plastic panels, 3/16 inch thick. Composed of a mixtureof farm crops and synthetic chemicals, the plastic is reported towithstand a blow 10 times as great as steel without denting. Eventhe windows and windshield are of plastic. The total weight ofthe plastic car is about 2,000 pounds, compared with 3,000 poundsfor a steel automobile of the same size. Although no hint hasbeen given as to when plastic cars may go into production, theexperimental model is pictured as a step toward materializationof Henry Ford's belief that some day he would "growautomobiles from the soil." When Henry Ford recentlyunveiled his plastic car, result of 12 years of research, he gavethe world a glimpse of the automobile of tomorrow, its toughpanels molded under hydraulic pressure of 1,500 pounds per squareinch from a recipe that calls for 70 percent ofcellulose fibersfrom wheat straw, hemp and sisal plus 30 percent resin binder.The only steel in the car is its tubular welded frame. Theplastic car weighs a ton, 1,000 pounds lighter than a comparablesteel car. Manufacturers are already taking a low-priced plasticcar to test the public's taste by 1943. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-69IA087-000625-B017-260http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/potbible.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044050 text/html 83408HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:40:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:47 GMTContent-length: 83190 Marijuana and the Bible by The Ethiopian Zion CopticChurch Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information MARIJUANA AND THE BIBLE by The Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church OFFERINGS OF DEVOTION With offerings of devotion, ships from the isles will meet topour the wealth of the nations and bring tribute to his feet. TheCoptic Church believes fully the teachings of the Bible, and assuch we have our daily obligations, and offer our sacrifices,made by fire unto our God with chants and Psalms and spiritualhymns, lifting up holy hands and making melody in our hearts. Herb (marijuana) is a Godly creation from the beginning of theworld. It is known as the weed of wisdom, angel's food, the treeof life and even the "Wicked Old Ganja Tree". Itspurpose in creation is as a fiery sacrifice to be offered to ourRedeemer during obligations. The political worldwideorganizations have framed mischief on it and called it drugs. Toshow that it is not a dangerous drug, let me inform my readersthat it is used as food for mankind, and as a medicinal cure fordiverse diseases. Ganja is not for commerce; yet because of theoppression of the people, it was raised up as the only liberatorof the people, and the only peacemaker among the entiregeneration. Ganja is the sacramental rights of every manworldwide and any law against it is only the organized conspiracyof the United Nations and the political governments who assist inmaintaining this conspiracy. The Coptic Church is not politically originated, and this wasfirmly expressed when we met with the political directorate ofthe land during the period of pre-incorporation. We support nopolitical organization, pagan religion, or commercialinstitution, seeing that religion, politics, and commerce are thethree unclean spirits which separate the people from their God.Because of our non-political stand, the church has receivedtremendous opposition from the politicians, who do not want theeyes of the people to be opened. Through its agency, the policeforce, the church has been severely harassed, victimized, anddiscriminated. Our members have passed through several acts ofpolice brutality, our legal properties maliciously destroyed,members falsely imprisoned, divine services broken up and allthese atrocities performed upon the Church, under the name ofpolitical laws and their justice. Walter Wells -- Elder Priest of the Ethiopian Zion CopticChurch of Jamaica, West Indies THE USE OF MARIJUANA IN ANCIENT TIMES The use of marijuana is as old as the history of man and datesto the prehistoric period. Marijuana is closely connected withthe history and development of some of the oldest nations onearth. It has played a significant role in the religions and culturesof Africa, the Middle East, India, and China Richard E. Schultes,a prominent researcher in the field of psychoactive plants, saidin an article he wrote entitled "Man and Marijuana": "...that early man experimented with all plant materialsthat he could chew and could not have avoided discovering theproperties of cannabis (marijuana), for in his quest for seedsand oil, he certainly ate the sticky tops of the plant. Uponeating hemp the euphoric, ecstatic and hallucinatory aspects mayhave introduced man to an other-worldly plane from which emergedreligious beliefs, perhaps even the concept of deity. The plant became accepted as a special gift of the gods, asacred medium for communion with the spiritual world and as suchit has remained in some cultures to the present." The effects of marijuana was proof to the ancients that thespirit and power of the god(s) existed in this plant and that itwas literally a messenger (angel) or actually the Flesh and Bloodand/or Bread of the god(s) and was and continues to be a holysacrament. Considered to be sacred, marijuana has been used inreligious worship from before recorded history. According to William A. Embolden in his book Ritual Use ofCannabis Sativa L, p. 235: "Shamanistic traditions of great antiquity in Asia andthe Near East has as one of their most important elements theattempt to find God without a vale of tears; that cannabis playeda role in this, at least in some areas, is born out in thephilology surrounding the ritualistic use of the plant. WhereasWestern religious traditions generally stress sin, repentance,and mortification of the flesh, certain older non-Westernreligious cults seem to have employed Cannabis as a euphoriant,which allowed the participant a joyous path to the Ultimate;hence such appellations as "heavenly guide". According to "Licit and Illicit Drugs" by theConsumer Union, page 397-398: "Ashurbanipal lived about 650 B.C., but the cuneiformdescriptions of marijuana in his library "are generallyregarded as obvious copies of much older texts." Says Dr.Robert P. Walton, an American physician and authority onmarijuana, "This evidence serves to project the origin ofhashish back to the earliest beginnings of history." THE USE OF MARIJUANA AS INCENSE According to the Encyclopedia Britannica:"Pharmacological Cults" "...the ceremonial use of incense in contemporary ritualis most likely a relic of the time when the psychoactiveproperties of incense brought the ancient worshipper in touchwith supernatural forces." In the temples of the ancient world, the main sacrifice wasthe inhalation of incense. Incense is defined as the perfume orsmoke from spices and gums when burned in celebrating religiousrites or as an offering to a deity. Bronze and gold incenseburners were cast very early in history and their forms wereoften inspired by cosmological themes representing the harmoniousnature of the universe. The following piece was taken from "Licit and IllicitDrugs", page 31. "In the Judaic world, the vapors from burnt spices andaromatic gums were considered part of the pleasurable act ofworship. In proverbs (27:9) it is said that 'Ointment andperfumes rejoice the heart.' Perfumes were widely used inEgyptian worship. Stone altars have been unearthed in Babylon andPalestine, which have been used for burning incense made ofaromatic wood and spices. While the casual readers today mayinterpret such practices as mere satisfaction of the desire forpleasant odors, this is almost certainly an error; in many ormost cases, a psychoactive drug was being inhaled. In the islandsof the Mediterranean 2,500 years ago and in Africa hundreds ofyears ago, for example leaves and flowers of a particular plantwere often thrown upon bonfires and the smoke inhaled; the plantwas marijuana." (Edward Preble and Gabriel V. Laurey, Plastic Cement: The TenCent Hallucinogen, International Journal of the Addictions, 2(Fall 2967): 271-272. "The earliest civilizations of Mesopotamia brewedintoxicating beer of barley more than 5,000 years ago; is it toomuch to assume that even earlier cultures experienced euphoria,accidentally or deliberately, through inhalation of the resinoussmoke of Cannabis?" (Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L, p. 216.) "It is said that the Assyrians used hemp (marijuana) asincense in the seventh or eighth century before Christ and calledit 'Qunubu', a term apparently borrowed from an old East Iranianword 'Konaba', the same as the Scythian name 'cannabis'."(Plants of the Gods - Origin of Hallucinogenic Use by Richard E.Schultes and Albert Hoffman) "It is recorded that the Chinese Taoist recommended theaddition of cannabis to their incense burners in the 1st centuryas a means of achieving immortality." (Marijuana, the First Twelve Thousand Years by Earnest Abel,page 5) "There is a classic Greek term, cannabeizein, which meansto smoke cannabis. Cannabeizein frequently took the form ofinhaling vapors from an incense burner in which these resins weremixed with other resins, such as myrrh, balsam, frankincense, andperfumes." (Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L) "Herodotus in the fifth century B.C. observed theScythians throwing hemp on heated stone to create smoke andobserved them inhaling this smoke. Although he does not identifythem, Herodotus states that when they "have parties and sitaround a fire, they throw some of it into the flames. As itburns, it smokes like incense, and the smell of it makes themdrunk, just as wine does us. As more fruit is thrown on, they getmore and more intoxicated until finally they jump up and startdancing and singing." (Herodotus, Histories 1.202.) EVIDENCE INDICATING THE SEMITIC ORIGIN OF CANNABIS The name cannabis is generally thought to be of Scythianorigin. Sula Benet in Cannabis and Culture argues that it has amuch earlier origin in Semitic languages like Hebrew, occurringseveral times in the Old Testament. He states that in Exodus30:23 that God commands Moses to make a holy anointing oil ofmyrrh, sweet cinnamon, kaneh bosm, and kassia. He continues thatthe word kaneh bosm is also rendered in the traditional Hebrew askannabos or kannabus and that the root "kan" in thisconstruction means "reed" or "hemp", while"bosm" means "aromatic". He states that inthe earliest Greek translations of the old testament"kan" was rendered as "reed", leading to sucherroneous English translations as "sweet calamus"(Exodus 30:23), sweet cane (Isaiah 43:24; Jeremiah 6:20) and"calamus" (Ezekiel 27:19; Song of Songs 4:14). Benet argues from the linguistic evidence that cannabis wasknown in Old Testament times at least for its aromatic propertiesand that the word for it passed from the Semitic language to theScythians, i.e. the Ashkenaz of the Old Testament. Sara Benetowaof the Institute of Anthropological Sciences in Warsaw is quotedin the Book of Grass as saying: "The astonishing resemblancebetween the Semitic 'kanbos' and the Scythian 'cannabis' leads meto suppose that the Scythian word was of Semitic origin. Theseetymological discussions run parallel to arguments drawn fromhistory. The Iranian Scythians were probably related to the Medes, whowere neighbors of the semites and could easily have assimilatedthe word for hemp. The Semites could also have spread the wordduring their migrations through Asia Minor. Taking into account the matriarchal element of Semiticculture, one is led to believe that Asia Minor was the originalpoint of expansion for both the society based on the matriarchalcircle and the mass use of hashish." The Ancient Israelites were a Semitic people. Abraham, thefather of the Israelite nation, came from Ur, a city of Babylonialocated in mesopotamia. The Israelites migrated throughout AsiaMinor and could easily have spread the religious use ofmarijuana. THE ISRAELITE USE OF INCENSE It was said that Moses, at the direction of Almighty God,first brought in the use of incense in public worship, and thatthe other nations of antiquity copied the practice from him. Itwas however a practice that began with Adam. The "Book ofJubilees", an Apocryphal book, (the Apocrypha was consideredcanonical by the early church and is to this day by the EthiopianZion Coptic Church) states that "on the day when Adam wentforth from the Garden of Eden, he offered as a sweet savour anoffering of frankincense, galbanum, and stacte, and spices, inthe morning with the rising of the sun, from the day when hecovered his shame." And of Enoch we read that "he burntthe incense of the sanctuary, even sweet spices, acceptablebefore the Lord, on the Mount." Incense was assigned miraculous powers by the Israelites. Itwas burned in golden bowls or cauldrons placed on or beside thealtar. It was also burned in hand-held censers. In the Blessingof Moses, a poem belonging to the Northern Kingdom of Israel, andwritten about 760 B.C., the sacrificial smoke is offered to theGod of Israel. Let them teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law; Letthem offer sacrificial smoke to thy nostrils, and whole burntsacrifice upon thy altar. Throughout the Bible the ancient patriarchs were brought intocommunion with God through smoking incense and at Mt. Sinai Godtalked to Moses out of a bush that burned with fire (Exodus 3:1-12). After Moses brought the Israelite people out of Egypt hereturned to Mt. Sinai at which time God made a covenant withMoses in which the Ten Commandments were revealed. Exodus 19:8describes the conditions at the time of this covenant. Exodus 19:8 "And Mount Sinai was altogether on smoke,because the Lord descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereofascended as smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quakedgreatly. The Mysterious smoke mentioned in the covenant on Mt. Sinai isalso referred to as a cloud. Exodus 24:15 "And Moses went upinto the mount, and a cloud covered the mount. 16 And the gloryof the Lord abode upon Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it sixdays: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midstof the cloud. Scriptures make it abundantly clear that the clouds and thesmoke are related to the burning of incense. Exodus 40:26describes Moses burning incense, a cloud covering the tent of thecongregation and the glory of the Lord filling the tabernacle. Leviticus 16:2-13 describes how God appeared in a cloud andrefers to it as the clouds of incense. Numbers 16:17-19 describeshow every man of the congregation had a censer full of burningincense and that the glory of the Lord appeared unto all thecongregation. Isaiah 6:4 describes how Ezekial saw God in a smoke-filledinner court. Numbers 11:25 describes how God was revealed toMoses and the seventy elders in a cloud; that the spirit restedupon them and that they prophesied and ceased not. The Book of Grass by Andrew and Vinkenoog includes a sectionon Ancient Scythia and Iran by Mircea Eliade, one of the foremostexperts on the history of religions. On pages 11 and 12 is thefollowing: "On one document appears to indicate the existence of aGetic shamanism: It is Straho's account of the MyssianKAPNOBATAI, a name that has been translated, by analogy withAristophanes' AEROBATES, as 'those who walk in clouds'; but itshould be translated as 'those who walk in smoke'! Presumably thesmoke is hemp smoke, a rudimentary means of ecstasy known to boththe Tracians and the Scythians..." This passage should be carefully noted. Biblical passages makeit abundantly clear that the ancient Isrealites also walked inclouds and in smoke. In fact it was in the clouds of smoke thatGod was revealed to the ancient Isrealites. The words"smoke" and "smoking" appear fifty times inthe King James Version of the Bible and two separate times theBible says of the Lord, "There went up a smoke out of hisnostrils." II Samuel 22:9, Psalms 18:8. There are numerous other places in the Bible that mention theburning of incense, the mysterious cloud, and smoke. This commonthread is found throughout the Bible, including the NewTestament. St. Matthew 24:30 "And then shall appear the signof the Son of Man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of theEarth morn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in theclouds of heaven, with power and great glory." Revelations 1:7 "Behold, he cometh with clouds; and everyeye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all thekindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so,Amen." Revelations 8:3 "And another angel came and stood at thealtar, having a golden censer: and there was given unto him muchincense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saintsupon the golden altar which was before the throne. 4 And thesmoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints,ascended up before God out of the Angel's hand." Revelations 15:8 "And the temple was filled with smokefrom the glory of God, and from his power." THE SYMBOLISM OF FIRE IN THE ANCIENT WORLD The word "fire" is mentioned several hundred timesin the King James version of the Bible. The sacrifice of the Lordis made by fire (Exodus 29:18, 25; Leviticus 2:10-11; Leviticus6:13; Numbers 28:6; Deuteronomy 4:33; Joshua 13:14; I Samuel2:28; II Chronicles 2:4; Isaiah 24:15; Matthew 3:11; Luke 1:9;Revelations 8:4-5) Abraham, the father of the Israelite nation, came from Urwhich was a city of Ancient Sumer in South Babylonia. For theBabylonians, fire was essential to sacrifice and all oblationswere conveyed to the gods by the fire god Girru-Nusku, whosepresence as an intermediary between the gods and man wasindispensable. Girru-Nusku, as the messenger of the gods, borethe essence of the offerings upward to them in the smoke ofsacrificial fire. At Babylon: "The glorious gods smell the incense, noblefood of heaven; pure wine which no hand has touched do theyenjoy." (L. Jeremias, in Encyclopedia Biblica, i.v. 4119,quoting Rawlinson, Cuneif. Inscrip. IV, 19 (59).) The most important of the ancient Indian gods was Agni, thegod of fire, who like the Babylonian god Girru-Nusku acted as amessenger between men and the gods. The fire (Agni) upon thealtar was regarded as a messenger, their invoker. "...For thou, O sage, goest wisely between these twocreations like a friendly messenger between two hamlets." According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, the section on"mysticism": "The Vedas (Hindu sacred writings) are hymns to themystic fire and the inner sense of sacrifice, burning forever onthe 'altar Mind'. Hence the abundance of solar and fire images:birds of fire, the fire of the sun, and the isles of fire. Thesymbol system of the world's religions and mysticisms areprofound illuminations of the human-divine mystery. Be it thecave of the heart or the lotus of the heart, 'the dwelling placeof that which is the Essence of the Universe, "the thirdeye", or the eye of wisdom' - the symbols all refer back towisdom entering the aspiring soul on its way to progressiveself-understanding. 'I saw the Lord with the Eye of the Heart. Isaid, "Who art thou?" and he answered,"Thou"'." The ancient Indian mystics said, "...that in the ecstasyof bhang (marijuana) the spark of the Eternal in man turns intolight the murkiness of matter or illusion and the self is lost inthe central soul fire. Raising man out of himself and above meanindividual worries, bhang makes him one with the divine force ofnature and the mystery 'I am he' grew plain. (Taken from theIndian Hemp Drugs Commission Report which was written at the turnof the twentieth century.) The concept of spiritual or inner light was found throughoutthe ancient world. As we shall see that spiritual light wasdirectly related to the burning of incense. According to LucieLamy in "Egyptian Mysteries", page 24: "ThePharaonic word for light is akh. This word, often translated as'transfigured', designated transcendental light as well as allaspects of physical light; and in the funerary text it denotesthe state of ultimate sublimation. "The word akh, first of all, is written with a glyphshowing a crested ibis, ibis comata. This bird - the name ofwhich was also akh -- lived in the southern part of the Arabianside of the Red Sea (near Al Qunfidhah) and migrated to Abyssinia(Ethiopia) during the winter. Both these places are near theregions from which sacred incense came, and were called the"Divine Land". The bird's crest, together with its darkgreen plumage shot with glittering metallic specks justifies themeanings 'to shine', 'to be resplendent', 'to irradiate'; of theroot akh in the hieroglyphic writing. "Akh indeed expressesall notions of light, both literally and figuratively, from theLight which comes forth from Darkness to the transcendental lightof transfiguration. It is also used to designate the 'third eye',the ureaeus, related in old tradition to the pineal body and tothe spirit." In the next chapter we will see that the sacred cloud ofincense was instrumental in the transfiguration of Christ. Notethat Ethiopia was referred to as the "Divine Land" andthat it was the source for the sacred incense. The ancients alsoreferred to Ethiopia as the "Land of God". The ancient Egyptians believed that they had received theirdivinities from Ethiopia and have always held to the ancient andhonored tradition of their southern origin. Ethiopia is soimportant in ancient history that it is mentioned as being in theGarden of Eden (Genesis 2:12). The ancient Greek historian Diodorus Siculus wrote: "TheEthiopians conceived themselves to be of greater antiquity thanany other nation; and it is probable that, born under the sun'spath, its warmth may have ripened them earlier than other men.They supposed themselves to be the inventors of worship, offestivals, of solemn assemblies, of sacrifice, and everyreligious practice." MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT According to Jack Herer in The Emperor Wears No Clothes orEverything You Wanted to Know About Marijuana But Were Not Taughtin School, "The Essenes, a kabalistic priest/prophet/healersect of Judaism dating back to the era of the Dead Sea Scrolls,used hemp, as did the Theraputea of Egypt, from where we get theterm 'therapeutic'." The Theraputea of Egypt were Jewish ascetics that dwelt nearAlexandria and described by Philo (1st century B.C.) as devotedto contemplation and meditation. Alexandria is where St. Mark istraditionally held to have established the Coptic Church in 45A.D. The Coptic Church has been neglected by Western scholarsdespite its historical significance. This has been due to thevarious biases and interest of the Catholic Church which claimedChristianity for its own. The result is that for the CopticChurch there is very little history. It is however assumed thatthe Coptic religious services have their roots in the earliestlayers of Christian ritual in Jerusalem and it is known that theCoptic church is of ancient origin going back to the time of thefirst Christian communities and even before. Tradition states that "Coptic" was derived from"Kuftaim", son of Mizraim, a grandchild of Noah whofirst settled in the Nile valley, i the neighborhood of Thebes,the ancient capital of Egypt. At one time Thebes was the greatest city in the world andhistory records that by 2200 B.C. the whole of Egypt was unitedunder a Theban prince. The splendor of Thebes was known to Homer,who called it "the city with a hundred gates". (RichardSchultes states that in ancient Thebes marijuana was made into adrink.) According to E.A. Wallis Budge in The Divine Origin of theHerbalist, page 79, "The Copts, that is to say the Egyptianswho accepted the teachings of St. Mark in the first century ofour era, and embraced Christianity, seem to have eschewed medicalscience as taught by the physicians of the famous School ofMedicine of Alexandria, and to have been content with the methodsof healing employed by their ancestors." The Essenes were an ascetic sect closely related to theTheraputea that had established a monastic order in the desertoutside of Palestine and were known as spiritual healers. It hasbeen suggested that both John the Baptist and Jesus may have beenof the Essene sect as they were both heavily dependent on Esseneteachings. The scripture makes no mention of the life of Jesusfrom the age of 13 to 30. Certain theologians speculate thatJesus was being initiated by the Essenes, the last fraternity tokeep alive the ancient traditions of the prophets. Every prophet, however great, must be initiated. His higherself must be awakened and made conscious so that his mission canbe fulfilled. Amongst the Essenes' ritual lustrations precededmost liturgical rites, the most important one of which wasparticipation in a sacred meal -- an anticipation of theMessianic banquet. Throughout the ancient world sacrifice was a sacramentalcommunal meal involving the idea of the god as a participant inthe meal or as identical with the food consumed. The communionsacrifice was one in which the deity indwells the oblation sothat the worshippers actually consume the divine. The originalmotive of sacrifice was an effort toward communion among themembers of a group, on one hand, and between them and their god,on the other. At its best, sacrifice was a "sacrament" and in oneform or another life itself. The central focus of the early Christian church was theEucharist or the "body and blood" of the Lord. This wasinterpreted as a fellowship meal with the resurrected Christ. Inmeeting the Resurrected One in the Eucharist meal the Christiancommunity had the expectation of the Kingdom of God andsalvation. Christ communicated life to his disciples through theEucharist or Christian sacrament. Christ said in describing thesacrament, "Take, eat, this is my body, this is my blood. Dothis as often as you will in remembrance of me." (ICorinthians 11:24- 25) Baptism is defined as the Christian sacrament used inpurification and the spiritual rebirth of the individual. ICorinthians 10:1 makes it clear that the smoking cloud of incensewas directly related to baptism. I Corinthians 10:1"Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant,how that our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed throughthe sea; 2 And were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and inthe sea; 3 And did all eat the same spiritual meat: for theydrank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rockwas Christ. In the Biblical story of Creation, God said, "Behold, Ihave given you every herb bearing seed and to you it will be formeat." (Genesis 1:29) Marijuana is technically an herb andwas considered a spiritual meat in the ancient world. From this passage in Corinthians we see that the spiritualcloud resulting from the burning of incense was instrumental inthe baptism of the Israelites. This baptism is also compared tothe "eating and drinking" of the spirit of Christ.Spirit is defined as the active essence of the Deity serving asan invisible and life-giving or inspiring power in motion. Scripture makes it abundantly clear that the sacrificial cloudor smoke contained the Spirit of God (Christ) and wasinstrumental in inspiring, sanctifying, and purifying thepatriarchs. In Numbers 11:25 the cloud results in the Spirit resting uponMoses and the seventy elders. This passage indicates that theyprophesied ecstatically. "Prophesy" is defined asfollows: to utter or announce by or as if by divine inspiration;to speak for God or a deity; to give instruction in religiousmatters. Throughout the Holy Bible prophets of God spake as they weremoved by the Holy Spirit. The smoking burning cloud of incensecontained the spirit and was instrumental in bringing about thespiritual revelations of the prophets. In the ancient worldmarijuana was used to reveal the future. The virtues of marijuanainclude speech-giving and inspiration of mental powers."Psychoactive" is defined as effecting the mind orbehavior. When we of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church think ofmind or behavior we think of that inward essence or element thatmakes up the individual. This is the person's spirit. We are allspiritual beings. It is just as important to keep the spiritualpart of a person healthy as it is to keep the physical bodyhealthy and in fact they are related. Hence marijuana and itsrelationship to spiritual food. In the Apocrypha (Book of Jubilees), Chapter 10, God tells anangel to teach Noah the medicines which heal and protect fromevil spirits. Surely God taught Noah about marijuana. In theancient world marijuana played an important role in purificationand protecting from evil influences. Note the following concerning the transfiguration of Christ:St. Matthew 17:1 "And after six days Jesus taketh Peter,James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into a highmountain apart. 2 And he was transfigured before them: and hisface did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as light. 3And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talkingwith him. 4 Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it isgood for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here threetabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias. 5When yet he spake, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them; andbehold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my belovedSon, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." The Bible Dictionary by John McKenzie, page 898, saysconcerning the transfiguration that the cloud and the formula ofthe utterance of the Father are derived from the baptism ofJesus. He says that the change described in the appearance of Jesussuggests the change which is implied in the resurrectionnarratives. Some of the synonyms for transfiguration are transformation,metamorphosis, transubstantiation, and avatar. These terms implythe change that accompanies resurrection or deification. Acrossthe world, legends of godlike men who manage to rise, in a stateof perfection go back to an era before human beings had cast awayfrom the divine source. Hence the gods were beings which oncewere men, and the actual race of men will in time become gods.Christ revealed this to the people of his day when he told themto whom the word of God came, "Ye are gods." (St. John10:34) St. Matthew 17:2 says that during the transfiguration ofChrist that his face did shine as the sun. The face of Moses alsoshone when he returned from the cloud on Mt. Sinai (Exodus30:34). The shining countenances are the result of theirresurrections, of their being spiritually illumined in the cloudof smoking incense. Most people are under the impression thatChrist baptized with water. As you can see from the followingaccount of John the Baptist this isn't so. John the Baptistbaptized with water and Christ baptized with fire. St. Matthew 3:11 "I indeed baptize you with water intorepentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whoseshoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the HolySpirit and with fire." It is only logical that this baptism with the Holy Spirit andwith fire is related to the baptism of Christ in the burning,smoking cloud of incense and to the baptism of the patriarchs inwhich the patriarchs did all eat of the same spiritual meal(incense). In the section dealing with the "HolySpirit" the Encyclopedia Britannica states that Christianwriters have seen in various references to the Spirit of Yahwehin the Old Testament an anticipation of the doctrine of the HolySpirit. It also says that the Holy Spirit is viewed as the mainagent of man's restoration to his original natural state throughcommunion in Christ's body and, thus, as the principle of life inthe Christian community. The patriarchs were recipients of arevelation coming directly from the Spirit (incense) and this wasexpressed in the heightening and enlargement of theirconsciousness. It is clear from Scripture that this spiritualdimension was also evident in the life of Jesus, in whom theexperience of the Hebrew prophets was renewed. Through the Eucharist Christ passed this spiritual dimensionon to his apostles. One of the apostles even makes mention inPhilippians 4:18 of a sweet smelling sacrifice that is wellpleasing to God. Christ compares this baptism to the drinking of a cup. St.Mark 10:38 "But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what yeask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptizedwith the baptism that I am baptized with?" This cup is referred to as the cup of salvation in Psalms116:12. Psalms 116:12 "What shall I render unto the Lord for allhis benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and callupon the name of the Lord. It is called the cup of blessing inconnection in connection with the eucharist. 1 Corinthians 10:16 "The cup of blessing which we bless,is it not the communion of the blood and the body of Christ? 17For we being many are one bread, and one body; for we are allpartakers of one bread. Here we see a connection between the cupof blessing and the communion of the blood of Christ. Blood isthe life-giving substance of the living being. Christcommunicated life to his disciples through the Eucharist orChristian sacrament. In I Corinthians 10:16 we note the mention of bread as thecommunion of the body of Christ and that we are all partakers ofone bread. This is the spiritual bread or food used by Christ andhis disciples. (A synonym for the Eucharist or the Body and Bloodof the Lord is the bread of life.) It is interesting to note thatthe finest marijuana in Jamaica is called Lamb's bread. 1 Corinthians 12:13 "For by one Spirit are we allbaptized into one body, whether we be Jew or Gentiles, whether webe bond or free; and have all been made to drink into one Spirit. 1 Corinthians 11:25 "After the same manner also he tookthe cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the NewTestament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, inremembrance of me. 26 For as often as ye eat this bread and drinkthis cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come. If these passages are compared to 1 Corinthians 10:1-4, it isplain that the "eating of one bread" is the same as thepatriarchs "eating the same spiritual meat" and the"drinking of one Spirit" (the cup) is the same as thepatriarchs "drinking of the Spiritual Rock that followedthem: and that Rock was Christ." By making this comparisonwe see that the terminology of the Eucharist is directly relatedto the smoking cloud of incense used in the baptism of Christ andthe patriarchs. It is interesting to note that smoking was referred to as"eating" or "drinking" by the early AmericanIndians. Peter J. Furst in Hallucinogen and Culture states thefollowing: "Considering its enormous geographic spread inthe Americas at the time of European discovery, as well as theprobable age of stone tobacco pipes in California, the inhaling(often called "drinking" or "eating") oftobacco smoke by the Shaman, as a corollary to therapeuticfumigation and the feeding of the gods with smoke, must also beof considerable antiquity." In Licit and Illicit Drugs, page 209, the following is quoted: "Columbus and other early explorers who followed him wereamazed to meet Indians who carried rolls of dried leaves thatthey set afire -- and who then "drank the smoke" thatemerged from the rolls. Other Indians carried pipes in which theyburned the same leaves, and from which they similarly "drankthe smoke". The Encyclopedia Britannica states in the section on"Sacrifice" that the interpretation of sacrifice andparticularly of the Eucharist as sacrifice has varied greatlywithin the different Christian traditions because of thesacrificial terminology in which the Eucharist was originallydescribed became foreign to Christian thinkers. We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare that the trueunderstanding of the Eucharist has been passed down fromgeneration to generation so that we are able to give an accurateinterpretation of the sacrificial terminology used to describethe Eucharist. We have shown, using history and Biblicalpassages, that his terminology is directly related to burningsmoking incense. We have shown that the "eating" or"drinking" contained in the terminology concerning theEucharist is associated with the inhalation of smoke. We haveshown that marijuana was used as incense and that it was thenumber one spiritual plant of the ancient world. We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare that the cupthat Christ baptized his disciples with in the baptism of theHoly Spirit and fire was in fact a pipe or chillum in whichmarijuana was smoked. This is a bottomless cup and soon as it isemptied, it is filled again and passed in a circle. There is apicture of this cup or pipe below, as well as on the cover. Likethe pipe of the ancient North American Indians, this cup was aportable altar. Christ was the Father of the doctrine of theEucharist which is the communion that Jesus gave his brethren.Jesus taught that the communion is his body and blood. Jesus wasnot speaking of His physical body and blood. He was speaking ofHis spiritual body and spiritual blood that was the communion ofhis holy church. The supper that Jesus celebrated with hisdisciples "on the night that he was betrayed" (1Corinthians 11:23) inaugurated the heavenly meal that was to becontinued. 1 Corinthians 11:23 "For I have received of the Lord thatwhich also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the samenight in which he was betrayed took bread: 24 And when he hadgiven thanks, he brake it and said, Take, eat, this is my body,which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. 25 Afterthe same manner also he took the cup, which he had supped,saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood; this do ye, asoft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. 26 For as often as yeeat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye do shew the Lord'sdeath till he come. 27 Wherefore whosoever shall eat of thisbread, and drink of this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall beguilty of the body and blood of the Lord. 28 But let a manexamine himself, and let him eat of the bread, and drink of thatcup. 29 For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth anddrinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. Christ said, "Do this in remembrance of me." Herethe original unity of man with God is restored. In general thereception of the Holy Spirit is connected with the actualrealization, the inward experiencing of God. Marijuana has beenreferred to as a mild euphoric (the producer of a feeling ofwell-being) that produces a profound religious experience of amystical and transcendental nature. This religious experience issaid to be brought about by the stirring of deeply buried,unconscious sensitivities so that one experiences ultimatereality or the divine and confirms the feeling of the worshipperthat he has been in the presence of God and has assimilated someof His powers. To be lifted above sense to behold the beatific vision andbecome "incorporate" in God is the end sought inecstasy. The priest or mystic in enthusiasm or ecstasy enjoys thebeatific vision by entering into communion with God and byundergoing deification. The experience of ecstasy, states MirceaEliade, one of the foremost authorities on religion, is atimeless primary phenomenon. Psychological experience of rapture,he continues, are fundamental to the human condition and henceknown to the whole of archaic humanity. (Some of the synonyms ofrapture are bliss, beatitude, transport, exaltation.) Baudelaire, a member of the Club Des Hashichins (Hashish Club)founded in Paris around 1835 and writer of Artificial Paradisesstates the following about hashish: Hashish is the unadulteratedresin from the flowering tops of the female hemp plant. "One will find in hashish nothing miraculous, absolutelynothing but an exaggeration of the natural. The brain andorganisms on which hashish operates will produce only the normalphenomena peculiar to that individual -- increased, admittedly,in number and force, but always faithful to the original. A manwill never escape from his destined physical and moraltemperament: hashish will be a mirror of his impression andprivate thoughts - a magnifying mirror, it is true, but only amirror. He cautions that the user must be in the right frame of mindto take hashish, for just as it exaggerates the natural behaviorof the individual, so too does hashish intensify the user'simmediate feelings. Baudelaire describes three successive phasesa hashish user will pass through. He says the final stage ismarked by a feeling of calmness, in which time and space have nomeaning, and there is a sense that one has transcended matter. Hesays that in this state, one final supreme thought breaks intoconsciousness. "I have become God." Realization of one's union with God is necessary inunderstanding the true Christian sacrament. The understanding ofman's relationship to God and God's relationship to man (God inMan and Man in God) was quite prevalent in the ancient world,particularly among the religions that utilized marijuana as partof their religious practice. Said the great Hindu sage, Manu, "He who in his own soulperceives the Supreme Soul in all beings and acquires equanimitytoward them all, attains the highest bliss." To recognizeoneness of self with God was contained in all the teachings ofGautama Buddha. In the Liturgy of Mithra (the Persian god oflight and truth) the suppliant prays "abide with me in mysoul; leave me not," and "that I may be initiated andthe Holy Spirit may breathe within me." The communion becameso intimate as to pass into identity: "I am thou and thouart I." Athanasius, a theologian, ecclesiastical statesman,and Egyptian national leader who was closely tied to the CopticChurch in Egypt said, "Even we may become gods walking inthe flesh," and "God became man that man might becomeGod." Western theology (Catholic and Protestant) teaches that thespirit created matter but remained aloof of it. In Hinduism andother Eastern religions, the spirit is the inside, the matter isthe outside; the two are inseparable. Eastern theologians hiverightly perceived that the God one worships must posses all theaspects of his worshippers' nature as well as his own divinenature. Otherwise, how can he create beings whose nature isentirely foreign to his own? What, then, would be the meaning ofthe Biblical phrase: "God made man in his own image"? The fact that modern Christendom has no sense of union withGod has led to numerous churches without the understanding forbuilding a Christian culture and kingdom to replace the confusionof modern politics. This lack of understanding was not lacking inthe ancient church and was a major source of enthusiasm for theprophets of old. In fact, the power of the early church wasmanifested due to this understanding of the spirit of Goddwelling in man, the temple of God. To the ancient prophets itwas not a God above, nor a God over yonder, but a God within."Be still and know that I am God" -- for thevisionaries and mystics of every time and place, this has beenthe first and greatest of the commandments. In 1 Corinthians 11:28 Christ said, "Let a man examinehimself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of thecup." Probably the most relevant study to date about whatmight be considered typical marijuana experience concludes thatmarijuana gives spontaneous insights into self (Dr. Charles Tart,"On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study of MarijuanaIntoxication", Science and Behavior, 1971). The sacramentality of marijuana is declared by Christ himselfand can be understood only when a person partakes of the naturaldivine herb. The fact is communion of Jesus cannot be disputed orbe destroyed. Marijuana is the new wine divine and cannot becompared to the old wine, which is alcohol. Jesus rejected theold wine and glorified the "new wine" at the weddingfeast of Cana. Cana is a linguistic derivation of the present day cannabisand so it is. (Some Biblical scholars -- and there is a certainamount of support in early tradition of the view -- have lookedupon the miracle of Cana as a sign of the Eucharist.) Note the references to new wine in the Bible: Isaiah 65:8 "Thus saith the Lord, As the new wine isfound in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for ablessing is in it; so will I do for my servant's sake" Acts 2:13 "Others mocking said, "These men are fullof new wine." Isaiah 65:8 declares that the new wine is found in the clusterand that a blessing is in it. When one mentions clusters, onethinks of clusters of grapes. Webster's New Riverside Dictionary,Office Edition, defines marijuana: 1. Hemp 2. The dried flowerclusters and leaves of the hemp plant, esp. when taken to induceeuphoria. The Encyclopedia Britannica says the following about hemp: Seed producing flowers form elongate, spike like clustersgrowing on the pistillate, or female plants; pollen producingflowers form many branched clusters or staminate, on male plants.Here and in Webster's, marijuana fits the description of the newwine and as history has shown a blessing is in it. Baudelairesaid the following about the effects of hashish: "Thismarvelous experience often occurs as if it were the effect ofsuperior and invisible power acting on the person fromwithout...This delightful and singular state...gives no advancewarning. It is as unexpected as a ghost, an intermittent hauntingfrom which we must draw, if we are wise, the certainty of abetter existence. This acuteness of thought, this enthusiasm ofthe senses and the spirit must have appeared to man through theages as the first blessing." In the books of Acts the apostles were accused of being fullof new wine. Acts 2:13 was the time of pentecost when the HolySpirit descended upon the apostles. Numerous outpourings of theSpirit are mentioned in the Acts of the apostles in whichhealing, prophesy, and the expelling of demons are particularlyassociated with the activity of the Spirit. Incense (marijuana)was used by the ancients for healing, prophesy, and the expellingof demons. When Christ ascended into heaven in the cloud (Acts 1:9-11) hesent his disciples the Holy Spirit with the "gift oftongues" (Acts 2:3) and there appeared unto them cloventongues like as a fire, and it sat upon each of them, and theywere filled with the Holy Spirit and were given the power toprophesy or witness. (Marijuana has been credited with speech giving andinspiration of mental powers.) The first two gifts of the Holy Spirit are traditionally saidto be wisdom and understanding, which no doubt are the two thingsmost needed by the human race. In Jamaica today marijuana isreferred to as the "weed of wisdom" and is reputed tobe the plant that grew on Solomon's grave, a man known for hisgreat wisdom. Marijuana expands consciousness and enhances thecapacity for mystical and creative inspiration. In Acts 2:3 Fire speaks figuratively of the Holy Spirit. Firewas also a means which to transport a saint to heaven. 2 Kings2:11 "And it came to pass, as they still went on, andtalked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, andhorses of fire, and parted asunder; and Elijah went up by awhirlwind into heaven." Recent writers have speculated that this passage was inreference to flying saucers. That is because they look at thispassage physically. This ascension of Elijah like the ascensionof Christ in the cloud into heaven is the "withdrawal"from the external or physical world, to be the inmost reality ofall. This can be referred to as ecstasy, rapture, or transportand is a result of the Holy Spirit. Ecstasy, rapture, ortransport therefor agree in designating a feeling or state ofintense, often extreme mental and emotional exaltation. Raptureis defined as ecstatic joy or delight; joyful ecstasy. Some ofthe synonyms of rapture are bliss, beatitude, transport, andexultation. The true rapture is therefore one in which one isspiritually transported to the heavens. Don't expect to float upinto the sky. Marijuana as history has shown is the catalyst used to achievethe spiritual journey into the heavens. That is why in India itwas referred to as the Heavenly-Guide, the Poor Man's Heaven, andthe Sky-flier. That is why Professor Mircea Eliade, perhaps theforemost authority on the history of religion, suggested thatZoroaster may have caused hemp to bridge the metaphysical gapbetween heaven and earth. One dictionary defines marijuana as the leaves and floweringtops when taken to induce euphoria. Euphoria is defined by thesame dictionary as great happiness or bliss. (In India, marijuanahas been referred to as the joy-giver and the soother of grief.) Bliss is defined as the ecstasy of salvation, spiritual joy.Some of the synonyms of bliss are beatitude, transport, rapture,ecstasy, paradise, heaven. Throughout the ancient world there is mention of "magicalflight", "ascent to heaven", and "mysticaljourney". All these mythological and folklore traditionshave their point of departure in an ideology and technique ofecstasy that imply "journey in spirit". The pilgrimage from earth to heaven is not a journey to someother place or some other time, but is a journey within. One mustrealize that "death" through which we must pass beforeGod can be seen does not lie ahead of us in time. Rather it isnow that we have a man of sin within us that must be killed and anew man free from sin that must be born. This is actualized inbaptism and the sacramental life in the church. For as many ofyou as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ(Galatians 3:27). The effect of baptism is spiritual regenerationor rebirth, whereby one is "enChristened", involvingboth union with Christ and remission of sins. In Titus 3:5baptism is the "bath of regeneration" accompanyingrenewal by the Spirit. Some of the synonyms of regeneration arebeatification, conversion, sanctification, salvation,inspiration, bread of life, Body and Blood of Christ. SaraBenetowa of the Institute of Anthropological Sciences in Warsawis quoted in the Book of Grass as saying: "By comparing the old Slavic word 'Kepati' and theRussian 'Kupati' with the Scythian 'cannabis' Shrader developedand justified Meringer's supposition that there is a link betweenthe Scythian baths and Russian vapor baths. "In the entire Orient even today to 'go to the bath'means not only to accomplish an act of purification and enjoy apleasure, but also to fulfill the divine law. Vambery calls'bath' any club in which the members play checkers, drink coffee,and smoke hashish or tobacco." St. Matthew's account of the institution of the Eucharistattaches to the Eucharist cup these words: "Drink of it, allof, for this is the blood of the covenant, which is poured outfor many for the remission of sins (st. Matthew 26:27). Drinkingthe sacramental cup therefor serves like baptism (Acts 2:38)where Peter said unto them, "Repent, and be baptizedeveryone of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission ofsins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. We of theEthiopian Zion Coptic Church declare a three-part doctrine of theHoly Herb, the Holy Word, and the Holy Man (Woman). The present and future benefits to the individual communicanthave their importance given them by Jesus, who said, "He whoeats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I willraise them up at the last day." (John 6:54) As such we mustsee that the divine person who is active in creation, in renewal,and in human rebirth and resurrection, is also active in theEucharist. There was a profound change in America when marijuanasmoking started on a large scale in the late 1960's. A largenumber of people resisted the draft, resisted the war ... startedletting their hair and beards grow ... became interested innatural foods... the ecology and the environment. What we reallysaw was the awakening of our generation to the beginning ofChristian mentality through marijuana smoking. The earmarks ofthis mentality are: I don't want to go to war; I really don'twant to be part of the political-military-economic fiasco youcall society. Like the Indians Hemp Drug Commission three quarters of acentury earlier, the Canadian Le Dain Commission conducted aninquiry into the use of marijuana. On page 156 of the report isthe following: "In the case of cannabis, the positive pointswhich are claimed for it include the following: It is a relaxant;it is disinhibiting; it increases self-confidence and the feelingof creativity (whether justified by creative results or not); itincreases sensual awareness and appreciation; it facilitates selfacceptance and in this way makes it easier to accept others; itserves a sacramental function in promoting a sense of spiritualcommunity among users; it is a shared pleasure; because it isillicit and the object of strong disapproval from those who are,by and large, opposed to social change, it is a symbol of protestand a means of strengthening the sense of identity among thosewho are strongly critical of certain aspects of our society andvalue structure today." On page 144 of the Report, marijuana is associated with peace."In our conversation with (students and young people) theyhave frequently contrasted marijuana and alcohol effects todescribe the former as a drug of peace, a drug that reducestendencies to aggression while suggesting that the latter drugproduces hostile, aggressive behavior. Thus marijuana is seen asparticularly appropriate to a generation that emphasizes peaceand is, in many ways, anticompetitive." In a magazine article by G. S. Chopra entitled "Man andMarijuana" on page 235 is a section dealing with HumanExperiments. One hundred persons with an established marijuanasmoking habit smoked marijuana. They described the symptoms asfollows: "I have done things today which I usually dislike butwhich I rather enjoyed doing today." "Nothing seemedimpossible to accomplish." "I assumed a cool andcomposed attitude and forgot all mental worries." "Ibehaved in a childish and foolish manner." "It relievessense of fatigue and gives rise to feelings of happiness.""I feel like laughing." "My head is dizzy.""I feel like taking more food." "The world is gayaround me." "I feel inclined to work." "I ama friend to all and have no enemy in the world." According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, in the section on"Roman Catholicism": "To understand the meaning and use of the Eucharist wemust see it as an act of universal worship, of cooperation, ofassociation else it loses the greater part of its significance.Neither in Roman Catholic nor in Protestant Eucharistic practicedoes the sacrament retain much of the symbolism of Christianunity, which clearly it has. Originally, the symbolism was thatof a community meal, an accepted social symbol of communitythroughout the whole of human culture." Marijuana has been used as sacrifice, a sacrament, a ritualfumigant (incense), a good-will offering, and as a means ofcommuning with the divine spirit. It has been used to sealtreaties, friendships, solemn binding agreements and tolegitimize covenants. It has been used as a traditional defenseagainst evil and in purification. It has been used in divinations(1. the art or practice that seeks to foresee or foretell futureevents or discover hidden knowledge; 2. unusual insight;intuitive perception.) It has been used in remembrance of thedead and praised for its medicinal properties. Most Christians agree that participation in the Eucharist issupposed to enhance and deepen communion of believers not onlywith Christ but also with one another. We must therefor ask thequestion, "What substance did the ancients use as acommunity meal to facilitate communion with the Lord?" Theanswer to that question is marijuana. Hemp as originally used inreligious ritual, temple activities, and tribal rites, involvedgroups of worshippers rather than the solitary individual. Thepleasurable psychoactive effects were then, as now, communalexperiences. Practically every major religion and culture of the ancientworld utilized marijuana as part of their religious observance.Marijuana was the ambrosia of the ancient world. It was the food,drink, and perfume of the gods. It was used by the Africans, theEgyptians, the Assyrians, the Asians, the Europeans, and possiblythe Indians of the Americas. Would it be too much to suggest thatthe ancient Israelites also utilized marijuana? The following information was taken from the mostauthoritative books dealing with the history of marijuana. Theyare mentioned at the end of this work. MARIJUANA IN INDIA In Indian tradition marijuana is associated with immortality.There is a complex myth of the churning of the Ocean of Milk bythe gods, their joint act of creation. They were in search ofAmrita, the elixir of eternal life. When the gods, helped bydemons, churned the ocean to obtain Amrita, one of the resultingnectars was cannabis. After churning the ocean, the demonsattempted to gain control of Amrita (marijuana), but the godswere able to prevent this seizure, giving cannabis the nameVijaya ("victory") to commemorate their success. Other ancient Indian names for marijuana were "sacredgrass", "hero leaved", "joy","rejoicer", "desired in the three worlds"'"gods' food", "fountain of pleasures"' and"Shiva's plant". Early Indian legends maintained that the angel of mankindlived in the leaves of the marijuana plant. It was so sacred thatit was reputed to deter evil and cleanse its user of sin. InHindu mythology hemp is a holy plant given to man for the"welfare of mankind" and is considered to be one of thedivine nectars able to give man anything from good health, tolong life, to visions of the gods. Nectar is defined as thefabled drink of the gods. Tradition maintains that when nectar or Amrita dropped fromheaven, that cannabis sprouted from it. In Hindu mythology Amritameans immortality; also, the ambrosial drink which produced it. In India hemp is made into a drink and is reputed to be thefavorite drink of Indra (the King of Indian gods.) Traditionmaintains that the god Indra gave marijuana to the people so thatthey might attain elevated states of consciousness, delight inworldly joy, and freedom from fear. According to Hindu legends, Siva, the Supreme God of manyHindu sects, had some family squabble and went off to the fields.He sat under a hemp plant so as to be sheltered from the heat ofthe sun and happened to eat some of its leaves. He felt sorefreshed from the hemp plant that it became his favorite food,and that is how he got his title, the Lord of Bhang. Cannabis ismentioned as a medicinal and magical plant as well as a"sacred grass" in the Atharva Veda (dated 2000 - 1400B.C.) It also calls hemp one of the five kingdoms of herbs...whichreleases us from anxiety and refers to hemp as a "source ofhappiness", "joy-giver" and "liberator".Although the holy books, the Shastras, forbid the worship of theplant, it has been venerated and used as a sacrifice to thedeities. Indian Tradition, writing, and belief is that the"Siddhartha" (the Buddha), used and ate nothing buthemp and its seeds for six years prior to announcing(discovering) his truths and becoming the Buddha. Cannabis held a preeminent place in the Tantric religion whichevolved in Tibet in the seventh century A.D. Tantrism was areligion based on fear of demons. To combat the demonic threat tothe world, the people sought protection in plants such ascannabis which were set afire to overcome evil forces. In the tenth century A.D. hemp was extolled as indracanna, the"food of the gods". A fifteenth-century document refersto cannabis as "light-hearted", "joy-full"and "rejoices", and claimed that among its virtues are"astringency", "heat","speech-giving", "inspiration of mentalpowers", "excitability" and the capacity to"remove wind and phlegm". Today in the Tantric Buddhism of the Himalayas of Tibet,cannabis plays a very significant role in the meditative ritualto facilitate deep meditation and heighten awareness. In modernIndia it is taken at Hindu and Sikh temples and Mohammedanshrines. Among fakirs (Hindu ascetics) bhang is viewed as thegiver of long life and a means of communion with the divinespirit. Like his Hindu brother, the Musalman fakir reveres bhangas the lengthener of life and the freer from the bonds of self. At the turn of the twentieth century, the Indian Hemp DrugsCommission set up to study the use of hemp in India contains thefollowing report: "...It is inevitable that temperaments would be found towhom the quickening spirit of bhang is the spirit of freedom andknowledge. In the ecstasy of bhang the spark of the Eternal inman turns into the light the murkiness of matter. "...Bhang is the Joy-giver, the Sky-filler, the Heavenly-Guide, the Poor Man's Heaven, the Soother of Grief...No god orman is as good as the religious drinker of bhang...The supportingpower of bhang has brought many a Hindu family safe through themiseries of famine. To forbid or even seriously restrict the useof so gracious an herb as the hemp would cause widespreadsuffering and annoyance and to large bands of worshippedascetics, deep-seated anger. It would rob the people of a solaceon discomfort, of a cure in sickness, of a guardian whosegracious protection saves them from the attacks of evilinfluences... MARIJUANA IN CHINA Hemp was so highly regarded in ancient China that the Chinesecalled their country "the land of mulberry and hemp".Hemp was a symbol of power over evil and in emperor Shen Nung'spharmacopoeia was known as the "liberator of sin". TheChinese believed that the legendary Shen Nung first taught thecultivation of hemp in the 28th century B.C. Shen Nung iscredited with developing the sciences of medicine from thecurative power of plants. So highly regarded was Shen Nung thathe was deified and today he is regarded as the Father of Chinesemedicine. Shen Nung was also regarded as the Lord of fire. Hesacrificed on T'ai Shan, a mountain of hoary antiquity. A statement in the Pen-ts'ao Ching of some significance isthat Cannabis "grows along rivers and valleys at T'ai-shan,but it is now common everywhere." Mount T'ai is in ShangtungPrivince, where the cultivation of the hemp plant is stillintensive to this day. Whether or not this early attributionindicates the actual geographic origin of the cultivation of theCannabis plant remains to be seen. (An Archeological andHistorical Account of Cannabis in China by Hui-Lin Li) A chines Taoist priest wrote in the fifth century B.C. thatcannabis was used in combination with Ginseng to set forward timein order to reveal future events. It is recorded that the Taoistrecommended the addition of cannabis to their incense burners inthe 1st century A.D. and that the effects thus produced werehighly regarded as a means of achieving immortality. In the earlyChinese Taoist ritual the fumes and odors of incense burners weresaid to have produced a mystic exaltation and contribution towell-being. Webster's New Riverside Dictionary defines marijuana: 1. Hemp2. The dried flower clusters and leaves of the hemp plant, esp.when taken to induce euphoria. Euphoria is defined as a strongfeeling of elation or well-being. Like the practice of medicine around the world, early Chinesedoctoring was based on the concept of demons. The only way tocure the sick was to drive out the demons. The early priestdoctors used marijuana stalks into which snake-like figures werecarved. Standing over the body of the stricken patient, his cannabisstalk poised to strike, the priest pounded the bed and commandedthe demon to be gone. The cannabis stalk with the snake carved onit was the forerunner to the sign of modern medicine (the staffwith the entwined serpents.) MARIJUANA IN JAPAN Hemp was used in Ancient Japan in ceremonial purificationrites and for driving away evil spirits. In Japan, Shinto priestsused a gohei, a short stick with undyed hemp fibers (for purity)attached to one end. According to Shinto beliefs, evil and puritycannot exist alongside one another, and so by waving the gohei(purity) above someone's head the evil spirit inside him would bedriven away. Clothes made of hemp were especially worn duringformal and religious ceremonies because of hemp's traditionalassociation with purity. MARIJUANA IN ANCIENT IRAN Ancient Iran was the source for the great Persian empire, Iranis located slightly to the northeast of the ancient kingdoms ofSumeria, Babylonia, and Assyria. According to Mircea Eliade,"Shamanistic ecstasy induced by hemp smoke was known inancient Iran." Professor Eliade has suggested thatZoroaster, the Persian prophet, said to have written theZend-Avesta, was a user of hemp. In the Zend-Avesta hemp occupies the first place in a list of10,000 medicinal plants. One of the few surviving books of theZend-Avesta, called the Venidad, "The Law AgainstDemons", calls bhanga (marijuana) Zoroaster's "goodnarcotic", and tells of two mortals who were transported insoul to the heavens where, upon drinking from a cup of bhang,they had the highest mysteries revealed to them. Professor Eliade has theorized that Zoroaster may have usedhemp to bridge the metaphysical gap between heaven and earth. MARIJUANA IN ANCIENT EGYPT In the book, Plants of the Gods: Origin of Hallucinogenic Useby Richard E. Schultes and Albert Hofman, page 72, it is statedthat the specimens of marijuana nearly 4,000 years old haveturned up in an Egyptian site and that in ancient Thebes theplant was made into a drink. MARIJUANA IN EUROPE According to Nikolaas j. van der Merwe (Department ofArchaeology, University of Cape Town, South Africa) the peasantsof Europe have been using cannabis as medicine, ritual material,and to smoke or chew as far back as oral traditions go. Marijuana was an integral part of the Scythian cult of thedead wherein homage was paid to the memory of their departedleaders. This use of cannabis was found in frozen Scythian tombsdated from 500 to 300 B.C. Along with the cannabis a miniaturetripod-like tent over a copper censer was found in which thesacred plant was burned. It is interesting to note that two extraordinary rugs werealso found in the frozen Scythian tombs. One rug had a borderfrieze with a repeated composition of a horseman approaching theGreat Goddess who holds the "Tree of Life" in one handand raises the other hand in welcome. MARIJUANA IN AFRICA The African continent is probably the zone showing the widestprevalence of the hemp drug habit. When white men first went toAfrica, marijuana was part of the native way of life. Africa wasa continent of marijuana cultures where marijuana was an integralpart of religious ceremony. The Africans were observed inhalingthe smoke from piles of smoldering hemp. Some of these piles hadbeen placed upon altars. The Africans also utilized pipes. TheAfrican Dagga (marijuana) cults believed that Holy Cannabis wasbrought to earth by the gods. (Throughout the ancient worldEthiopia was considered the home of the gods.) In south central Africa, marijuana is held to be sacred and isconnected with many religious and social customs. Marijuana isregarded by some sects as a magic plant possessing universalprotection against all injury to life, and is symbolic of peaceand friendship. Certain tribes consider hemp use a duty. Theearliest evidence for cannabis smoking in Africa outside of Egyptcomes from fourteenth century Ethiopia, where two ceramicsmoking-pipe bowls containing traces of excavation. In many partsof East Africa, especially near Lake Victoria (the source for theNile), hemp smoking and hashish snuffing cults still exist. MARIJUANA IN THE NEW WORLD According to Richard L. Lingeman in his book Drugs from A toZ, page 146, "Marijuana smoking was known by the Indiansbefore Columbus." After the Spanish conquest in 1521 theSpaniards recorded that the Aztecs (Mayans) used marijuana. The present day Cuna Indians of Panama use marijuana as asacred herb and the Cora Indians of the Sierra Madre Occidentalof Mexico smoke marijuana in this course of their sacredceremonies. In the Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L by William A Emboden,Jr., pages 229 and 231, is the following: "A particularlyinteresting account of a Tepehua (no relationship to"Tepecana") Indian ceremony with cannabis was publishedin 1963 by the Mexican ethnologist Roberto William Garcia of theUniversity of Veracruz, northernmost branch of the Maya languagefamily. "In his account of Teehua religion and ritual, WilliamGarcia (1963:215-21) describes in some detail a communal curingceremony focused on a plant called santa rose, "The HerbWhich Makes One Speak", which he identified botanically asCannabis Sativa: According to Garcia it is worshipped as an earthdeity and is thought to be alive and comparable to a piece of theheart of God." MARIJUANA USE BY THE MOSLEMS It is interesting to note that the use of hemp was notprohibited by Mohammed (570-632 A.D.) while the use of alcoholwas. Moslems considered hemp as a "Holy Plant" andmedieval Arab doctors considered hemp as a sacred medicine whichthey called among other names kannab. The Sufis (a Moslem sect)originating in 8th century Persia used hashish as a means ofstimulating mystical consciousness and appreciation of the natureof Allah. Eating hashish to the Sufis was "an act ofworship". They maintained that hashish gave them otherwiseunattainable insights into themselves, deeper understanding andthat it made them feel witty. They also claimed that it gavehappiness, reduced anxiety, reduced worry, and increased musicappreciation. According to one Arab legend Haydar, the Persian founder ofthe religious order of Sufi came across the cannabis plant whilewandering in the Persian mountains. Usually a reserved and silentman, when he returned to his monastery after eating some cannabisleaves, his disciples were amazed at how talkative and animated(full of spirit) he seemed. After cajoling Haydar into tellingthem what he had done to make him feel so happy, his discipleswent out into the mountains and tried the cannabis themselves. Soit was, according to the legend, that the Sufis came to know thepleasures of hashish. (Taken from the Introduction to AComprehensive Guide to Cannabis Literature by Earnest Abel.) SUMMARY Due to the prosecution of God's church from the beginning ofthe Christian era and due to the persecution against marijuanathe true understanding of the Eucharist has remained hidden fromChristendom and the world, only to be revealed in these times,the culmination of all human history. We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare marijuana forthe communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, and for theresurrection of mankind. The fruits of the mystery areremembrance of the passions and death of Christ, propitiation forsins, defense against temptation, and the indwelling of Christ inthe faithful. Preparations for communion consist of confession of sins,fasting from sin, and reconciliation with all mankind. As suchthe participant in the Eucharist will be in a condition in whichprayer and meditation are easy and fruitful. He will find hisemotion purified and stimulated, his spirituality quickened andhis heart filled with love. SOURCES Richard E. Schultes, article: "Man and Marijuana" Richard E. Schultes and Albert Hofman, Plants of the Gods -Origin of Hallucinogenic Use (McGraw-Hill Book Co. [U.K.]Limited, Maidenhead, England [1979]). G.S. Chopra, article: "Man and Marijuana",International Journal of the Addict,1969, 4, 215-247. Earnest L. Abel, Marijuana, the First Twelve Thousand Years(Phenum Press, New York, 1980) Earnest L. Abel, A Comprehensive Guide to Cannabis Literature Earnest L. Abel, Marijuana Dictionary: Words, Terms, Eventsand Persons Relating to Cannabis(Greenwood Press, Westpoint,Connecticut [1982]) Edward M. Breecher and the Editors of Consumer Reports, TheConsumer Union Report, "Licit and Illicit Drugs",(Little, Brown, and Co.) Louis Lewin, Phantastica, Narcotic and Stimulating Drugs:Their Use and Abuse, (London: Kegan, Trench, Turbner and Co.,Ltd. Translated from the second German edition by P.H.A. Wirth,1931) (N.Y., Dutton, 1964, reprint, 1924, trans. 1931) Sula Benet, Cannabis and Culture, ed. V. Rubin (The Hague:Moutan, 1975) Richard E. Lingeman, Drugs from A to Z, A Dictionary(McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1969, 74) John R. Glowa, The Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Drugs (ChelseaHouse Pub., N.Y., New Haven, Philadelphia, 1986) George Andrews and Simon Vinkenoog, The Book of Grass: AnAnthology on Indian Hemp; Chandler and Sharp Series in CrossCultural Themes (N.Y., Grove Press [1967]) Jack Herer, The Emperor Wears No Clothes, 1985, 90, 91, 92. Peter T. Furst, Hallucinogens and Culture (Chandler and SharpPublishers, Inc., 1976) Baudelaire, Artificial Paradises Dr. Charles Tart, "On Being Stoned: A Psychological Studyof Marijuana Intoxication" (Science and Behavior, 1971) William A. Emboden, Jr. Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L S.I. Rudenko, Frozen Tombs of Siberia (Dent., London, 1970) Edward Atchley, A History of the Use of Incense in DivineWorship E. A. Wallis Budge, The Divine Origin of the Craft of theHerbalist Egon C. Corti, A history of Smoking, by Count Corti;Translated by Paul England (G.G. Harrap, London, England, 1931) Francis Robicsek, The Smoking Gods: Tobacco in Mayan Art,History, and Religion (University of Oklahoma Press, Norman,1978) Diodurus, Histories 1.97.7 Herman Scneider, History of World Civilization, 2v (New York,1931) M.N. Dhalla, Zoroastrian Civilization (Oxford UniversityPress, N.Y., 1922) Sir Charles Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism 3v. (Routledge &K. Paul, London, 1921) A.A. McDonell, India's Past (The Clarendon Press, Oxford,1927) Charles Anthon, A Classical Dictionary (N.Y., Harpers andBrothers, 1848) G. Maspero, The Dawn of Civilization: Egypt and Chaldea(London, 1897) Lucy Lamy, Egyptian Mysteries Friedrich Ratzel, History of Mankind (N.Y., Gordon Press) R.H. Charles The Book of Jubilees, cap, iij, (London, 1902) Alfred Wiedemann, Religion of the Ancient Egyptians (London,1987) Geoffrey Wainwright, Eucharist and Eschatology (Epworth Press,London, 1971) Webster's Third New International Dictionary, 1966 The Book of the Dead, Edit. E.A.W. Budge, British Museum,1895, p. 250 J. Jeremias, in Encyclopedia, Iv, 4119, quoting Rawlinson,Cuneiform Inscription IV. 19 (59) Cnf. the story of Bel and theDragon. John McKenzie, The Bible Dictionary (N.Y. MacMillan Pub. Co.,1965) Encyclopedia Britannica, "Holy Spirit" (15thEdition, 1978) Micropaedia, Ready Reference and Index Encyclopedia Britannica, "Sacrifice" (15th Edition,1978) Encyclopedia Britannica, "Pharmacological Cults"(15th Edition, 1978), p. 199 Encyclopedia Britannica, "Coptic" Encyclopedia Britannica, "Essenes" Encyclopedia Britannica, "Theraputea" Encyclopedia Britannica, "Sacred Pipe" (15thEdition) Encyclopedia Britannica, "Incense" Encyclopedia Britannica, "Hemp" (Microppaedia ReadyReference and Index, p. 1016) Encyclopedia Britannica, "Roman Catholicism, TheEucharist" (Volume 15, p. 998) Encyclopedia Britannica, "Mysticism" King James version of The Bible The Apocrypha We hope you enjoyed this pamphlet. If you have any questionsor comments, we would like to see them. Send them to theEthiopian Zion Coptic Church, P.O. Box 1161, Minneola, FL34755-1161. We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church decided to publish thispamphlet in order to give the public an opportunity to study thechurch and its doctrine; not from inflated and misleading mediabut from historical and Biblical reference. The Church hasreceived extensive publicity as "60 Minutes" has done asegment; Life, Omni, Science, Rolling Stone, and High Timesmagazines have all done articles, countless newspaper articleshave been written, and various brothers have been on radio and TVtalk shows around the country. We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church revere ganja(marijuana) as our "holy" Eucharist and "spiritualintensifier" with Biblical, historical and divineassociations for its use. Ganja is the mystical body and blood of "Jesus" --the burnt offering made by fire -- which allows a member to seeand know the "living God", or the "God inman". Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-70IA087-000625-B017-282http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/1911hemp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044107 text/html 15438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:41:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:17 GMTContent-length: 15220 Hemp article, from Encyclopedia Britannica, 1910-1911 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information HEMP article, from Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed. (1910-1911) HEMP (in O. Eng. _henep_, cf. Dutch _hennep_, Ger. _Hanf_,cognate with Gr. k\'annabis [in Greek letters], Lat. cannabis),an annual herb (_Cannabis sativa_) having angular rough stems andalternate deeply lobed leaves. The bast fibres of _Cannabis_ arethe hemp of commerce, but, unfortunately, the products from manytotally different plants are often included under the generalname of hemp. In some cases the fibre is obtained from the stem,while in others it comes from the leaf. Sunn hemp, Manila hemp,Sisal hemp, and Phormium (New Zealand flax, which is neither flaxnor hemp) are treated separately. All these, however, are oftenclassed under the above general name, and so are thefollowing:---Deccan or Ambari hemp, _Hibiscus cannabinus_, anIndian and East Indian malvaceous plant, the fibre from which isoften known as brown hemp or Bombay hemp; Pit\'e hemp, which isobtained from the American aloe, _Agave americana_; and Moorva orbowstring-hemp, _Sansevieria zeylanica_, which is obtained froman aloe-like plant, and is a native of India and Ceylon. Thenthere are Canada hemp, _Apocynum cannabinum_, Kentucky hemp,_Urtica cannabina_, and others. The hemp plant, like the hop, which is of the same naturalorder, Cannabinaceae, is dioecious, i.e. the male and femaleflowers are borne on separate plants. The female plant grows to agreater height than the male, and its foliage is darker and moreluxuriant, but the plant takes from five to six weeks longer toripen. When the male plants are ripe they are pulled, put up intobundles, and steeped in a similar manner to flax, but the femaleplants are allowed to remain until the seed is perfectly ripe.They are then pulled, and after the seed has been removed areretted in the ordinary way. The seed is also a value product; thefinest is kept for sowing, a large quantity is sold for the foodof cage birds, while the remainder is sent to the oil mills to becrushed. The extracted oil is used in the manufacture of soap,while the solid remains, known as oil-cake, are valuable as afood for cattle. The leaves of hemp have five to seven leaflets,the form of which is lanceolate-acuminate, with a serrate margin.The loose panicles of male flowers, and the short spikes offemale flowers, arise from the axils of the upper leaves. Theheight of the plant varies greatly with season, soil andmanuring; in some districts it varies from 3 to 8 ft., but in thePiedmont province it is not unusual to see them from 8 to 16 ft.in height, whilst a variety (_Cannabis setiva_, variety_gigantea_) has produced specimens over 17 ft. in height. All cultivated hemp belongs to the same species, _Cannabissativa_; the special varieties such as _Cannabis indica_,_Cannabis chinensis_, &c., owe their differences to climateand soil, and they lose many of their peculiarities whencultivated in temperate regions. Rumphius (in the 17th century)had noticed these differences between Indian and European hemp. Wild hemp still grows on the banks of the lower Ural, and theVolga, near the Caspian Sea. It extends to Persia, the Altairange and northern and western China. The authors of the_Pharmacographia_ say:---``It is found in Kashmir and in theHim\'alaya, growing 10 to 12 ft. high, and thriving vigorously atan elevation of 6000 to 10,000 ft.'' Wild hemp is, however, ofvery little use as a fibre producer, although a drug is obtainedfrom it. It would appear that the native country of the hemp plant isin some part of temperate Asia, probably near the Caspian Sea. Itspread westward throughout Europe, and southward through theIndian peninsula. The names given to the plant and to its products in differentcountries are of interest in connexion with the utilization ofthe fibre and resin. In Sans. it is called _goni_, _sana_,_shanapu_, _banga_ and _ganjika_; in Bengali, _ganga_; Pers._bang_ and _canna_; Arab. _kinnub_ or _cannub_; Gr. _kannabis_;Lat. _cannabis_; Ital. _canappa_; Fr. _chanvre_; Span._c\'a\~namo_; Portuguese, _c\'anamo_; Russ. _kon\'opel_; Lettishand Lithuanian, _kannapes_; Slav. _konopi_; Erse, _canaib_ and_canab_, A. Sax. _hoenep_; Dutch, _hennep_; Ger. _Hanf_; Eng._hemp_; Danish and Norwegian, _hamp_; Icelandic, _hampr_; and inSwed. _hampa_. The English word _canvas_ sufficiently reveals itsderivation from _cannabis_. Very little hemp is now grown in the British Isles, althoughthis variety was considered to be of very good quality, and topossess great strength. The chief continental hemp-producingcountries are Italy, Russia and France; it is also grown inseveral parts of Canada and the United States and India. TheCentral Provinces, Bengal and Bombay are the chief centres ofhemp cultivation in India, where the plant is of most use fornarcotics. The satisfactory growth of hemp demands a light richand fertile soil, but, unlike most substances, it may be rearedfor a few years in succession. The time of sowing, the quantityof seed per acre (about three bushels) and the method ofgathering and retting are very similar to those of flax; but, asa rule, it is a hardier plant than flax, does not possess thesame pliability, is much coarser and more brittle, and does notrequire the same amount of attention during the first few weeksof its growth. The very finest hemp, that grown in the province of Piedmont,Italy, is, however, very similar to flax, and in many cases thetwo fibres are mixed in the same material. The hemp fibre hasalways been valuable for the rope industry, and it was at onetime very extensively used in the production of yarns for themanufacture of sail cloth, sheeting, covers, bagging, sacking,&c. Much of the finer quality is still made into cloth, butalmost all the coarser quality finds its way into ropes andsimilar material. A large quantity of hemp cloth is still made for the Britishnavy. The cloth, when finished, is cut up into lengths, made intobags and tarred. They are then used as coal sacks. There is alsoa quantity made into sacks which are intended to hold very heavymaterial. Hemp yarns are also used in certain classes of carpets,for special bags for use in cop dyeing and for similar specialpurposes, but for the ordinary bagging and sacking the employmentof hemp yarns has been almost entirely supplanted by yarns madefrom the jute fibre. Hemp is grown for three products---(1) the fibre of its stem;(2) the resinous secretion which is developed in hot countriesupon its leaves and flowering heads; (3) its oily seeds. Hemp has been employed for its fibre from ancient times.Herodotus (iv. 74) mentions the wild and cultivated hemp ofScythia, and describes the hempen garments made by the Thraciansas equal to linen in fineness. Hesychius says the Thracian womenmade sheets of hemp. Moschion (about 200 B.C.) records the use ofhempen ropes for rigging the ship ``Syracusia'' built for HieroII. The hemp plant has been cultivated in northern India from aconsiderable antiquity, not only as a drug but for its fibre. TheAnglo-Saxons were well acquainted with the mode of preparinghemp. Hempen cloth became common in central and southern Europein the 13th century. _Hemp-resin._---Hemp as a drug or intoxicant [sic---the word"intoxicant" implies "something whichpoisons", while it is well known that hemp is not poisonousin any way] for smoking and chewing occurs in the three forms ofbhang, ganja, and charas. 1. _Bhang_, the Hindustani _siddhi_ or_sabzi_, consists of the dried leaves and small stalks of thehemp; a few fruits occur in it. It is of a dark brownish-greencolour, and has a faint peculiar odour and but a slight taste. Itis smoked with or without tobacco; or it is made into a sweetmeatwith honey, sugar and aromatic spices; or it is powdered andinfused in cold water, yielding a turbid drink, _subdschi_._Hashish_ is one of the Arabic names given to the Syrian andTurkish preparations of the resinous hemp leaves. One of thecommonest of these preparations is made by heating the bhang withwater and butter, the butter becoming thus charged with theresinous and active substances of the plant. 2. _Ganja_, the guaza [???] of the London brokers, consists ofthe flowering and fruiting heads of the female plant. It isbrownish-green, and otherwise resembles bhang, as in odour andtaste. Some of the more esteemed kinds of hashish are preparedfrom this ganja. Ganja is met with in the Indian bazaars in densebundles of 24 plants or heads apiece. The hashish in suchextensive use in Central Asia is often seen in the bazaars oflarge cities in the form of cakes, 1 to 3 in. thick, 5 to 10 in.broad and 10 to 15 in. long. 3. _Charas_, or churrus, is the resin itself collected, as itexudes naturally from the plant, in different ways. The best sortis gathered by the hand like opium; sometimes the resinousexudation of the plant is made to stick first of all to cloths,or to the leather garments of men, or even to their skin, and isthen removed by scraping, and afterwards consolidated bykneading, pressing and rolling. It contains about one-third orone-fourth its weight of the resin. But the churrus prepared bydifferent methods and in different countries differs greatly inappearance and purity. Sometimes it takes the form of egg-likemasses of greyish-brown colour, having when of high quality ashining resinous fracture. Often it occurs in the form ofirregular friable lumps, like pieces of impure linseed oil-cake.The medicinal and intoxicating [sic] properties of hemp haveprobably been known in Oriental countries from a very earlyperiod. An ancient Chinese herbal, part of which was writtenabout the 5th century B.C., while the remainder is of stillearlier date, notices the seed and flower-bearing kinds of hemp. Other early writers refer to hemp as a remedy. The medicinaland dietetic use of hemp spread through India, Persia and Arabiain the early middle ages. The use of hemp (bhang) in India wasnoticed by Garcia d'Orat in 1563. Berlu in his _Treasury ofDrugs_ (1690) describes it as of ``an infatuating quality andpernicious use.'' Attention was recalled to this drug, inconsequence of Napoleon's Egyptian expedition, by de Sacy (1809)and Rouger (1810). Its modern medicinal use is chiefly due totrials by Dr O'Shaughnessy in Calcutta (1838--1842). The plant isgrown partly and often mainly for the sake of its resin inPersia, northern India and Arabia, in many parts of Africa and inBrazil. _Pharmacology and Therapeutics._---The composition of thisdrug is still extremely obscure; partly, perhaps, because itvaries so much in individual specimens. It appears to contain atleast two alkaloids---cannabinine and tetano-cannabine---of whichthe former is volatile. The chief active principle may possiblybe neither of these, but the substance cannabinon [since then theactive substance has been discovered to be delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol, although marijuana's effects may be furtherhelped by these other substances]. There are also resins, avolatile oil and several other constituents. Cannabis indica---asthe drug is termed in the pharmacopoeias---may be given as anextract (dose 1/4--1 gr.) or tincture (dose 5-15 minims). The drug has no external action. The effects of itsabsorption, whether it be swallowed or smoked, vary within widelimits in different individuals and races. So great is thisvariation as to be inexplicable except on the view that thenature and proportions of the active principles vary greatly indifferent specimens. But typically the drug is an intoxicant,resembling alcohol in many features of its action, but differingin others The early symptoms are highly pleasurable, and it is forthese, as in the case of other stimulants, that the drug is solargely consumed in the East. There is a subjective sensation ofmental brilliance, but, as in other cases, this is not borne outby the objective results. It has been suggested that theincoordination of nervous action under the influence of Indianhemp may be due to independent and non-concerted action of thepart of the two halves of the cerebrum. Following on a decidedlowering of the pain and touch senses, there comes a sleep whichis often accompanied by pleasant dreams. There appears to be noevidence in the case of either the lower animals or the humansubject that the drug is an aphrodisiac. Excessive indulgence incannabis indica is very rare, but may lead to general ill-healthand occasionally to insanity . The apparent impossibility ofobtaining pure and trustworthy samples of the drug has led to itsentire abandonment in therapeutics. When a good sample isobtained it is a safe and efficient hypnotic, at any rate in thecase of a European . The tincture should not be prescribed unlessprecautions are taken to avoid the precipitation of the resinwhich follows its dilution with water. See Watt, _Dictionary of the Economic Products of India_. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-71IA087-000625-B017-304http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/1856hemp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044116 text/html 16723HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:41:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:24 GMTContent-length: 16505 Hemp Article from the Encyclopedia Brittanica, 1856 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information Hemp Article from the Encyclopedia Brittanica, 1856 THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA, OR DICTIONARY OF ARTS, SCIENCES, AND GENERAL LITERATURE. EIGHTH EDITION. WITH EXTENSIVE IMPROVEMENTS AND ADDITIONS; AND NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS. VOLUME XI LITTLE, BROWN, AND CO., BOSTON, U.S. MDCCLVI. [The Proprietors of this Work give notice that they reservethe right of Translating it.] (skip to page 311, bottom right to find:) HEMP, a tough fibre yielded by the large annual plant_Cannabis sativa_, of the natural order Cannabinaceae. There are,however, several other fibres known in commerce to which the termis more or less commonly applied. for example - Jute hemp isobtained from _Corchorus capsularis_ and _C. olitorius; Manillahemp from _Musa textilis_; Brown hemp from _Hibiscus canabinus;Pite or Pita hemp from several species of agave and aloe; Sunnhemp, Madras hemp, brown Bombay hemp and Malabar hemp, from_Crotalaria juncea_; Jubbulpore hemp, from _Crotalariatenuifolia_, and several others. The true hemp (_Cannabis sativa_) has been recognised as auseful plant from a very early period, although probably not ofthe same antiquity as flax. Herodotus is the first writer whomentions it (iv. 74), but he speaks of it in a manner which showsit must have been then well-known, for he describes the hempengarments made by the Thracians as being equal to linen (flaxcloth) in fineness. Its use for making cordage is noted as earlyas 200 years B.C. by Moschion, who mentions that a large ship,the "syracusia," built by Hiero II, was rigged withropes made from hemp brought from the Rhone. The original countryof the hemp-plant is not positively known, but it is generallybelieved to have been the mountainous districts in the extremenorth of India, whence it spread westward through Europe, andsouthward through the peninsula of India. Its cultivation in eachdirection had in all probability a different object; for it isfound to produce under tropical culture an inferior fibre, and apowerfully intoxicating drug, but in cold and temperate climatesit yields an abundance of strong fibres in great perfection fortextile purposes, and loses its narcotic qualities. Thesimilarity of its name in various languages is a strongindication that it has taken the course here indicated; thus, inthe Sanscrit it is called goni_, _sana_, or _shanapu_; Persic,_canna_; Arabic, _kanneh_ or _kinnub; Greek, kannabis_; Latin,_cannabis_; Italian, _canapa_; French, _chanvre_ or _chanbre_;Danish, _kamp_ or _kennep_; Lettish and Lithuanian, _kannapes_;Slavonic, _konopi_; Erse, _canaib_; Scaninavian, _hampr_;Swedish, _hampa_; German, _hauf_; Anglo-Saxon, _haenep_; andEnglish, _hemp_. In India other names are applied, indicative ofits intoxicating or narcotic powers; thus, according to Dr Royle,it is called the "increaser of pleasure," the"exciter of desire," the "cementer offriendship," the "causer of the reeling gait," the"laughter mover," &c.; and he also suggests that itmay have been the _nepenthes_ ("assuager of grief") ofHomer, given by Helen to Telemachus. The intoxicating properties of hemp reside in a peculiarresinous extract naturally secreted by the plant when growing ina hot climate. So remarkable is this peculiarity, that botanistsuntil lately insisted upon the hemp of India being a distinctspecies (_C. indica_). It is now, however, decided that there isreally no specific difference, the change being simply climatal.The secretion is deposited by exudation upon the surface of theleaves, the slender branches, and the flowers. According to DrO'Shaughnessy, it is collected during the hot season by men cladin leathern dresses, who rush with violence through the hempfields; the resin adheres to their dresses, from which it isscraped off and kneaded into lumps which have the appearance ofpieces of linseed oil cake in colour and texture, and a peculiarand by no means agreeable smell. In this state it is called"churrus;" and there are evidently several varieties ofthe substance, as Dr Pereira describes it as being "inmasses of the shape and size of a hen's egg, or of a small lemon,and formed by the adhesion of superimposed elongated pieces. Ithas dull grayish-brown colour, and not much odour;" whereasone specimen in the writer's collection differs in being in largeshapeless fragments of the colour of amber, with the loosefriable texture of linseed cake, and a heavy unpleasant odour.Another specimen has a resinous lustre, a dark brown colour, andis formed into an elongated oval shape, but not larger than halfa hen's egg. This is almost odourless, and is probably the _momeea_ or_waxen churrus_, said to be collected with great care by thehand, and to be highly prized. The dried plant after it hasflowered, and from which the churrus has not been removed, iscompressed into bundles of twenty-four plants each, and is soldin the bazaars of India under the name of gunjah. The largerleaves and capsules, without the stalks, are also compressed intoirregular sized masses, which receive the names of bang, subjee,or sidhee, in India. The hashish of the Arabians consists of thetops of the small branchlets after inflorescence, carefullygathered and dried. Both this and the two previously mentionedpreparations are extensively used for smoking and chewing - thegunjah and bang in India and Persis, and the hashish in Africa.When the bushmen of Southern Africa were brought to England, theypassed much of their time in smoking this narcotic in pipes madeof the long teeth of alligators, hollowed out for the purpose.Its use as a means of intoxication is said to have given rise toour word assassin, from the fact that the low Saracen soldiery,called _hashashins_, when intoxicated with hashish, were sentinto the camps of the crusaders for the purpose of killingwhomsoever they met, the drug rendering them quite regardless ofthe consequences. The physiological effects of the variouspreparations above mentioned are most remarkable, and are unlikeevery other narcotic at present known. It produces inebriationand delirium of decidedly hilarious character, inducing violentlaughter, jumping and dancing. The writer several times witnessedits effects upon the bushmen. After inhaling the smoke for sometime they rose and began a very slow dance, which was graduallyquickened until they became perfectly frenzied, and finally felldown in a state of complete insensiblity, from which they were aconsiderable time in recovering. Dr O'Shaughnessy relates somemost remarkable effects of the churrus, particularly its power inproducing a state of true catalepsy. The same effects do notappear to take place upon Europeans, but this point has not yetbeen fairly tried, as the drug evidently suffers some change inits transmission by sea. But it is not as a narcotic and excitant that the hemp plantis most useful to mankind; it is as an advancer rather than aretarder of civilization, that its utility is made most manifest.Its great value as a textile material, particularly for cordageand canvas, has made it eminently useful; and if we were to copythe figurative style of the Sanscrit writers, we might withjustice call it the "accelerator of commerce," and the"spreader of wealth and intellect." for ages man hasbeen dependent upon hempen cordage and hempen sails for enablinghis ships to cross the seas; and in this respect it stilloccupies a most important place in our commercial affairs. For its valuable fibre hemp is very largely cultivated inEurope, but chiefly in Russia and Russian Poland. It undergoesthe same process for decomposing the parts of the stem as thatdescribed in the article on FLAX, called _water-retting_, bywhich the cellular tissue of the bark and medulla is destroyed,and the long fibres of the woody part are set free. This is notdone by simply soaking in the waters of ponds and streams, for itrequires to be dried both previously and subsequently to theretting process; after which it is beaten with wooden beetles ormallets, or by an apparatus called a _break_ or _brake_ worked bya treddle. Sometimes, however, this laborious operation iseffected by water or steam-power. Some of the finer kinds of hempare more carefully prepared; the seed is sown broad-cast insteadof in drills, by which the stems are grown more slender and thefibres finer; and after the water-retting each stem is taken inthe hand, and the epidermis is stripped or _peeled_ off, and thereed or boon is then submitted as before mentioned to the_breaking_ process. In both cases after _breaking_ the stalks areconveyed to the _scutching-mills_, where the separation of thefibres is still further effected by rubbing and striking, afterwhich it is heckled or hackled - the heckler taking as much as hecan conveniently hold and drawing it through a number of ironspikes fixed in a board forming a kind of comb. The process called dew-retting, described in the article onFLAX, is also adopted for very fine varieties of hemp, such asthe white crown Marienburg, and the Italian garden hemp; and inRussia and Sweden another method called snow-retting is used.After the first fall of snow the hemp which has been put up instacks is spread out over the snow, and left to be buried bysuccessive falls. It thus remains covered until the snowdisappears, and is then sufficiently retted. We have hitherto received the largest quantity of hemp fromRussia - St Petersburg, Memel, and Riga being the chief ports ofshipment; but the late war, which put a stop to the supply fromthis source, is likely to produce a beneficial result to ourcolonies. The indefatigable exertions of Dr Royle on behalf ofthe Indian government have led to the knowledge of variousfibrous substances which are produced in the greatest abundancein our Indian empire, in the manufacture of cordage and canvas;so that having been forced into a knowledge of our own resources,it is not probable we shall ever be so dependent upon Russia infuture for this necessary article. The best substitute appears to be the Caloee or Rheea fibreproduced by a plant of the nettle tribe (Urticaccae), _Boehmerianivea_. The Rheea fibre can, it is expected, be produced verymuch cheaper than Russian hemp, and it is nearly twice as strong.Hitherto hemp has had one great advantage over all other fibresin the manufacture of cordage, and it remains to be seen whetherthe Rheea fibre has this qualification. When a hempen rope isworn out, if it has not been tarred, it is valuable for makingpaper; and if it has been tarred, it is even more useful foroakum. This is not the case certainly with the fine ropes ofManilla hemp (_Musa textilis_), which, though stronger than thebest Russian hemp, are almost useless when worn out. The same maybe said of the admirable coir ropes now so extensively used forship's hawsers and other corage exposed to water. These ropes aremade of the fibres from the husk of the common cocoa-nut. The fibre called New Zealand flax, which is procured from thelong sword-shaped leaves of _Phormium tenax_, a liliaceous plant,has been much recommended of late; but whether from thedifficulty of preparing it, or from the inadequacy of the supply,it has not yet become a regular article of commerce. Theepidermis of its leaves is more compact and harder than that ofthe stalks of the plants previously mentioned, and this may causegreat difficulty both in retting and scutching. We import hempfrom Russia, Italy, Holland, Turkey, the East Indies, andlatterly from the United States. That from America, however, isof inferior quality and blackish colour. The East Indian hemp iscoarse, and is in small hanks plaited about the thickness of aman's arm. The Italian hemp is very fine, that variety calledgarden-hemp being the longest of any kind; its superiority issupposed to be the result of spade culture in very suitable soil.It is also as white and soft as the finest white Russian. Of the Russian kinds the St Petersburg clean and the Riga rein(or clean) are the best for general purposes. The variety calledwhite crown Marienburg is remarkably short, white and soft; it isonly fit for fine canvas. The quantity of hemp imported into the United Kingdom was- From Russia | From other countries. In 1851.........33,229 tons | In 1851..........31,441 tons .. 1852.........26,857 .... | .. 1852..........26,551 .... .. 1853.........40,320 .... | .. 1853..........20,619 .... .. 1854......... 1,044 .... | .. 1854..........35,927 .... .. 1855......... nil. .... | .. 1855..........28,010 .... The price of Russian hemp has ranged from L38 to L90 (L=pound)per ton during the last five years, the maximum price beingcaused by the war. Considerable quantities are also raised inEngland and Ireland. Of the figures just given those relating to Russia may bedepended upon, but those referring to the imports from othercountries are by no means satisfactory; for owing to the slovenlymanner in which our commercial statistics are collected by thegovernment, all articles which bear the trade name of hemp areincluded, such as Manilla hemp, and very often even jute. There is one other useful quality in the hemp plant; itproduces an abundance of seed, which not only yields a valuableoil, but the seed is extensively used in feeding singing birds.As the hemp is _diaecious_, only about one half the plantsproduce seeds; but these yield it in such abundance that an acrewill yield from three to four quarters at about 40s. per quarter.As this is independent of the fibre produced it is a profitablecrop in countries like Russia where the land is not too valuable. For fuller information upon the subject consult Dr Royle's_Illustrations of the Botany of the Himalayan Mountains_, and his_Fibrous Plants of India_; Dr. O'Shaughnessy on the Preparationof the Indian Hemp or Gunjah_; and the erudite work _TextrinumAntiquorum_, by James Yates, Esq., M.A. (T.C.A.) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-72IA087-000625-B017-320http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/assassin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044130 text/html 7805HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:41:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:58 GMTContent-length: 7588 Assassins, The by Philip K. Hitti Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information THE ASSASSINS by Philip K. Hitti From _The Book of Grass: An Anthology on Indian Hemp_,edited by George Andrews and Simon Vinkenoog. The Assassin movement, called the "new propaganda"by its members, was inaugurated by al-Hasan ibn-al-Sabbah (diedin 1124), probably a Persian from Tus, who claimed descent fromthe Himyarite kings of South Arabia. The motives were evidentlypersonal ambition and desire for vengeance on the part of theheresiarch. As a young man in al-Rayy, al-Hassan receivedinstruction in the Batinite system, and after spending a year anda half in Egypt returned to his native land as a Fatimidmissionary. Here in 1090 he gained possession of the strongmountain fortress Alamut, north-west of Qazwin. Strategicallysituated on an extension of the Alburz chain, 10200 feet abovesea level, and on the difficult by shortest road between theshores of the Caspian and the Persian highlands, this"eagle's nest," as the name probably means, gaveibn-al-Sabbah and his successors a central stronghold of primaryimportance. Its possession was the first historical fact in thelife of the new order. From Alamut the grand master with his disciples made surpriseraids in various directions which netted other fortresses. Inpursuit of their ends they made free and treacherous use of thdagger, reducing assassination to an art. Their secretorganization, based on Ismailite antecedents, developed anagnosticism which aimed to emancipate the initiate from thetrammels of doctrine, enlightened him as to the superfluity ofprophets and encouraged him to believe nothing and dare all.Below the grand master stood the grand priors, each in charge ofa particular district. After these came the ordinarypropagandists. The lowest degree of the order comprised the"fida'is", who stood ready to execute whatever ordersthe grand master issued. A graphic, though late and secondhad,description of the method by which the master of Alamut is saidto have hypnotized his "self-sacrificing ones" with theuse of hashish has come down to us from Marco Polo, who passed inthat neighborhood in 1271 or 1272. After describing in glowingterms the magnificent garden surrounding the elegant pavilionsand palaces built by the grand master at Alamut, Polo proceeds: "Now no man was allowed to enter the Garden save thosewhom he intended to be his ASHISHIN. There was a fortress at theentrance to the Garden, strong enough to resist all the world,and there was no other way to get in. He kept at his Court anumber of the youths of the country, from twelve to twenty yearsof age, such as had a taste for soldiering... Then he wouldintroduce them into his Garden, some four, or six, or ten at atime, having first made them drink a certain potion which castthem into a deep sleep, and then causing them to be lifted andcarried in. So when they awoke they found themselves in theGarden. "When therefore they awoke, and found themselves in aplace so charming, they deemed that it was Paradise in verytruth. And the ladies and damsels dallied with them to theirhearts' content... "So when the Old Man would have any prince slain, hewould say to such a youth: 'Go thou and slay So and So; and whenthou returnest my Angels shall bear thee into Paradise. Andshouldst thou die, natheless even so will I send my Angels tocarry thee back into Paradise.'" (from 'The Book of Ser Marco Polo, the Venetian', translatedby Henry Yule, London, 1875.) The Assassination in 1092 of the illustrious vizir of theSaljug sultanate, Nizam-al-Mulk, by a fida'i disguised as a Sufi,was the first of a series of mysterious murders which plunged theMuslim world into terror. When in the same year the Saljug SultanMalikshah bestirred himself and sent a disciplinary force againstthe fortress, its garrison made a night sortie and repelled thebesieging army. Other attempts by caliphs and sultans provedequally futile until finally the Mongolian Hulagu, who destroyedthe caliphate, seized the fortress in 1256 together with itssubsidary castles in Persia. Since the Assassin books andrecordswere destroyed, our information about this strange andspectacular order is derived mainly from hostile sources. As early as the last years of the eleventh century theAssassins had succeeded in setting firm foot in Syria and winningas convert the Saljug prince of Aleppo, Ridwan ibn-Tutush (diedin 1113). By 1140 they had captured the hill fortress of Masyadand many others in northern Syria, including al-Kahf, al-Qadmusand al-'Ullayqah. Even Shayzar (modern Sayjar) on the Orontes wastemporarily occupied by the Assassins, whom Usamah callsIsma'ilites. One of their most famous masters in Syria wasRachid-al-Din Sinan (died in 1192), who resided at Masyad andbore the title shakkh al-jabal', translated by the Crusades'chroniclers as "the old man of the mountain". It wasRashid's henchmen who struck awe and terror into the hearts ofthe Crusaders. After the capture of Masyad in 1260 by theMongols, the Mamluk Sultan Baybars in 1272 dealt the SyrianAssassins the final blow. Since then the Assassins have beensparsely scattered through northern Syria, Persia, 'Uman,Zanzibar, and especially India, where they number about 150000and go by the name of Thojas or Mowlas. They all acknowledge astitular head the Aga Khan of Bombay, who claims descent throughthe last grand master of Alamut from Isma'il, the seventh imam,receives over a tenth of the revenues of his followers, even inSyria, and spends most of his time as a sportsman between Parisand London. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-73IA087-000625-B017-338http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/arab1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044140 text/html 8997HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:41:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:03 GMTContent-length: 8780 Tale of Two Hashish-Eaters from 1001 Arabian Nights Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information THE TALE OF TWO HASHISH-EATERS (Traditional) From 1001 Arabian Nights There was once, my lord and crown upon my head, a man in acertain city, who was a fisherman by trade and a hashish-eater byoccupation. When he had earned his daily wage, he would spend alittle of it on food and the rest on a sufficiency of thathilarious herb. He took his hashish three times a day: once inthe morning on an empty stomach, once at noon, and once atsundown. Thus he was never lacking in extravagent gaity. Yet heworked hard enough at his fishing, though sometimes in a veryextravagent fashion. On a certain evening, for instance, when he had taken a largerdose of his favorite drug than usual, he lit a tallow candle andsat in front of it, asking himself eager questions and answeringwith obliging wit. After some hours of this delight, he becameaware of the cool silence of the night about him and the clearlight of a full moon abouve his head, and exclaimed affably tohimself: "Dear friend, the silent streets and the cool ofthe moon invite us to a walk. Let us go forth, while all theworld is in bed and none may mar our solitary exaltation."Speaking in this way to himself, the fisherman left his house andbegan to walk towards the river; but, as he went, he saw thelight of the full moon lying in the roadway and took it to be thewater of the river. "My dear old friend the fisherman,"he said, "get your line and take the best of the fishing,while your rivals are indoors." So he ran back and fetchedhis hook and line, and cast into the glittering patch ofmoonlight on the road. Soon an enormous dog, tempted by the smell of the bait,swallowed the hook greedily and then, feeling the barb, madedesperate efforts to get loose. The fisherman struggled for sometime against this enormous fish, but at last he was pulled overand rolled into the moonlight. Even then he would not let go hisline, but held on grimly, uttering frightened cries. "Help,help, good Mussulmans!" he shouted. "Help me to securethis mighty fish, for he is dragging me into the deeps! Help,help, good friends, for I am drowning!" The guards of thatquarter ran up at the noise and began laughing at the fisherman'santics; but when he yelled: "Allah curse you, O sons ofbitches! Is it a time to laugh when I am drowning?" theygrew angry and, after giving him a sound beating, dragged himinto the presence of the kadi. At this point Shahrazad saw the approach of morning anddiscreetly fell silent. BUT WHEN THE SEVEN-HUNDRED-AND-NINETY-EIGHTH NIGHT HAD COMESHE said: Allah had willed that the kadi should also be addicted to theuse of hashish; recognizing that the prisoner was under thatjocund influence, he rated the guards soundly and dismissed them.Then he handed over the fisherman to his slaves that they mightgive him a bed for calm sleep. After a pleasant night and a daygiven up to the consumption of excellent food, the fisherman wascalled to the kadi in the evening and received by him like abrother. His host supped with him; and then the two sat oppositethe lighted candles and each swallowed enough hashish to destroya hundred-year-old elephant. When the drug exalted their naturaldispositions, they undressed completely and began to dance about,singing and committing a thousand extravagances. Now it happened that the Sultan and his wazir were walkingthrough the city, disguised as merchants, and heard a strangenoise rising from the kadi's house. They entered through theunlatched door and found two naked men, who stopped dancing attheir entrance and welcomed them without the least embarrassment.The Sultan sat down to watch his venerable kadi dance again; butwhen he saw that the other man had a dark and lively zabb, solong that the eye might not carry to the end of it, he whisperedin his wazir's startled ear: "As Allah lives, our kadi isnot as well hung as his guest!" "What are youwhispering about?" cried the fisherman. "I am theSultan of this city and I order you to watch my dancerespectfully, otherwise I will have your head cut off. I am theSultan, this is my wazir; I hold the whole world like a fish inthe palm of my right hand." The Sultan and his wazirrealized that they were in the presence of two hashish-eaters,and the wazir, to amuse his master, addressed the fisherman,saying: "How long have you been Sultan, dear master, and canyou tell me what has happened to your predecessor?" "Ideposed the fellow," answered the fisherman. "I said:'Go Away!' and he went away." "Did he not protest?" asked the wazir. "Not at all," replied the fisherman. "He wasdelighted to be relased from the burden of kingship. He abdicatedwith such good grace that I keep him by me as a servant. He is anexcellent dancer. When he pines for his throne, I tell himstories. Now I want to piss." So saying, he lifted up hisinterminable tool and, walking over to the Sultan, seemed to beabout to discharge upon him. "I also want to piss," exclaimed the kadi, and tookup the same threatening position in front of the wazir. The twovictims shouted with laughter and fled from that house, cryingover their shoulders: "God's curse on allhashish-eaters!" Next morning, that the jest might be complete, the Sultancalled the kadi and his guest before him. "O discreet pillarof our law," he said, "I have called you to me becauseI wish to learn the most convenient manner of pissing. Should onesquat and carefully lift the robe, as religion prescribes? Shouldone stand up, as is the unclean habit of unbelievers? Or shouldone undress completely and piss against one's friends, as is thecustom of two hashish-eaters of my acquaintance?" Knowing that the Sultan used to walk about the city indisguise, the kadi realized in a flash the identity of his lastnight's visitors, and fell on his knees, crying: "My lord,my lord, the hashish spake in these indelicacies, not I!" But the fisherman, who by his careful daily taking of the drugwas always under its effect, called somewhat sharply: "Andwhat of it? You are in your palace this morning, we were in ourpalace last night." "O sweetest noise in all our kingdom," answered thedelighted King, "as we are both Sultans of this city, Ithink you had better henceforth stay with me in my palace. If youcan tell stories, I trust that you will at once sweeten ourhearing with a chosen one." "I will do so gladly, as soon as you have pardoned mywazir," replied the fisherman; so the Sultan bade the kadirise and sent him back forgiven to his duties. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-74IA087-000625-B018-28http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hemphis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044224 text/html 5549HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:42:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:25 GMTContent-length: 5332 Hemp History, Short by John Birrenbach Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information A SHORT HEMP HISTORY, The Story you were never told in school By John Birrenbach, Founder The Institute for Hemp The World History of Commercial Cannabis Hemp or MarijuanaCannabis Hemp has a history that goes back to pre-historic time. Cannabis Hemp has been found in Tombs dating back to 8,000 B.C. Hemp Travels The World: 1. 8500BC China 2. 1000BC India 3. 500BC Africa - Asia 4. 500AD Europe 5. 1495 N America 6. 1545 S America 7. 1992 Australia 8. 1993 England Cannabis use can be documented as far back as 2700 BC (1) inancient Chinese writings. These writings tell us that cannabiswas used by the Chinese for a variety of uses. These includedfiber, oil, and as a medicine. By 450 BC history tells us thathemp was being cultivated in the Mid-East region. FromAfghanistan to Egypt hemp was cultivated for its fiber and drugs.It appears that hemp was first introduced into Europe around500-1000 AD. It is known that hemp was in wide cultivation inEurope by the Sixteenth century. It was cultivated for its fiberand its seed. The seed was cooked with barley and other grainsand eaten. In 1537 Dioscorides called the plant Cannabis Sativa,the scientific name that stands today as its true name. He notedits use in "the stoutest cords" and also its medicinalproperties (2). Hemp was introduced into Chile about 1545 (3) where it wasgrown for fiber. Hemp was introduced in New England soon afterPuritan Immigrants settled, noting that it grew "twice so high"(4). In Virginia the early legislature passed manyacts to promote the hemp industry. Before the revolution hempseems to have flourished in the area around Lancaster PA. Hempwas first grown in Kentucky in 1775 (5). In 1802 two extensiveRopewalks were built in Lexington Kentucky. There was alsoannounced a machine that could break "eight thousand weightof hemp per day"(6), a huge quantity for the time. Hempspread to other states including Missouri by 1835, Champaign IL by 1875, Nebraska by 1887, California by 1912(7), Minnesota by 1880 (8), Wisconsin and Iowa by the early1920Us. The cultivation of hemp was stalled by federal action in1937 by the imposition of a heavy tax on producers known as theMarijuana Tax Act. By 1940 the US government reduced the tax soproduction could take place during WW II. After WW II, with theheavy tax, cultivation declined until 1968 when the last legalcrop was grown in Minnesota (9). +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ Footnotes: 1 Yearbook of the Dept of Yearbook of the Dept of Agriculture,L Dewey, Pg. 296, 1913: 2 Dioscorides. Medica Materia, li bri sex, pg 147, 1537; 3 Husbands, Jose D, US Dept of Agriculture, Bureau of Plant Industry, Bulletin #153, pg 42, 1909; 4 Yearbook of the Dept of Agriculture, L Dewey, pg 291, 1913; 5 Moore, Brent. A study of the past, the present and future of the hemp industry in Kentucky, p 16,1905; 6 Michaux, Andre, Travels to the west of the Alleghenies, pg152, 1805; 7 Yearbook of the Dept of Agriculture, L Dewey, pg 293, 1913; 8 Schoenrock Ruth, Hemp in Minnesota During the war timeemergency, pg15,1966; 9 Robinson, Bob Dr., Hemp experimenter at U of MN 1960-1968 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-75IA087-000625-B018-49http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/brit34.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044243 text/html 11079HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:42:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:06:12 GMTContent-length: 10861 Cannabis: British Pharmaceutical Codex, 1934 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information The British Pharmaceutical Codex 1934 Cannabis Synonyms - Cannabis Indica; Indian Hemp; Ganjah; Guaza. Cannabis consists of the dried flowering and fruiting tops of the pistillate plant of Cannabis sativa Linn. (Fam. Cannabinace�), an annual dioecious herb indigenous to Central Asia and the Northern and Western Himalayas, and cultivated mainly in tropical districts of India, Africa, and North America. Cannabis occurs in flattened, dull green masses which remain more or less compacted together by the adhesive resinous secretion. The tops vary in length from about 3 to 30 centimetres, the smaller tops being preferred; they consist of the upper part of the stem with ascending branches, which are longitudinally furrowed and bear numerous covering and glandular trichomes. The leaves are alternate and consist of simple or palmately compound bracts, each having two linear stipules and bearing in its axil two bracteoles, each of which subtends a single pistillate flower or a more or less developed fruit occasionally containing an oily seed. The taste is very slight and the odour somewhat heavy and narcotic. The diagnostic microscopical characters are the conical, curved, unicellular cystolith-trichomes with enlarged bases; the similar but more slender trichomes without cystoliths; the numerous, usually 8-celled, rosette-shaped, glandular trichomes with either unicellular or multiseriate pedicels; the bracteoles with very numerous small cluster-crystals of calcium oxalate; the red stigmas with long cylindrical papill� laticiferous tubes with brown contents; occasional, more or less lignified, phloem fibres from the stem, and brown, thick-walled, pitted cells from the palisade layer of the pericarp. Cannabis contains a soft, brown resin (cannabinone), the chief constituent of which is cannabinol, C21H26O2, a viscid, reddish oil, possessing a powerful narcotic action, but resinifying and becoming less active on exposure to air; choline, and traces of volatile oil, fat, and wax are also present. Cannabis yields to alcohol (90 per cent) from 10 to 22 per cent of extractive. The ash is about 15 per cent. The following test has been used for the identification of cannabis: Shake 0.1 gramme in powder with 5 millilitres of light petroleum for three minutes and filter; to 1 millilitre of the filtrate add 2 millilitres of a 15 per cent w/v solution of hydrogen chloride in dehydrated alcohol; at the junction of the two liquids a red colouration appears, and, after shaking, the upper layer becomes colourless and the lower layer acquires an orange-pink colouration which disappears on the addition of one millilitre of water. Varieties: Tinctures of cannabis, prepared from African, American, German, and Indian varieties of the drug, when examined by oral administration to cats appear to possess about the same degree of activity, and this activity is not destroyed by long storage of the drug in a dry condition. Standard: Cannabis contains not more than 10 per cent of fruits, large foliage leaves, and stems over 3 millimetres in diameter, and not more than 2 per cent of other foreign organic matter. Acid-insoluble ash, not more than 5 per cent. When a mixture of 10 grammes of finely powdered cannabis and 100 millilitres of alcohol (90 per cent) is shaken occasionally during twenty-four hours and then filtered, 20 millilitres of the filtrate, evaporated in a flat-bottomed dish, yields a residue weighing, when dried at 100 degrees, not less than 0.20 gramme. Cannabis indic� herba I.A. consists of the tops, in flower and in fruit, of the female plant cultivated in the East Indies. Cannabis, in powder (Pulvis Cannabis : Pulv. Cannab.), contains the constituents and possesses the diagnostic microscopical characters of Cannabis, and complies with the limits for acid-insoluble ash and residue on extraction with alcohol (90 per cent) of the unground drug. Action and Uses: Cannabis acts chiefly on the central nervous system. It first produces excitement with hallucinations, a feeling of happiness and indifference to surroundings, this stage being followed by deep sleep. The hallucinations include inability to estimate time and space. In the East the hemp is smoked and almost immediately produces symptoms of pleasurable excitement, followed by depression and lethargy. Cannabis is used as an anodyne sedative or hypnotic in mania, spasmodic coughs, phthisis, asthma, and dysmenorrhoea. It has been used in the treatment of chorea and paralysis agitans. It does not produce constipation or loss of appetite. Cannabis is usually administered as the extract in pills, or as tincture. In cases of poisoning the stomach should be evacuated and the usual methods adopted to prevent collapse and respiratory failure. CANNABIN� TANNAS: Cannabine tannate is a brownish powder which may be obtained from an aqueous extract of cannabis by precipitation with tannic acid. It has been used as a hypnotic in nervous insomnia, in dysmenorrhoea and in menorrhagia. Dose - 0.25 to 0.5 gramme (4 to 8 grains). CANNABINONUM: Cannabinone, the brown resin obtained from cannabis, has been used as a hypnotic in hysteria and insomnia. Dose - 0.016 to 0.06 gramme (1/4 to 1 grain). Extractum Cannabis (Ext. Cannab.) Extract of Cannabis Metric Imperial Cannabis, in coarse powder 1000 g 16 oz. Alcohol (90 per cent) (sufficient) Exhaust the cannabis by percolation with the alcohol andevaporate to a soft extract. Dose: 0.016 to 0.06 gramme (1/4 to 1 grain). In making this preparation the alcohol (90 per cent) may bereplaced by industrial methylated spirit diluted so as to be ofequivalent alcoholic strength, provided that the law and thestatutory regulations governing the use of undustrial methylatedspirit are observed. This extract replaces the Extractum Cannabis Indic� of theBritish Pharmacopoeia, 1914, which was prepared in the same wayfrom Indian cannabis (Cannabis Indica). Tinctura Cannabis (Tinct. Cannab.) Tincture of Cannabis Metric Imperial Extract of Cannabis 50 g 1 oz Alcohol (90 per cent) to 1000 ml to 20 fl oz Dissolve. Dose: 0.3 to 1 millilitre (5 to 15 minims). Alcohol content, 83 to 87 per cent v/v of ethyl alcohol. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-76IA087-000625-B018-68http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/history/pygmies.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044256 text/html 3085HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:42:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:03:33 GMTContent-length: 2870 Marijuana and the Pygmies Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information Marijuana and the Pygmies Carl Sagan, The Dragons of Eden, Speculations onthe Origin of Human Intelligence p 191 footnote (pb edition 1978, copyright 1977) "In defense of the Pygmies, perhaps I should note that afriend of mine who has spent time with them says that for suchactivities as the patient stalking and hunting of mammals andfish they prepare themselves through marijuana intoxication,which helps to make the long waits, boring to anyone furtherevolved than a Komodo dragon, at least moderately tolerable.Ganja is, he says, their only cultivated crop. It would be wrylyinteresting if in human history the cultivation of marijuana ledgenerally to the invention of agriculture, and thereby tocivilization. (The marijuana-intoxicated Pygmy, poised patientlyfor an hour with his fishing spear aloft, is earnestly burlesquedby the beer-sodden riflemen, protectively camouflaged in redplaid, who, stumbling through the nearby woods, terrorizeAmerican suburbs each Thanksgiving.)" Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-77IA087-000625-B018-86http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/indust/CHILD_EN.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122044310 text/html 5704HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:42:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:07:35 GMTContent-length: 5487 Hemp, The Children's Encyclopedia, 1909 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information from The Children's Encyclopedia,1909; pp.321-324 FIBRE PLANTS -- HEMP We all know hemp as a roadside weed, tall, straight, withwhorls of spreading, lady-finger leaves, all pitched at adownward slant, the flowers clustered at the bases of the leaves,as happens with all members of the stinging nettle family, towhich hemp belongs. Wild hemp, as it grows escaped from cultivation, and in itsnative region, western Asia, has poor fibre. But in the hempfields of Russia, Austria, Turkey, Italy, China, Japan, and theUnited States, it may reach ten, and even twenty feet in height. The fibres of the inner bark, when properly separated, comeout creamy-white, soft, pliable, and with a silky sheen. It issubstituted for linen in all but the better grades in the northof Italy, where methods of cultivation and curing produce thebest quality of fibre. The great hemp region of this country is the Blue Grassregion in Kentucky, where a rich, moist, well-drained loamoverlies limestone. The seed is sowed and rolled, but notcultivated after it comes up. The vigorous plants get the startof the weeds and kill them out. The roots plow deep, and thestems soar. When the flowers appear and the tops turn yellow, then comesthe harvest. The stems are cut as low as possible, for the bestfibre is at the base. The September sun dries the stalks that liewith butts down hill on the grass. In a week they are gatheredinto small bundles, tied, shocked, or stacked. In November the stems are spread for two months so thatmoisture and frost rot the outer bark and woody center of thestems from the fibrous layer. This "retting" issometimes done in water. When the fibre separates easily, the stalks are set up todry. The old-fashioned hand-breaks are used to"decorticate" the fibre, and clean it of the fragmentsof bark and wood left after the breaking is done. The freed fibreis tied in hanks, and these are baled for market. After beinghackled it goes to the twine factory. Often the hemp-growerclears $30 to $60 an acre, after cost of growing is deducted. Andthe land is left in better condition than before the hemp wasplanted. The British navy consumes a quantity of hemp fibre in themanufacture of the bags in which coal is carried. Sail cloth,coarse sheetings and canvas, carpet warp and rugs, fish lines andnets, and all kinds of twines and ropes are made of hemp. Hempseed is not ripe when the canes are right for fibre, so specialplots are grown for seed, which is valuable as poultry food. Oilfor paint is extracted from the seed. The plants are best grownin hills so that they have room to branch and produce thegreatest amount of seed. The seed crop often nets the farmeralmost as much as if he grew hemp fibre. In the Far East the resinous substance in flowers and leavesof hemp is a commercial product in great demand. In variousforms, to drink, to chew, and to smoke, the intoxicating drug isuniversally used. The bhang is the dried leaves and fruits. Itmay be mixed with tobacco, for smoking, or with honey and spices,for a kind of candy, or steeped like tea. Hasheesh is the name itis known by in Turkey and Syria. Hasheesh cakes, often huge insize, are sold in the bazaars. The effect of hasheesh ispleasantly stimulating at first; then follows loss of sensation,dulling of pain, and sleep with pleasant dreams. The result ofconstant use of the drug may be insanity. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-78IA088-000636-B021-30http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/history/slavery.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103458 text/html 15807HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:34:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:03:31 GMTContent-length: 15591 Slavery in the Hemp Industry - History of the HempIndustry in Kentucky Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information The following is excerpted from _A History ofthe Hemp Industry in Kentucky_ (Lexington: University ofKentucky, 1951), pp. 4, 24-30, 132-40, 196. SLAVERY IN THE HEMP INDUSTRY James F. Hopkins ... Without hemp, slavery might not haveflourished in Kentucky, since other agricultural products of thestate were not conducive to the extensive use of bondsmen. On thehemp farm and in the hemp factories the need for laborers wasfilled to a large extent by the use of Negro slaves, and it is asignificant fact that the heaviest concentration of slavery wasin the hemp producing area. Perhaps the nearest approach inKentucky to the plantation on the southern scale was the largeBluegrass farm upon which hemp was one of the major crops andwhere virtually all manual labor was performed by slaves. On theother hand, since hemp does not require as much attention as mustbe given to cotton, the number of Negroes on a Kentucky farm wasusually far less than the number necessary on a cotton plantationof comparable size. Consequently, owing to their high birth rate,the slaves increased faster than they were needed. Sale ofsurplus blacks to the lower South brought welcome revenue toKentucky and led to the unwelcome charge that peopled in thestate were engaged in the breeding of Negroes for market. Kentuckians sometimes referred to hemp as a"nigger crop," owing to a belief that no one understoodits eccentricities as well or was as expert in handling it as theNegro. A Lexingtonian stated in 1836 that it was almostimpossible to hire workmen to break a crop of hemp because thework was "very dirty, and so laborious that scarcely anywhite man will work at it," and he continued by saying thatthe task was done entirely by slave labor. Among the slaves, themen held a monopoly on all the tasks connected with theproduction of fiber because, in the words of this observer,"Negro women cannot labor at hemp at all, and are scarcelyworth anything." Another commentator a few years laterconcluded that "none but our strong able negro men canhandle it to advantage." To a considerable extent thatbelief was based on fact, for the tasks connected with hempculture were for the most part laborious and sometimesunpleasant, and such work was given to the slave or, after theCivil War, to the Negro tenant or "hired hand." As longas hemp was produced in the state, at least certain types ofwork, such as breaking the stalks, were largely reserved for theNegro. After years of repetition of these tasks, he did becomeexpert at their performance, though the complaint was sometimesmade that he was undependable. Among the slaves most in demand inKentucky were those who were able to work in manufacturingestablishments where hemp was turned into bale rope and bagging,but the agricultural skill which most contributed to the value ofthe Negro was the ability to hackle hemp fiber in preparing itfor market. On many farms, of course, neither slaves nor,later, freedmen were available or desired, and in such cases themen of the family performed all tasks for themselves. If alandowner was not willing to do this work and would not depend onslaves, he could follow the example of Nathaniel Hart of WoodfordCounty, who explained his decision as follows: For several yearsI turned my attention to the raising slaves were slight from 1830to 1860. . . . THE FACTORIES IN OPERATION In the 1830's new machinery was introduced inthe manufacturing of bale rope and bagging in Kentucky, thoughfor years afterward many establishments continued using moreprimitive methods, depending on hand labor to do most of thework. Rope-making, before the industry was mechanized, wasperformed in a long, narrow building called a"ropewalk," whose dimensions varied from oneestablishment to another. A description written in 1873, possiblyreferring primarily to the walks found in New England, statedthat they were "twelve or thirteen hundred feet inlength." John B. McIlvaine's cordage factory in Carlisle,Kentucky, extended across "the whole square on Water street,from Main Cross to Second Cross," and Charles W. Turston'swalk in Louisville was about 26 feet wide and 570 feet long in1837 and seems to have been extended to 770 feet by 1849. The method of manufacturing has been describedas follows: The first part of the process of rope making byhand, is that of spinning the yarns or threads, which is done ina manner analogous to that of ordinary spinning. The spinnercarries a bundle of dressed hemp round his waist; the two ends ofthe bundle being assembled in front. Having drawn out a propernumber of fibers with his hand, he twists them with his fingers,and fixing this twisted part to the hook of the whirl, which isdriven by a wheel put in motion by an assistant, he walksbackwards down the rope walk, the twisted part always serving todraw out more fibers from the bundle around his waist. . . . Thespinner takes care that these fibers are equably supplied, andthat they always enter the twisted parts by their ends, and neverby their middle. As soon as he has reached the termination of thewalk, a second spinner takes the yarn off the whirl, and gives itto another person to put upon a reel, while he himself attacheshis own hemp to the whirl hook, and proceeds down the walk. Whena person at the reel begins to turn, the first spinner, who hadcompleted his yarn, holds it firmly at the end, and advancesslowly up the walk, while the reel is turning, keeping it equallytight all the way, till he reaches the reel, where he waits tillthe second spinner takes his yarn off the whirl hook, and joinsit to the end of that of the first spinner, in order that it mayfollow it on the reel. The next step in ropemaking was to"warp" the yarns or to stretch all of them to the samelength and at the same time to put a "slight turn ortwist" in them. If the cordage was intended for marine use,it was wound from one reel to another, meanwhile passing througha vessel containing boiling tar. If "white work" wasdesired, the tar was omitted. Finally, the last step, called"laying the cordage," was carried out: For this purpose two or more yarns are attachedat one end to a hook. The hook is then turned the contrary wayfrom the twist of the individual yarn, and thus forms what iscalled a strand. Three strands, sometimes four, besides a centralone, are then stretched at length, and attached at one end tothree contiguous but separate hooks, but at the other end to asingle hook; and the process of combining them together, which iseffected by turning the single hook in a direction contrary tothat of the other three, consists in so regulating the progressof the twists of the strands round their common axis, that thethree strands receive separately as their opposite ends just asmuch twist as is taken out of them by their twisting the contraryway, in the process of combination. During the first third of the nineteenthcentury most of the rope made in Kentucky was spun and twisted byhand and by the use of horse power at one end of the walk. In1838 David Myerle, formerly of the firm of tiers and Myerle,Philadelphia, established upon a new principle a largesteam-driven factory at Louisville. The method of manufacture hadbeen invented earlier by Robert Graves of Boston, from whomMyerle had bought the patent right, and it: consisted, in part, in winding the threads uponrevolving spools, from which they were conducted through acast-iron tube of a diameter suitable for the size of roperequired. In the opinion of officers of the United States navyand others the cordage made by the Graves machinery was strongerthan that made by the old method. Myerle's establishment, called the WashingtonSteam Patent Cordage Factory," included several buildingsand was valued by him at $28,650. The ropewalk, housed in a framebuilding one story high, was 1,100 feet long and 25 feet wide.Down the length of the walk ran tracks on which the patentedmachinery operated as it spun the yearns and twisted them intorope. Three tons of cordage per day, or at least 600 tonsannually, could be manufactured by this machinery. A factory for making bagging by machinery wasestablished in Newport in 1832. Prior to that time most of thebagging had been made upon the old hand looms, but the newmachines turned out a product that was claimed to be superior tothat woven by manual labor. The cloth was strong, compact,uniform in texture, and consistently weighed twenty-six ounces tothe yard. As first set up, the manufactory could process 450 tonsof hemp annually, and the owners stated their intention shortlyto add other machinery for making Kentucky jeans. The writer whodescribed this plant said that "no doubt is entertained nowof the practical success of this mode of manufacturing bagging ofhemp, though heretofore it has been considered as a visionaryspeculation." In 1835 this enterprise employed two hundredworkmen and was manufacturing wool and cotton in addition tohemp. Its total annual output was valued at over a quarter of amillion dollars. At the same time a factory located at Covingtonwas producing $25,000 worth of finished hempen goods each year. Andrew Caldwell of Lexington invented, and in1841 began the operation of, machinery which received raw fiber,hackled it, spun it into thread, and then wove it into bagging.He claimed that its output was thirty yards per hour, which wasfar more than any other loom of the time could produce. Caldwellalso professed to be able to manufacture bagging for three centsa yard, or at a saving of five or six cents over the cost ofother methods of manufacturing. Most of the innovations in themanufacturing of hemp were adopted slowly by those engaged in theindustry, probably because most of the changes did not yield theresults claimed for them. Even in 1860 only a few factories wererun by steam, most of them relied on horse power, and a few werestill operated by hand. Only a comparatively few manufacturersspecialized in either bale rope or bagging, and the majority ofthem produced both in their factories. One of the largerestablishments, operated by Gratz and Bruce in Lexington,included for the manufacture of bagging a "Calender and HempHouse, capable of storing 60 tons of Hemp;" a hackling house18 feet wide and 30 feet long; a "Factory" 195 feetlong, 50 feet wide, and two stories high, "calculated for 12spinners each story;" and, attached to the factory, aweaving house which contained spindles and looms. For making ropethe company had a brick hemp house 40 feet long, 50 feet wide,and two stories high, capable of storing 200 tons of hemp, abrick spinning house 180 feet long and 32 feet wide, and aropewalk "extending 100 fathom," or 600 feet. Slave labor was used to a large extent in themanufacture of hemp, the Negroes being owned by the operator ofthe business or hired by him for a period of time. In either casethe task work plan was used to promote diligence, and the slavewho applied himself could earn in the 1850's two or three dollarsper week which he was free to spend as he chose. The price paidfor the hire of such laborers varied according to the ability ofthe slave. In Louisville in 1834 one Negro, George, was hired for$30 per year, whereas Henry cost his employer $80 for the sameperiod of time. Two years later the extremes were George, at $40,and Sullivan, at $180. "The exceedingly low price oftwenty-five cents per day," was the figure set in 1836 bythe Nicholasville manufacturer who, wishing to retire frombusiness, offered to sell his factory and hire out his"thirty old hands well skilled in the manufacture ofHemp." Wishing to protect insofar as possible the valuableproperty he was hiring to another man, the owner of a slavesometimes required a contract which obligated the employer totreat the laborer well, clothe and feed him, "pay his taxes& physician Bill Should the Same be necessary, & returnthe Boy as usual well clothed at the End of the time" forwhich he was hired. Early in the nineteenth century Thomas Bodleyand Company of Lexington wanted to hire ten Negro boys, from 12to 15 years of age, and five men, from 17 to 25, "the boysto spin & the men to weave and heckle in a Coarse LinenManufactory." In the same year Tom, a ropemaker by trade,ran away from his master in Danville, and shortly afterwardThomas H. Pindell advertised a desire to purchase or hire severalNegro boys, age 14 to 18, to work in a ropewalk. When John W.Hunt of Lexington decided to retire from the manufacture ofbagging, he advertised an auction sale of 60 men, boys and women. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Historical Information WT01-B22-79IA088-000636-B020-348http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/1938_MHC.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122103423 text/html 220759HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:33:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 06:04:25 GMTContent-length: 220542 1938 Marihuana Conference Marihuana Conference HELD DECEMBER 5, 1938 in the UNITED STATESBureau of Internal Revenue Building (Room 3003) Washington D. C. CALLED BY THE BUREAU OF NARCOTICS OF THE UNITEDSTATES TREASURY DEPARTMENT PRESIDED OVER BY MR. H. J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONEROF NARCOTICS, AND MR. H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTINGCHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT MARIHUANA CONFERENCE INDEX 	Page Conferees Present:	2 - 3 OPENING STATEMENT OF H.J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONER OF NARCOTICS, containing Review of Proceedings of Sub-Committee on Cannabis of Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium, League of Nations:	4-16 STATEMENT OF DR. A. H .WRIGHT, PROFESSOR OF AGRONOMY, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN, relating to growthof Hemp, where seeds are produced, and Hemp is grown in United States:	16 - 27 STATEMENT OF MR. FRANKLIN, CHIEF OF DRUG CONTROL, STATE OFNEW YORK, as to growth of Marihuana in that state.	27 - 29STATEMENT OF DR. B. B. ROBINSON,BUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, relative to experiments as to World Production of Hemp, and quantity of Production in United States and Growth and Production of Cannabis, and Comparative Results obtained from Seed obtained from various Countries:	29 - 49 STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, CHIEF CHEMIST, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, as to Tests made from Seeds of Hemp in various Countries:	42- 43STATEMENT OF MR. HENRY FULLER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, as to his Experience in Growth of Cannabis:	49 - 55MARIHUANA CONFERENCEINDEX -(Continued)	Page STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, PROFESSOR OF PHARMACOLOGY, TEMPLE UNIVERSITY, relating to Effects of Marihuana on Organs of Body:	55- 60 STATEMENT OF DR. S. LOEWE, PHARMACOLOGIST, CORNELL UNIVERSITY MEDICAL COLLEGE, as to Bio-Assay of Marihuana	60 - 65 STATEMENT OF DR. WALTER BROMBERG, SENIOR PSYCHIATRIST, DEPARTMENT OF HOSPITALS, NEW YORK CITY, relating to varying Effects of Marihuana in various Classes of Individuals:	65 - 88 Discussion on Pharmacological Phases of Marihuana Problem:	89 -133 STATEMENT OF H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT:	133 -137 STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. BLATT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY, Relative to Survey of Chemical Constituents of Cannabis Sativa:	137-143 STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, TREEASURY DEPARTMENT, containing Report of Department of Attacks on Marihuana Problems:	143 -151 STATEMENT OF DR. JOSEPH LEVINE, CHEMIST, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, as to Tests for Identification of Marihuana	152 -160STATEMENT OF MR. LOUIS BENJAMIN, CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENT, as to Tests:	160-1643MARIHUANA CONFERENCE..... INDEX -(Continued)	Page STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, as to Tests:	162-164 STATEMENT OF DR. H. M. LANCASTER, CHIEF DOMINION ANALYST, CANADIAN GOVERMENT, in relation to Tests:	165 -l70STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES COUCH,PATHOLOGICAL DIVISION, BUREAU OF ANIMAL INDUSTRY, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE:	170 -173General Discussion:	173-1782 BY COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I want to express to you the appreciation of the Treasury Department for giving your valuable time in an effort to assist the Government in this important work.I will now introduce the conferees in attendance:DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, Chief Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics DR. JOSEPH LEVINE, Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics LOUIS BENJAMIN, Chemist, Treasury DepartmentDR. B. B. ROBINSON, Bureau of Plant Industry,Department of AgricultureDR. HERBERT O. CALVERY, Chief, Division of Pharmacology, Food & Drug Administrs.tion, Department of AgricultureDR. ROBERT P. HERWICK, Food & Drug Administration, Department of AgricultureDR. LAWRENCE KOLB, Division of Mental Hygiene, Public Health ServiceDR. JAMES COUCH, Pathological Division, Bureau of Anlmal Industry, Department of AgricultureDR. A.H. BLATT, Professor of Chemistry, HowardUniversityDR. S. LOEWE, Pharmacologist, Cornell UniversityMedical CollegeDR. A.H. WRIGHT, Professor of Agronomy, University of WisconsinDR. WALTER BROMBERG, Senior Psychiatrist, Department of Hospitals, City of New York3DR. JAMES C. MUNCH, Professor of Pharmacology, Temple UniversityMR. H. M. LANCASTER, Chief Dominion Analyst, Canadian Government, Ottawa, CanadaMR. HENRY FULLER, Consulting Chemist, Washington, D. C.MR. FRANK SMITH, Chief of Drug Control, State of New York.DR. JAMES HIBBEN, Geophysical Laboratory Carnegie Institute of WashingtonMR. FRED T. MERRILL, Foreign Policy Association Washington, D. C.MR. PETER VALAER, Chemist, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S. Treasury Department, Washington, D. C.DR. W. V. LINDER, Chief, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S. Treasury Department, Washington, D. C.MR. PAUL W. SIMONDS, Assn. Chief, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S. Treasury Department, Washington, D. C.MR. MORRIS KAPLAN, Office of the Chief, Division of Laboratories, U. S. Bureau of CustomsDR. S. T. SCHICKTANZ, Chemist, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory, U. S. Treasury Department4Commissioner Anslinger:I assume the press will be after us. The Treasury Department has not as yet publicly announced this meeting. The Department will do this subsequently. I hope therefore, that none of you will be drawn into discussions with reporters until the meeting is concluded. The Treasury Department will issue a statement on the meeting.I want all of you to freely express your opinions on every phase of the subject under discussion; and if you differ on any point, we hope you will not hesitate to present your side of the picture.I want to give you a brief review of what took place at Geneva, Switzerland, last spring at a meeting of the Sub-Committee on Cannabis, of the Advisory Committee on traffic in opium and other dangerous drugs of the League of Nations. I think this a fitting way to open the Conference. It will illustrate the international significance of the Cannabis problem and show the current status of some of the excellent work that is being done by other nations on the question.This work I think was very important, and I want to give you the reports of the experts of the various countries which will give you an idea as to the points on which the authorities still remain in doubt.5The Secretariat of the League referred to various points submitted to the Experts in a questionnaire drawn up for their use in January, l936, and used as a basis for the Sub-Committees work. He described the research work being undertaken.The Sub-Committee endeavored to indicate on what phases of the Marihuana problem agreement exists, and on what points there is a divergence of views which has formed the subject of exchange of information between the Experts whether on chemical and agricultural questions, or on the medical and pathological questions.Since the Advisory Committee's last session, Mr. J. V. Collins, Government Analyst, Ceylon, on January 12, l938, notified the Committee of his acceptance of the Advisory Committee's invitation to act as an Expert on Cannabis in place of the late Dr. Symons.The Committee received important documents from two of its Experts, Dr. Bouquet and Dr. de Myttenaere.Dr. Bouquet has for many years done a vast amount of work on Cannabis. He is the Inspector of Pharmacies in Tunis.Dr. Bouquet submitted reports on the following points:I	Vegetable products wrongly designated as hemp.II	Microscopic examination of samples of Cannabis.III	Physiologically active resin in the staminate Cannabis plant.6IV	 New variety of Cannabis.V	Influence of drought on the growth of Cannabis.VI	Medical uses of Cannabis and drugs with a Cannabis base.VII	Use of animal charcoal. VIII	Dr. James C. Munch's Reaction.IX	Is light petroleum the only solvent of the active element of Cannabis and its preparations? X	Addiction by certain solanaceae.Then the report is supplemented by Dr. Bouquet regarding the following points:I	Are the light petroleum extracts of Cannabis the only ones that are physiologically active?II	Observations on document O.C.1542 (z) (Report on the research conducted by the Treasury Department of the United States of America, in cooperation with the Department of Agriculture, in connection with studies on the chemical identification of Cannabis Indica (Cannabis Sativa).III	Identification test for Cannabis resin, proposed by Dr. de Myttenaere.IV	Method of identifying resin, proposed by Dr. H. J. Wollner.V	Procedure for experiments.VI	Observations on the causes of Cannabis addiction in North Africa.Dr. de Myttenaere submitted to the Secretariat a supplement to the third note on Indian hemp, and a fourth note on Indian hemp, including a study of the published work which has appeared since May, 1937, giving observations of Mr. Wollner's experiments in the United States.Apart from these contributions from Experts of the Sub-Committee on Cannabis, the Secretariat received a �Study of the Chemical Identification of Marihuana (Cannabis Indica)" by Dr. Rafael Plasencia, Government Chemist of Cuba, and a reply concerning the same subject from the United Kingdon Representative. It also received information regarding experiments on the chemical identification of Cannabis indica communicated by the United States Government. This is the report covering the investigation conducted by the Treasury Department in cooperation with the Department's Agriculture.The United Kingdom also submitted to the Secretariat a communication concerning the question as to whether Cannabis stalks used commercially for the production of fibre still contained resin. That point was also discussed.As to the American documents, we usually summarize all work that has been done on Cannabis, incorporate it into one document and submit it to the League of Nations.As to Dr. Plasencia's experiment; he has followed up Beam's experiments and elaborated a new method which he8states is absolutely and specifically suitable for Cannabis and constant for all the varieties tested, even Merck's extract of Cannabis indica with which Beam's reaction gave no result.Our Government has submitted observations on this paper.The United Kingdom Representative also transmitted an opinion by the Government Chemist who suggests certain modifications in this method. These modifications consist of an attempt to separate the substances responsible for the characteristic color in Beam's test on the assumption that it is a phenol.All of these documents are available in the United States Treasury Department for anyone who would like to study them.It would seem that Dr. de Myttenaere and Mr. Wollner have different opinions on the point as to whether light petroleum is the best solvent for Cannabis. Dr. de Myttenaere considers that so far as is known at present, light petroleum is the best solvent for the extraction of the active principles of Cannabis, and hence the only one suitable for Beam's test; and he has carried out experiments as to whether ethyl acetate should be substituted, or is preferable as a solvent for petroleum ether.9In the report there is also given the list of vegetable products wrongfully designated as hemp,We have a little trouble with that in this country, as it is frequently designated as Cannabis, New Zealand hemp, hemp of the Americas, Bombay hemp, African hemp, etc.It has been found that these were all wrong designators used by various persons interested in the problem.NOTE.--Until very recently. the definition of Cannabis sativa (marihuana) was based upon the traditional conception that the active principle of the drug, technically known as cannabinol or cannabinone, is present only in the female or pistillate plant and present there only in the flowering tops. Since the development of more refined chemical tests, it has been discovered that the active principle is contained in the leaves of the pistillate plant as well as the leaves of the staminate plant. This brought about the advisability of makihg the definition all inclusive in laws for control of the drug found in the male as well as the female plant. It will therefore be necessary to change the definition in the League of Nations Treaty of 1925.Dr. Bouquet, while investigating this question, found that it always has been acknowledged that intoxicating resin could be obtained from male Cannabis plants but in10such small quantities that for practical purposes this source of production is not utilized at present. He realized, however, that it might become worthwhile for traffickers to turn their attention to it, and recommended that the free handling of the vegetative parts of both male and female Cannabis plants should be prohibited.That work was started in America by the laboratory of Parke-Davis some years ago.Then the question of the production of the fibre, the condition of development, depending on the meterological factors of the crop area was discussed. In this respect differences have been noted between the height of the plant, and the length, consistency and toughness of the textile fibres.The growing conditions of the plant also affect the output of its resin, which depends directly on the degree of temperature; on the dryness of the soil; and probably on the amount of sunshine encountered.In the annual report for Turkey for 1937, there is brought to the attention of the Committee data concerning a variety of Cannabis sativa having long stalks. It is grown for industrial purposes in various parts of Anatolia; the fibre is used for manufacturing ropes and sacks; and its resin content is so slight it could not be used for11the extraction of a narcotic drug.That seems to be the answer to our prayers, if true. As to the psychical and psychopathic effects of Cannabis, the literature on this phase of the subject tends to confirm the analysis as to the psychic effects of hashish made as long ago as 1845 by Dr. Moreau de Tours in his book, which incidentally is still the standard work on the subject.Also, Dr. Brottaux in his book on Hashish published in 1934, which I think is considered a veritable "bible" on the subject today, has followed up and in the main confirmed Dr. Moreau's analysis.Then there was discussed the relation between Cannabis and insanity. There was reference to the work of Dhunsiboy, the Director of one of the Hospitals for Insane in India�in which he points out that the prolonged use of Indian hemp leads to insanity.The work of Dr. Bouquet was discussed; and also the work of the British Indian hemp Commission which carried out an inquiry in 1893 and 1894 into the relationship of Indian hemp and lunacy.Colonel Chopra did some work in India which was discussed. He found that in India a special form of mental disease classed as toxic insanity had direct relation to the excessive use of hemp drugs.12All of these experts laid stress on "excessive use."Then there was a proposal discussed to authorize the sale of ganja to the Indian population in Burma.As you probably know, in India. the Government maintains a Monopoly, and various narcotic products are sold across the counter tax-paid.The League of Nations wanted to point out to the Committee the various points that were raised in connection with the proposal to sell hemp.To meet the allegation concerning the increase in insanity due to the use of ganja, a table prepared by the Inspector General of Civil Hospitals in Burma has been added showing that as far as the mental hospital at Tagadale was concerned, the percentage of mental cases attributable to the use of ganja and its derivatives varied during the years between 1928 and 1937 from 0.87 to 4.35; and that in 1936, out of a total of 296 admissions there were ten such cases, the corresponding figures for 1937 being 356 and ten respectively.The Sub-Committee was urged to examine the still-controversial question of the relationship between addiction to hemp drugs and the spread of insanity.The work of Dr. Stringaris on Hashish was discussed. He is an authority on insanity due to the use of Hashish13in Russia. He maintains that a further increase can be expected in the ravages caused by Hashish in Asiatic Russia.Then the question of the relationship between the abuse of narcotic drugs and alcoholism arose. It is still a mixed question, and considerable recommendations were furnished.In Algeria, Dr. Bouquet has noted that Heroin addicts were recruited from the Hashish addicts, and Dr. Stringaris in Asiatic Russia has found that to be the case there also.In conclusion the Secretariat pointed out that, as a result of concurrent investigations, progress has been made on chemical studies and research, while fresh information has been gathered in other spheres; at the same time, certain points still require clarification, especially in connection with the physiological, psychological, and psychopathic effects of Cannabis and with the relationships between Hashish-addiction and insanity, and between Cannabis-addiction and crime.After considering all of the recommendations furnished by the League of Nations, the Sub-Committee then made the following report, which is very pertinent in the light of the points we want to discuss here."In discussion of the matter before it, the Sub-Committee divided consideration of the subject as follows:14(l)	Commercial uses of Cannabis (2)	Medical uses of Cannabis (3)	Effects of the abuse of Cannabis (4)	Methods of detecting the presence of Cannabis(5)	Legal definition of the term "Cannabis.�The discussions developed the fact that the Committee still lacks complete information concerning the commercial uses of Cannabis. The Sub-Committee would welcome further information concerning the physiological, psychological and psychopathic effects of abusive use of Cannabis and the relation between Cannabis-addiction and crime.Dr. Bouquet pointed out that percentages of resin content in the hemp plant raised in different countries should be ascertained with a view to deciding whether it is necessary to prohibit or merely to control the cultivation of Cannabis for industrial purposes.The value of the Beam test for detecting the presence of Cannabis appears to have been confirmed by a further series of experiments, the results of which are before the Committee, including those attained by the employment of several different modifications of that text.Dr. de Myttenaere said that his experience enabled him to state that the Beam alkaline reaction and its modifications indicated the chief element in the various15components of Cannabis resin which was the cause of Hashish addiction, i.e.the alcoholic group.Dr. Bouquet informed the Sub-Committee that a test based upon new principles had recently been devised which will form the subject of a thesis to be presented by Messrs. Duquenois and Hassan Negm Mustapha at the University of Strasbourg in July, 1938, a brief description of which will be circulated to the Opium Advisory Committee.The question of modifying the incomplete definition of Indian hemp in the Geneva Convention of 1925 was discussed, but no definite conclusion was arrived at. It appeared upon examination that such modification would affect not only Article 1 of the Convention, but also Articles 4 and 11 and would necessarily involve complicated adjustments in the Convention itself. It was therefore decided to postpone further consideration of this matter until the next session of this Sub-Committee when it is hoped that more time will be available for the work.Up to the present time, the work of the Sub-Committee has consisted almost entirely of collecting information in regard to the various phases of the Cannabis problem, and, until the Sub-Committee has before it more data than it has at present, it would scarcely be considered advisable to undertake definite recommendations."16We would like to take inventory of our research and see what is needed.The Federal Government did not get into this picture until after all 48 states had adopted legislation controlling Marihuana in greater or less degree. The Marihuana Tax Act went into effect a little over a year ago, and since that time we have destroyed some 16,000 acres of the plant throughout the various States; most of it in the Middle West. About l,000 violators have been arrested by the Federal Government.I am not trying to sell this book, but I want to call your attention to the work on "Marihuana'a written by Dr. Robert P. Walton, Professor of Chemistry, University of Mississippi, with a foreword by Dr. Geller who is a distinguished pharmacologist connected with the University of Chicago.I would like to start with the agricultural phases of this problem, which will also include the industrial and economic phases.I am therefore going to call on Dr. Wright of the University of Wisconsin and ask him to discuss some of the questions that seem to be troubling us.STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. WRIGHTProfessor of Agronomy University of Wisconsin17DR. WRIGHT: Gentlemen, let me say to you in the first place that while I am connected with the University of Wisconsin, so far as the hemp work is concerned, the hemp being Marihuana, I am working as an agent and in cooperation with the Bureau of Plant Industry here in Washington.I had better assume that you are about the agricultural side like I am about chemistry, that you do not know very much about it. Therefore, suppose I sketch briefly the practical every day procedure by which hemp is handled in the United States and Canada, not mentioning anything about the European situation, and as Dr. Robinson is going to review something about the history of hemp, I will leave that out entirely.In the United States hemp is an annual crop produced from seed planted each year, planted in the Spring the same as small grains are planted, the same as corn is planted.It has been grown during recent years almost exclusively in very few sections; Kentucky, Illinois, Wisconsin and Minnesota.It is planted en masse thickly as small grain, in other words, it is drilled in.It is planted on very good soil in order to be a profitable production. It is a crop limited to good soil18for profitable production most every where in the world, and it is seeded about a bushel to the acre on soil, prepared as for small grain.After it is planted, there is nothing left to be done except to wait for it to be harvested, and it is harvested in the latter part of August, throughout September, and sometimes extending into October depending on the section of the United States or Canada.The seed is usually produced in Kentucky, and in the North American Continent, very rarely any other place. In the sections where it is grown for fibre or industrial uses, seed is not produced.The usual, or arbitrary way of determining when to harvest a crop is when it is well in blossom, we will say rather late blossom when the pollen is being fairly cleared, depending from that time on how circumstances work out, but that is when it is begun.It is generally harvested now by special machinery which has been developed during the last few years. It is cut and spread in swaths of even length. It is left in the stuble, spread out for retting.Now, the exact procedure varies in different sections of the country. This retting period, that is the period when the so-called fibre portion of the stem is released19from the woody portion, varies from two weeks to, in certain cases, two months.After it has reached that stage where the fibre can be removed from the straw by being dressed, it is gathered and bound in bundles and shocked. Then it is put in stacks, usually in hemp mills or processing plants.From these stacks it is sent to the dryer, and dried to what is commonly called in the trade bone-dry condition and which would mean 8 or 9 or 10% moisture.Then it is crushed by the breaking process, that is the fiber is separated by the usual process called scutching, and it is divided into two kinds of fibre, one the long stretch, and the other tangled, and then it is inserted in bales.That, I believe, is the agricultural procedure of the handling of the hemp.There is a little variation in Kentucky because of the weather conditions. It is not retted immediately, but shocked until later in the season when the retting conditioning can be done.In the northern part of the country, it is spread on the ground and the retting is done immediately.Now, I want to avoid going into the acreage and that phase of the work for Dr. Robinson is going to cover that.20I would like to inject this thought here for I am sure it will do no harm, and that is that hemp has been an American industry ever since Colonial times It is not a large industry. It has had its ups and downs, but it has been an American industry since Colonial times, and it is one of the oldest crops that we have in the United States.It is used, as you know, from an industrial stand-point for textile purposes, and to a minor extent for other purposes and Dr. Robinson will develop that.Now, there might be perhaps some questions right now. One or two other items I want to take up before I am through.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Go right ahead.DR. WRIGHT: You know I might not have another chance to say anythingCOMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: You will be given a chance. Go right ahead, Dr. Wright.DR. WRIGHT: I was just wanted to throw this into the pot, and that is, of course, that we who work with the commercial producers, and the industry naturally collectively, and I suppose we are justifiable in that, our prejudices are on that side. I do not think we would be human if we were not, and I do not claim to be other than human. We have a small industry in the United States that21has had its ups and downs over a long period of time. We still produce commercial hemp and fibre. Those in the industry are naturally concerned. They have a stake in that they have what little they have invested in the business. They are not concerned about this last law because I believe they were given a very square deal in the national legislation on the matter. What they are concerned about is the public position, that indefinite intangible thing, public feeling about growing hemp at all. They have already been subjected to some rather embarrassing situations. Now, just suppose that as a result of the agitation, warranted or not, and there are probably two views on that, and I am open to both views, the extensive publicity that has been given in the hemp states, particularly Wisconsin where there is much agitation, that some kind of a legislation will come up to put out or eradicate the production of hemp under the Weed Control Department or the Legislature appropriating money to do it. I will not bother you long on that, but I just want to mention that and show what problem we will be called on to face. Those men have managed to keep their mouths22shut and have expressed no views concerning Marihuana in public, for we feel we are not in a position to do so, and we would like to be sure of our ground before doing it.Of course, having worked with eradication procedures and eradication programs, unless you would convince us otherwise we would oppose the eradication program in Wisconsin as we see it now with the immense cost and the things of that sort.Now comes the other phase of it. We have been trying, in cooperation with the Bureau of Plant Industry, and Dr. Robinson and the Division of Pharmacy of the University of Wisconsin and Dr. Link who is head of the Bio-Chemistry Department of the University of Wisconsin to begin a study of Cannabis in relation to hemp as a crop. Without going into details, I think I have told you my story for the present.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We thank you very much, Doctor. Before we go on to Dr. Robinson, I think there were various points brought up that our conferees would like to discuss.There is one point about commercial hemp. We did not make a survey in your State, but we did make a survey in the State of Minnesota, and some of the hemp that was harvested in 1934 is still on the ground.23DR. WRIGHT: That is right.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: It is giving us a great deal of difficulty. The farmers up in Minnesota in some of the sections have been subjected to various promotion schemes. Due to the existence of stacks of the old 1934 and 1935 crop of harvested hemp in Southern Minnesota, which is a menace to society in that it has been used by traffickers, we have arrested a gang who took a truck load of this Marihuana into New York.I will say that the farmers up there have been cooperating with us 100%. If they see anybody around that section who looks like a trafficker, they bring out their old shot guns, and he is soon disposed of. We have very little trouble from the farmers up there.It is said that every stack contains a plentiful supply for smoking purposes.Allegations have been made that if it was on the ground three years there would not be any resin left. Mr. Wollner can tell you how much resin some of the experts reported after Marihuana had been lying on the ground three years. It seems that the traffickers can find it. Our own chemists have found it.We feel that the farmer is entitled to a reasonable return for these old crops. He planted the crop in goodfaith; he has no desire to violate the law, and we have24been assured that the removal of the harvested crops is very desirable. It is a very difficult situation.Have you any observations to make, or any discussion on the question?DR. ROBINSON: As to thw commercial procedure, tha plant is spread out on the land, and left there until the stalks are retted, and some of the leaves are gone. It is shocked and taken into the hemp mill. The grower is uncertain as to where he stands, and whether the leaves that are associated with the straw are in the legal sense Marihuana, referring, of course, to that particular clause in the law which refers to dry stalks.Now this is done as follows: the straw is left on the land in the stubble for varying times, as I say, from two weeks or longer during this retting process. It is subject to the action of rains and bleaching and decomposition with the various effects of bacteria and fungi, but when it is taken in, it still retains a trace of the leaves. That is what affects the folks up there in Minnesota.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I notice the term "hurds" referred to.DR. WRIGHT: That is the non-fibrous material crushed and taken away from the fibrous. It is the residue. It25would be the same as shives in flax.MR. WOLLNER: I am afraid to say that the experiment with Minnesota hemp is rather inconclusive. As I understand it the hemp was bundled before it had been permitted to ret for an extended period of time.It may be we will find that if the hemp is permitted to ret before it is stacked, a further decomposition of the drug will ensue. However, we do know that the Minnesota hemp of 1934 is active.DR. WRIGHT: It would be active.MR. WOLLNER. It is active but whether the activity was retained by improper handling of the hemp, I don't know. As I understand it they were advised to bunch their hemp before it was retted.DR. WRIGHT: It was never rotted or retted. The plan of handling in Minnesota was unauthorized. In other words, it was contrary to the usual procedure. They put the green hemp or the semi-green hemp in a bundle, and at a later stage it would be known in the trade as green hemp. That was never used for textile purposes. It was not suitable for textile purposes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Then, Dr. Wright, your opinion is that if harvested properly most of the leaves avould remain on the ground and not adhere to the stalks?26DR. WRIGHT: I will be perfectly frank in telling you that will vary in seasonal conditions, and so we are much concerned about that. There are leaves left. As to the condition of those leaves, we don't know. They are left, and there is no use in denying that. There are considerable left on the straw. There are not a great deal, but there are leaves left.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Then prompt harvesting would reduce this danger we are now confronted with? DR. WRIGHT: It would.DR. MATCHETT: What about the hemp stacked green in Kentucky; doesn't that mold more than that left on the ground?DR. WRIGHT: Hemp is left in the shock in Kentucky. You will correct me Dr. Robinson, if I'm wrong, because it has been fifteen years since I was down there, but it is my impression that it is shocked. It is first spread and allowed to wilt on the ground.DR. MATCHETT: Then there is no molding?DR. WRIGHT: If properly handled there will be no molding. MR. WOLLNER: From our point of view that would be improper handling; there would be no decomposition of the resin.27DR. WRIGHT: The general weathering we would get would be during the curing stage.MR. WOLLNER: How long, about, does that take?DR. WRIGHT: Now, after it is shocked, cured and stacked, later it is spread on the land again and retted.DR. MATCHETT: But, during this period, of course, it would be in excellent condition for smoking, - that is, relatively dry in the stack.DR. WRIGHT: From the time it is cut until it is rotted, whatever leaves there are should be suitable for Marihuana.MR. SMITH: While we have not found in New York State a large agricultural growth, we do find that the largest part of our growth, instead of being on good soil, is on poor soil.For the past two years when I have been looking for wild growth, I have found it in dumps or soil that has a high content of ashes or cinders, and I have found it trying to grow it in my own garden but the growth does not begin to compare with that of the cinder growth, and as a matter of fact we have found that most recently the wild growth seeks that kind of soil.That does not prove anything, of course, except we have probably most of our wild growth coming from ashes28and cinders and public dumps. This did strike me very forcibly, and what struck me more forcibly was that we had some of the biggest growths in Brooklyn where it was almost a clear cinder dump.Our experience in New York State so far has not produced anyone who desired to be licensed as a cultivator.I think some of that might be offset if the public was assured that the cultivator would have to be licensed, after proper investigation, and that definite qualifications exist to establish control.DR. WRIGHT: As to your first statement about hemp growing on cinder beds, wild hemp, - it is not a fibrous hemp. As all of you who are familMWith the middle west know, you will find blocks that were formerly even cinder beds, but fibrous hemp will not grow there.MR. SMITH: The point I was chiefly interested in was the public interest, where it was grown, whether being produced by chance or design.DR. WRIGHT: We are hopeful we can clarify this situation. Since legislation may be introduced to eradicate or to bring pressure upon the legitimate producer, I appreciate your suggestion. I think it is a good one.MR. SMITH: We have also in New York State given some consideration to definite measures for removal, but so far we have operated under difficulties acting under nuisance laws. Under the Public Health laws in New York, we can fix a penalty for maintaining a public nuisance. We have in a few instances removed Marihuana from private property where the owner wouldn't undertake it himself, and then assessed a lien against the property within the Public Health law on the ground that we have removed a public nuisance.DR. WRIGHT: It might be construed to apply to Marihuana under our Public Health regulations in Wisconsin. I do not know whether it has been discussed or not.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Robinson, we would like to hear from you.STATEMENT OF DR. B. B. ROBINSONBUREAU OF PLANT INDUSTRY DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.DR. ROBINSON: If fibres produced from plants were ranked in accordance with their world production in tonnage, hemp would occupy a position of probably third or fourth. It would be surpassed by cotton and jute produced in India, and in some years by flax. That gives you some idea of where it stands in relative importance.Dr. Wright mentioned a mattor that many of you are familMWith, the fact of the importance that hemp played in our earlier Colonial days before the introduction of30the cotton gin.The culture of hemp in the United States, I might ay has decreased because of the cheap competitive fibres which are produced by cheap labor in foreign countries, and it is because of this cheapness that they are substituted for hemp in many cases, and not because of the fact that they have characteristics that are better than hemp for cordage or textile purposes.The average world production between the years 1930 and 1954 for hemp was about 750,000 tons. And now, during that same period in the United States in this small industry we have produced about 500 tons. The world production was produced mainly by Russia where I think 56% of the fibre is produced, followed by Italy, Yugoslavia, Rumania as other producing countries, During the past year or two we imported for domestic consumption about 700 to 800 tons a year, so our total consumption, including domestically produced fibre, and imported fibre runs about from 1500 to 2000 tons.Now, many of you here may wonder why such a small industry as that should be favored to continue on, particularly in the light of the detrimental character of certain parts of the plant used illegally.In the first place the United States is dependent31upon the foreign production of fibres other than cotton. The United States imports annually about 300,000 tons of fibre used for cordage and textile purposes. The estimated value last year was about $35,000,000. That does not include some importations of India twine.I do not mean to infer that if hemp were grown in this country, it could substitute for all of this 300,000 tons imported, but it is the principal fibre which we can get in the United atates, which could be substituted in many cases if conditions arose to make it necessary.The United States, is very thoroughly taken care of at present in reference to supplying our own needs on this cordage fibre.Another argument for the hemp industry is the adaptability of the hemp plant to various regions of the country and because of suitability for mechanical handling, and these are some of the reasons why the office with which I am connected in the Department of Agriculture is interested in seeing this small nucleus of hemp industry continued each year until it is capable of supporting itself under economic conditions. I am speaking more of the industry in Wisconsin rather than the promotional attempts to grow hemp in Minnesota which one might speak of an unorthodox processing. But this industry we have is capable at the32present time of supporting itself if public opinion does not force it to be shut doan, or additional restrictions hamper it.So, this industry could be benefited we naturally think, if this Marihuana stigma could be removed. However, the Wisconsin operators are not opposed to adjust themselves to the conditions and are very much interested in trying to overcome this drug problem.A couple of years ago when this problem was brought to the front more vividly than in the past, the Department of Agriculture was naturally interested in it, and the main way we could see to combat it was as to how to get around it [sic]. Naturally there might be less restriction on the production of hemp in this country if we could prove that in certain sections of the country, because of climatic conditions, the drug was not active, or if we could possibly get plants of varieties that lack the drug, which is probably an Utopian view, or that had it in low concentration.As a result we cooperated with the Bureau of Narcotics, in setting up some experiments. The Bureau of Narcotics has conducted all of the chemical work, and Dr. Marchett later on will speak of these tests. I do not want to go too much into his field. But, we have attempted under33this cooperative work to remove or reduce the resinous substance from commercial hemp.You gentlemen who are chemists and pharmacologists can assist the Agricultural program by furnishing the Agriculture Department some working tools or some tests by which we can tell the presence or absence of this drug, or its activity. It may be said that I am throwing it all on the chemists. I am not trying to do that, but we do need something to work with.So far we naturally have resorted to the Beam tests, the significance of which we do not know with certainty, but in the work we undertook last year, it was the only simple tool which we could work with.Now last summer out at Arlington farm close by, we planted a field in which there were 98 small plots of hemp that were set up in conformity with the statistical method of analysis of variances by a man named Fisher.We obtained statistically significant differences between the varieties using the alkaline but did not obtain it using the acid test. The question may arise, then, as to which is the most accurate of the tests in measuring the presence or absence of the drug.In reference to that, the question of the region of the hemp may play some importance. The native home of34hemp is supposedly in central Asia, �and the hemp of Chinese origin which has been distributed throughout the world has practically always been used for fibre purposes.The hemp that has come from India has been of the narcotic type and has not been cultivated generally for fibre. It has been cultivated for the drug. I wish I knew the history of this a little better, but from what I have been able to learn from others, hemp does not appear to constitute a narcotic problem in China. That is of a fibrous variety, and there is a great difference between that hemp and the hemp that came from India. With reference to our test at Arlington, the narcotic chemists selected samples at three different periods for the acid and alkaline test. We got a difference, mathematically significant between those tests. That is, the first sampling which I think was in the early part of June, was different from the later two samplings in that it was lower in that characteristic of activity, the numbers they gave on the Beam test.Actually, the last test was a little lower than the middle test, but it was not significantly lower.We arranged 8 different fertilizer treatments for the various plots and found that the fertilizer used had no effect on the strength or incidence either the35acid or alkaline test.Because of the fertilizer result it would appear that soil vs. variations that occurred probably did not produce any differences or that the soil does not play a part.With reference to climate, so far we have not made a test for we have only had the work at Arlington.  But we plan next summer, if things go well at Arlington, to conduct a test in Wisconsin. We have some cooperative agents in Mississippi and we thought we could get a test farm there. It has been suggested that we try to get one other region, Arizona or New Mexico, or out in that section.  So far, we have not made arrangements, but, if we could get these various locations in the United States, then we could have a set-up whereby we could evolute [sic] climatic conditions in reference to certain tests, the Beam test or some other one if you can furnish it. These are the results which we have obtained so far in the agricultural program to get away from this drug.There have been several reasons I have not brought out as to why we thought we could get somewhere.  We know by handling the plants that some of them are very resinous, and some are not.So, we are receptive to the work you men will do to give us some means of testing our plants so as to allow36us to produce agriculturally some results which we hope will help the industry.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Thank you very muck, Dr. Robinson. You recall what I said about the Turkish annual report for the year 1937 in which it is said that Cannabis sativa with long stalks is grown for industrial purposes in various parts of Anatolia; that the fibre is used for the manufacture of ropes and sacks, and its resin content is so slight that it could not be used for the extraction of a narcotic drug. It might be interesting to get some Turkish seed. MR. WOLLNER: We have not had a great deal of success as regards those statements. We obtained some seed submitted by Dr. Bouquet and I believe Dr. Robinson planted some of them, without any success.DR. ROBINSON: We planted them under favorable conditions last spring. Roughly we may have gotten in the field 200 or 300 plants, and after our first Beam test it was estimated we had about 100 left. About the first of August, I came back from a trip to the west, and we el-iminated about two-thirds of the remainder leaving only about 40. I have harvested about 20 of these one-half were males, and we sent 10 from that collection over to Dr. Matchett to run an alkaline Beam test on. I was37able to obtain out of that .about one-third negative and the rest positive.MR. WOLLNER: Was the amount of resin in these plants comparable to that in other plants?DR. ROBINSON: In harvesting these plants, we merely stripped the seed in the field to keep the birds from getting it and I would say that the African plant was more resinous than the Manchurian plant. It may be that the African plant was later in maturing, but still, by comparison with the Manchurian plant, it had more resin. My hand was simply caked with resin in stripping the plant for the seed.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: The Indian Government report for 1934 shows that where they did not have this type of hemp all of the resin was imported from Central Asia.It is stated that the hemp cultivated in Europe does not carry the intoxicating properties of Indian hemp. While it is believed that the European hemp does not contain as much resin as is to be found in hemp usually produced in Asia, the production of the active resin is particularly variable, and there are some times great differences in quantity depending on the altitude of the place of cultivation.Are there any questions that you care to ask, Dr.38Robinson?DR. HIBBEN: I would like to ask if you made any experiments artificially in the new varieties by radiation?DR. ROBINSON: We had a program for a number of years on hemp, and my predecessor, Mr. Dewey, who unfortunately could not be here this morning, reached retirement age three years ago, and our hemp program was interrupted.So far we have not gone into that, but to some extent we have considered it. These other methods we have approached seemed to have possibilities of results if the tests mean anything.I think this next spring, we should be able to plant these negative seeds we have, and those which have tested negative three different times and have been pollinated by plants in three different tests, and we should be able to give the chemists something definite to test.DR. MUNCH: It is my recollection, when Mr. Dewey made a test of the original plants growing in Arlington back in 1922, we found different physiological portents in the male and the female but, at that time, Mr. Dewey had seed he had obtained from various parts of the world, and it is my impression that after about three years of cultivation at Arlington, the growth characteristics of all of these plants tended to the same type. In other39words, they all tended to hemp of a certain height, �as I say that occurred after three years of cultivation.DR. ROBINSON: I think that more or less that result is obtained. Professor Wright who may have had a little closer touch with the problem could answer you better. Wouldn't that be your opinion, Professor Wright?DR. WRIGHT: Yes, under the method used of applying open pollinating, that was the tendency as far as our observation went,�that they were more or less alike.DR. ROBINSON: In reference to that, these stalks of hemp we obtained last year from these various sources, have all been isolated, so they have not been cross pollinated.DR. MUNCH I do not know where Mr. Young of Florence, South Carolina, got his idea for the raising of Cannabis for a medicinal purpose -DR. ROBINSON: He got it from Mr. Dewey.DR. MUNCH: There was a material decrease in the material before he finally abandoned that project.DR. ROBINSON: I do not know how he obtained it all, or that he obtained it all from Mr. Dewey, but as I recall, he did.DR. MUNCH: There is one other question, and that is as to the method by which the seeds themselves were ob-40tained,-is that of any interest to you?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes, Dr. Wright, can you give us something on the that?DR. WRIGHT: Commercial seed used for commercial planting?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes.DR. WRIGHT: I do not have any notes on that. The seed are grown from plants cultivated principally for seed; I mean the ordinary hemp which has been planted for seed similar to corn. It is planted in rows, all harvested by hand, and put in large shocks like those in Kentucky. It is harvested in the latter part of September or the first of October in the section in which it is grown. Then the shocks are dumped over on large canvasses, smoothed out on the ground, and the stubble removed and beat out with sticks in the old fashioned method. This is the only place in the United States producing this commercially.DR. MATCHETT: Isn't most of the seed planted here produced in foreign countries?DR. WRIGHT: I do not get the question.DR. MATCHETT: Aren't most of the seeds produced in foreign countries?DR. WRIGHT: Most of the seed produced for Commercial purposes originated in China, central China or towards41the south part of China and was carried here for cultivation.MR. WOLLNER: I believe what Dr. Matchett means is the commercial crop that is grown for instance in Wisconsin, does that originate from seed grown in Kentucky, or the Far East?DR. WRIGHT: All of the hemp planted in the United States for commercial purposes comes from Kentucky. That is, all of the legitimate hemp comes from seed grown in Kentucky. Does that answer the question? DR. MATCHETT: Yes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Matchett, you have been collaborating with Dr. Robinson in these experiments at Arlington. Can you tell us what results you obtained? Dr. Robinson has told us quite a lot about the results, but I think you can probably elaborate upon them.DR. MATCHETT: First of all I might state we made these tests in the manner that was published by us last year, and in the treatment we divided the tests into six categories, according to the depth of color that we obtained, beginning with zero for negative plants. These plants which, gave us only traces of color, which we felt should not be overlooked, but which we also felt would not constitute wholly satisfactory identification of the42plant, were designated number one.Those plants characterized as 2, gave strong responses, definitely positive, and those as 3, 4, and 5 responded with increasing intensity in that order.Briefly we found on variety No. 1, a Rumanian variety 97.5% of the plants tested would have been satisfactorily identified by the Beam test. That is assuming for the moment the single test would be sufficient, which I believe is generally understood not to be so.Variety No. 2, another Rumanian variety, gave us 100%.Variety No. 3, the third Rumanian variety, 87% of satisfactory response.Variety No. 5, Manchuria, 22.9% satisfactory response. Variety No. 6, Chinese, 13.8% satisfactory. Variety No. 9, Italian, 98.1%There is a very decided difference between the Chinese, and Manchurian varieties on the one hand and the Rumanian and Italian varieties on the other.Now there were some very interesting things in reference to the differences between the three test periods.It is true that there was one rather decided change, particularly in the second test, but there was not as significant difference between the number of negative plants, nor was the difference worked with reference to43category No. l.The interesting thing was where we had many in category 2 in the first testing, in the next testing a considerable increase appeared in category 4, with a corresponding decrease in category 2.The actual number of negative plants was not significantly different. I believe the first test gave us 36, the second test 32, and the third test 40.During the course of our activities we found that molding had no apparent effect on one alkaline test response of either negative or positive plants. We permitted them to mold in a. very moist place for a period of five weeks. There was no change in the Beam test.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I want to ask Dr. Wright a question. In harvesting the plant, Doctor, we understand that the farmer usually harvests it before the resin reaches its highest stage. Is that true?DR. WRIGHT: I will say yes, not knowing when the highest stage of the resin is reached myself, but from what I could gather from talking to Mr. Wollner and Dr. Link and those most familiar with the subject. It is cut in the mid-blossom stage, and from what I understand the plants are usually expected to have a high content of resin at that time.44COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our eradication program, 16,000 acres have been gone over, and as I understand it we will also have to go over that same acreage during the coming year, and probably the third year. Do you know how long that seed will remain dormant in the soil? DR. WRIGHT: I can only give you some guess on that. It is quite variable, and how long the seed will remain in the soil is simply my guess. If it is harvested the first year, before pollination occurs I would expect that to handle the situation under most circumstances. I am basing that on practical observation and experience, but if there is a repetition and the plant does become a volunteer plant, if the same process as followed for two years we could expect almost complete eradication. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: What seed could replace the hemp seed as bird food? There is a lot of growth throughout the country due to the casting about of bird seed. Now, however we require sterilization of hemp seed. We have not reached the 100% point in sterilization but the seed people tell us they should sell the seed in 5% mixtures; but even 5%, mixtures if the seed is not properly sterilized, might produce some wild growth. Have you any suggestions on that?45DR. WRIGHT: I believe that these gentlemen here from the animal biology department might be better able to judge of that than I am.DR., COUCH: As a matter of fact, I do not know anything on that point, and we have not gone into it at all. I am extremely interested however.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think there should be some discussion as to the relative activities between the male and the female plants.DR. BLATT: May I ask a question of Dr. Robinson? As I understand it, the average production is about 500 tons a year. Is that 500 tons of fibre?DR. ROBINSON: Yes. This past summer, we had 1300 acres of hemp produced commercially in this country, and it has been running about that acreage with the exception that in 1934 and 1935 this acreage appeared in Minnesota, and in 1936 and 1937 we had a big acreages in Illinois, but those were acreages planted, you might say, for other purposes than the ordinary use, for there was an idea of producing fibre as a substitute for a wool and various things of that nature. Those industries that attempted to do that, for one reason or another, have dropped by the wayside, and 1000 to 1500 acres is the normal hemp production each year in the United States.46MR. WOLLNER: Professor Wright, you heard Commissioner Anslinger's question for information on the relationship between male and female plants. You are undoubtedly aware of most of the discussions in the past years on the subject of Marihuana, and that it has centered around the female plant. As a matter of fact, I believe the United States Pharmacopoeia refers to the flowering type of the female plant, and it is stated that Marihuana comes mostly from the female plant. I wonder whether historically that might not have arisen from the fact that possibly the male plant flowered at an earlier period than the female plant in the growth of the plant itself, and at the time of harvesting by force of circumstance they were limited to harvesting female tops.DR. WRIGHT: Not actually knowing it, I could not say, of course, but I am sure that is the answer. In the male plant the leaves drop off long before, the female plant, and when the traffickers have reached the plant the leaves have practically all gone from the male, but the females are luxuriant.MR. LEVINE: Is there any distinction between the fiber of males and females?DR. WRIGHT: You see, in fibre, they are cut at an early stage when the female plants are just forming the47bud, and the male plants just shedding the pollen.MR. WOLLNER: Then the male plant would grow as tall as the female plant.DR. WRIGHT: Yes, they do usually reach the same height.MR. WOLLNER. When produced for fibre, the plant does not reach the height we experienced in Arlington.DR. WRIGHT: It has reached its full height when cut for fibre. You planted it in rows, too, which would add to the height.MR. HERWICK: I should like to ask Professor Wright a question as to whether or not there was any quantity of Cannabis raised in this country for commercial drug purposes.DR. WRIGHT: I cannot answer that question.DR. ROBINSON: Undoubtedly there are others here who could furnish that information. I do not know of a single case where any of it has been furnished companies for that purpose, but I think there are companies that get it for that purpose.MR. SMITH: There was a concern that grew it in Indianapolis several years ago for their own purposes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Most of the pharmaceutical houses before enactment of Federal Marihuana Legislation48obtained their Cannabis supply from the Middle West. There was relatively little importation of Cannabis for medical purposes.DR. COUCH: In the Food and Drug Administration, we occasionally see a questionnaire sent to the importers more or less of the patent medicine type, and also some well known pharmaceutical houses where cannabis is still found in the formula for certain products. Under the Pure Food and Drug Act, we have some requirements on that, and we are informed what the source of it is, whether gotten in this country or through importation.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think the stocks of some of the larger houses who are still putting this out are sufficient to carry them over for a considerable period of time. Some of the firms transferred or sold their product to other houses, but I know of a number of occasions where raw material was obtained in this country for the local trade.DR. WRIGHT: I have been informed by Doctors that they did get a considerable amount of their prepared processed material from Mexico. I was wondering if there was any processing plant in Mexico.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I did not know they imported it for medical uses from Mexico.49DR. MUNCH: Many of the commercial manufacturers have grown it, but because of the extreme variability of the potency of the material they were growing themselves, they attempted to import it from Madras or Bombay. But the material imported was often weaker than that grown in this country. So the next step was to purchase from Mr. Young at Charleston, South Carolina, or the general neighborhood of Lexington, Kentucky, or Nantou, Illinois. But, those sources folded up within the last ten years and there has not been any substantial production of material in the United States since then. I tested most of the material grown in this country that has been offered.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I suppose that seed came from Kentucky, which in turn came from China.DR. MUNCH: That is true, but I have tested material grown in the United States commercially that was more potent in its physiological aspects than that imported from India.MR. FULLER: I think that came about as a result of the interest that developed in the production of it during the war, or just before we got into the war, because at that time I was in the field myself and grew it com-mercially for four or five years in Virginia from that same stock of seed that Young used in South Carolina, and50which was obtained from the Bureau of Plant Industry. I do not know whether he got it from Dewey or not.The plan we adopted was to cull out as much as possible the tall plants for purely commercial reasons. We could not get so much material from the tall plants. In other words, bushy plants grew up six and seven feet high, giving much more drug than those that grew up taller but not so bushy, When we considered it the proper time, you would grab hold of it. It felt like a sponge. We collected enough material then to produce a drug very much more potent than any imported material that came into the country.It was our experience that it really did not make much difference where the hemp came from, after it had been grown here and become acclimated to our conditions you could select bushy plants from it, and it was just as potent. It did not make any difference where it came from. We used to cull our plants, particularly the male plants. I used to think it did not have much effect, but be that as it may, that was what we did. I do not think we could have ever used the male plants anyway for, in stripping, the amount of material obtained was so small.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: How did you strip the plant?MR. FULLER: It was a very easy process. It was done by women, and they used gloves. In all of the years we51were producing that material as far as we knew, there never was a case of where anybody used it for illegitimate purposes. In fact at that time, I do not think there was any Marihuana used. But, it did not pay us to go on.I think a great deal of the Cannabis sold in the drug trade came from the wild materials that grew in the Middle West and one of the largest dealers in drugs handled that crop. I knew him very well, and he told me at the time.DR. BROMBERG: What further preparation was there after stripping for medicinal purposes?MR. FULLER: We just baled it and sold it.DR. BROMBERG: Any other processing necessary?MR. FULLER: In the manufacturing of medicinals, it has to be extracted usually with alcohol end concentrated down to a solid extract. There was no attempt, and I do not think there has been any attempt made, to separate for commercial purposes the active principle, for even with all of the work done, we do not know what it is.MR. WOLLNER: Did you find, Mr. Fuller, in your growth of the plant commercially, that arid seasons or drier seasons would increase, or produce an increased quantity of resin?52MR. FULLER: I do not think we noticed any difference. Now, I was in that portion of Virginia very near to Washington on the first plateau, six or eight miles out, and some of those summers were very dry. We would get sometimes six weeks without rain, and it did not seem to affect the yield at all. One season, I recall particularly, there was a great deal of rain, and the crop was just about the same.MR. WOLLNER: I would like to offer this thought to the Department of Agriculture. The statement is invariably made by people in Europe and the Far East and Near East that the amount of resin produced by a plant is in a measure proportionate to the rainfall, and the less rainfall the more resin. I wonder whether we are actually dealing with the question of the variation in the amount of resin produced as against the amount of resin exuded. That is to say, isn't it possible as a result of a condition, all that happens is the plant structure, so to speak, shrinks to evaporation and greater amount of resin appears on the surface, but the absolute quantity contained by the flowering tops and the leaves is the same ?DR. ROBINSON: I think your point is well taken, and it was my intention to go into some of those points53in those tests throughout the United States. We collected material over at Arlington Farm last summer at various stages for the purpose of making a microtome test of these little pockets. So far we have not had time to do very much on that, and there are gentlemen here who have done more. We actually found those pockets present in pants two weeks old and on varying specimens which we have in our office. We want back to plants that were less [than] three weeks old and we found there hashish material. Now in older plants in some of the specimens we have of Indian hemp, it seemed to be exuded from the cells all over the surface, and I imagine in such plants as that, if it exuded if you touched it, much more would come off than if it had not exuded. Is that what you mean, certain climatic conditions would cause cells to erupt, and the viscosity of the exudate would be such that it would spread.MR. WOLLNER: I am thinking in terms of opium or the poppy. You can get opium from the pod without scarifying, and the thought struck me, in the case of Cannabis, since the leaf is always extracted in this country, and since in the past the process has been of rubbing it from the outside, in the East, they get more resin than we do, due to the fact that more has exuded but not54more produced.DR. HIBBEN: There is another factor involved in the question about rainfall, and the formation of resin, and that is perhaps the production of resin would depend upon the amount of sunshine, and the more rainfall, the less sunshine. In tomato plants for example, the Department of Agriculture has done a great deal of experimentation as to foliage, and [it] has been shown that the quantity of foliage depends greatly upon the duration of sunshine the plant has received.MR. WOLLNER: I had not thought of that. DR. HIBBEN: Some plants require a great deal of sunshine. DR. WRIGHT: May I ask you this question, - I was interested in the fact that you selected the bushy plant believing it more profitable to do that. MR. FULLER: Yes.DR. WRIGHT: Did you have any observations at all to indicate they were more potent or more satisfactory to the purchaser than the more slender plants; have you any reason to believe there is a difference between the two?MR. FULLER: No, I do not think there is any difference, for the green leaf from the male plant yields resin, and as far as we could determine, the resin was just as55potent as the female. You do not get so much per plant. That was what we were interested in, but, as far as quality is concerned, I do not think there was any difference.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: And now, Gentlemen, if we have no more questions on the agricultural phase of the problem we will proceed to a little more controversial subject. The pharmacological phase. I would like to have Dr. Munch give us a little history of the pharmacology of Marihuana.STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES C. MUNCHPROFESSOR OF PHARMACOLOGY TEMPLE UNIVERSITYDR. MUNCH: So far as the external effects are concerned of the fluid extract of Cannabis, the effects are hyperesthesia, fomication, and cold extremities. These cause increase in intensity. It is not local.So far as the gastro-intestinal tract is concerned, there is no effect upon the taste. There is a tendency towards an increase in thirst and appetite, and large doses will cause nausea, emesis, vomiting, and the drugs produced diarrhea or constipation.So far as the effect on the brain, I am only going into that to this extent, to say that in connection with USPVIII which was thirty years ago we were interested56in knowing whether the American grown plant could be used as well as that which had been imported from India. The study made by the American Drug Manufacturers Association and by others at that time led the USP official Committee to the stand that either the Indian or the American grown material would be comparable for medicinal purposes so long as it was tested and found to have a certain physiological effect, and from a number of bio-tests that were made in which the material was administered to dogs, there were three different effects produced, one effect being to cause the dog to sway from side to side, and back and forth, and finally not to be able to stand erect at all. It was then that satisfactory material was produced which would produce such a response.When it became necessary to prepare revised standards for world use of the Cannabis, we standardized the standards. First, we obtained material from various manufacturers in this country representing the ordinary strength or potency of the product and then many of these manufacturers told me of the material of ten or twenty or thirty years before, and they gave me the products or materials which were of the same commercial strength as they have always been marketing.Then through various means, we obtained drugs and57standardized those products, that is thirteen different products of this series of drugs. Those products were then mixed, and constituted the USP fluid extract of Cannabis, which was officially recognized in USP X.Then as to the method of bio-assay. Contrary to much of the published literature we find that dogs vary as greatly in their response as do humans. On. some 500 dogs I have used, fully one-half were very insensitive, and were discarded immediately. The nervous type or short-haired dog is usually a satisfactory animal but not necessarily the best.Going back to the pharmacological action, so far as the causes, and effect on circulation, a small dose causes rapid beating of the heart which may be followed by less than normal. The blood pressure is usually unchanged, or there is a slight fall.So far as the blood is concerned, there is a definite increase in the hypoglycemiacal content. At the same time, there is a definite increase in the blood sugar. Enormous doses have produced death by cardiac failure, but the doses were 100 to 200 times doses, which produced a tremendous physiological effect.If smoked, there is a tendency to choking or coughing, and all doses tend to decrease the respiratory needs.58So far as the muscles are concerned, the muscles show a definite confusion, and with very large doses there are shown flexor spasms. But not with a therapeutic dose.So far as the pupils of the eyes themselves, there is a very definite contraction of the conjunctiva, and usually but not always a dilation of the pupil.So far as the effect on the glands, there is probably a double diuretical effect. There is a question, and the production of the diuretic effect is unsettled.It has been reported there is a sexually stimulating effect. Some say it does and some say it does not exist.So far as antidotes are concerned the thought is, if it has been swallowed, the administration of an emetic, caffeine or acid drinks in general.So far as the habituation is concerned, it has been claimed and denied, and so far as elimination is concerned, I have not been able to detect it in the urine. So, I do not believe the active principle is eliminated by urine.In the general pharmacopoeia developed by O'Shaunessy in 1843, which reached its peak ten or fifteen years later, it was clinically recommended for all sorts of diseases and later found worthless.There is a definite decrease in the central Indian59drug which stimulated further work done by Casparis and others, after which it appears to have gone into innocuous desuetude until it began to be criminally exploited, which led to the present burst of study.Pharmacology is right I think, when it is said it does not have the same effect, or one effect on the brain, and I may be sticking my head out when I make a suggested answer that the cause of the awful intoxication is largely due to the difference in the rate of absorption, whether the material is smoked or given by solution or in capsules and taken into the stomach, or given rectally, and also the susceptibility on the brain, because in many instances we have given the same material to humans or dogs. Some of the animals it has shown no effect upon, others it has shown an enormous effect with the same dose. So far as animals are concerned, we have made a comparative study and find that dogs and rabbits have proven most suitable for quantitative assays but none can be relied on for qualitative accuracy, that is 10 to 12%. That is a complete change from what I said in my book,1 but it is possible, by running from 14 to 20 bio-assay, to obtain results accurate within plus or minus 11 to 20%. But, it never has been done commercially and can only be done in connection with research.60Through what channels does the active principle find its way into the nerve centers? I should say through the blood.So far as the effect on the blood pressure, I have attempted to cover those reflex changes. It has been stated and denied that there are significant lesions in the brain of humans. Dogs I have used for some years, in some instances showed certain types of brain changes. Whether those are connected with Cannabis, I do not know. I am trying to complete that now and perhaps within the next five years I can answer the question.Regarding the other questions, I would rather refer those to Dr. Bromberg.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Before we enter into a general discussion, I would like to call on Dr. Loewe of Cornell University to give us a statement on the bio-assay method.STATEMENT OF DR. S. LOEWEPHARMACOLOGIST CORNELL UNIVERSITY MEDICAL COLLEGEDR. LOEWE: The bio-assay, in my opinion, is the point where the pharmacologist has to enter this manifold picture at which we arrive in this conference for a very significant reason.61The reason is that all the manifold aspects of Marihuana are focused around and makes the existence of an active principle in this drug, active principles which are chemically not known, and as long as an active principle is not chemically known, it can only be determined from its action, that is, biologically, which can only be by bio-assay.Dr. Munch has thoroughly depicted the many aspects of the pharmacological action of Marihuana. That is what we can call the pharmacological spectrum of this drug, But it must be emphasized, that the spectrum of the drug as such and not on one certain active principle necessarily, for nobody knows the active principle, and nobody ever knows whether there is only one active principle or more than one active principle.It can be assumed from the beginning that there is more than one active principle but this must not necessarily concern the Marihuana interests, because the problem is narrowed to that active principle among possibly many active principles which produces the narcotic or "dope" action in humans.Even with respect to this point, of course, we are not one hundred percent sure that this is the action of one principle or more than one.62Quantitative bio-assay of the active principle of Marihuana, of course, tends or aims to determine that one active principle or a complex of active principles, which is interesting from the human point of view, the narcotic principle. May I mention right here that as long as we do not know how many active principles there are, we have to assume primarily that every action is carried by a separate active principle, and with this assumption, may I speak for the definite ataxia principle, which is the principle which can be bio-assayed in the drug which produces the main action stored in the dog. There is another action in the drug, which I may call the depressant action, the cataleptic action, and then there is the anesthetic principle which can be studied in the rabbit, using the depression of the corneal reflex. The depressant action in the mouse, manifested by prolonging the hypnotic action, is an action which I have observed and used to bio-assay this one active principle.Now, bio-assay has to start, therefore, with this, which one of these actions is preferable for the Marihuana problem for studying the narcotic principle, important for humans?We have much evidence that the ataxia action is fairly well related to the narcotic action.63In detail, there is not much to say. Walton has elaborated the previous effects and experiences of the bio-assay of the drug in a fairly good manner. There are details, and certainly it is necessary to bio-assay a large number of animals due to the individual natures and non-susceptibility which complicates the actions, and action can only be compared in one and the same animal, and only for comparison in a single animal, and the consequence is that a large group of animals has to be used.The mode of administration has been emphasized by Dr. Munch. I would prefer and do prefer, for bio-assay, intravenous administration because the Marihuana action has a very long period of latency without the means of elimination from the system, so that the results seem to be fairly well comparable.Now, I am of the opinion, just like Dr. Munch has emphasized, that the bio-assay method of the drug is not definitely eliminated. I have the impression that the method will result in fairly good accuracy, but it is an accuracy of plus or minus 15 or 20%, and which will suffice, I suppose, for the period in which bio-assay is necessary.It is the unfortunate situation of the pharmacologist that in certain periods of development of active princi-64ples he is available for the purpose, and in a certain sense he is the man charged with the entire problem.  But, his unfortunate situation is that just when he has developed this method and applied it, it is always finally inherent that he is out of the picture for, as soon as the chemist comes into the picture, and the bio-assay is not any more necessary, the pharmacologist can be dropped.  If I may mention this at random, all of these points of view are true also as to the chemical test.  Before the chemist has developed the active principle, the chemical method of identification of much or great importance to the country, and they may be of much or less importance for identifying the active principles than are the bio-assay methods, but only after the discovery of the active principle and its chemical properties, the problem of the chemical test, the importance of the Beam test can become clear.I know of another example where a greater activity of a certain drug was found, and the drug was not white but yellow, and this, of course, introduced many beliefs that yellow colors and opticals would be an easy expedient for getting a quantitative activity.  So, there was developed a number of tests for this drug, going into this problem, but finally it turned out what general color65of the narcotic or commodity was and the reason for the high activity of the drug.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Well, Doctor, we are going to have the chemists confer among themselves, and they will then give us some of their views. I think we can reserve the general discussion for the afternoon.We will now hear from Dr. Walter Bromberg, Senior Psychiatrist of the Department of Hospitals, City of New York.STATEMENT OF DR. WALTER BROMBERGSENIOR PSYCHIATRIST DEPARTMENT OF HOSPITALS, CITY OF NEW YORK.DR. BROMBERG: To start with, my interest in this Marihuana problem began in 1933 when I reported at Bellevue Hospital a group of 11 cases of mental reactions induced by smoking Marihuana and I reviewed the literature and medical knowledge at that time. Also, the experience which I obtained was at the Psychiatric Clinic of the Court of General Sessions over a period of six years. Persons showing overt mental symptoms were brought to the hospital by interested relatives and occasionally on a magistrate's order. For that reason, the vast majority of Marihuana smokers did not reach the hospital. Cases which came before the Clinic had passed through the Court of General Sessions and had been arraigned, indicted and66convicted of a felony.There has been considerable literature on the intoxication and insanity-producing effect of Cannabis, in papers from Asia, Europe, and the United States. To sum up this material concisely, it can be said that the several types of syndromes recognized fall into three groups: (a) intoxication, (b) toxic psychosis with or without admixture of other types of mental reactions (schizophrenia, manic-depressive) and (c) according to Eastern European and Asiatic observers, chronic dementia and deterioration following prolonged use of the drug. Apparently this latter type of deteriorating process has not been observed in American clinics.Our experience with mental conditions following Marihuana indicate to us that there are two categories of mental reaction. The following classification is suggested:Acute intoxication (Marihuana Psychosis) Containing sensory, motor and subjective elements, lasting hours to several days, often with anxiety or hysterical reactions, and panic states and depressions of transient nature.Toxic Psychoses (a) in which there are many admixtures of disturbed sensorlum, delusional and emotional reactions amounting to psychosis, but with the common characteristic67toxic signs and (b) functional psychoses of a typical variety, initiated by Marihuana or colored by Marihuana in their symptomatology, but which continue in the form of the underlying psychosis. In these cases Marihuana represents an incipient stage in the psychosis, apparently.There were 14 cases of Acute Intoxication and 17 of Toxic psychosis.The point at which the line is drawn between acute intoxicating due to Marihuana and psychosis due to Marihuana depends on the degree and severity of the symptoms. Acute intoxications, induced by smoking one to four cigarettes, bring about after an interval varying from one-half to five hours in the individual one or all of the following symptoms: an increase in motor activity, a feeling of excitement, mental confusion, disorientation, crowding of perception, elementary visual illusions and hallucinations, euphoria and talkativeness. In addition to these symptoms, numerous subjective experiences occur, such as increased speed of thought processes, a feeling of intellectual brilliance, change in time perception, various somatic feelings, dizziness, hunger, a feeling of swelling of the head, lightness of the extremities, a sensation of walking on air, lengthening of the limbs and sexual illusions. More often sex excitement consists68in the fact that the possible sexual objects in his environment become extraordinarily desirable. There is abundant evidence in our clinical and experimental material to show that the stimulus for sexual interest and activity derives from the aesthetic enhancement of objects in the environment. It is not so much a matter of increased potency on the part of the user as increased reaction to sexual fantasies and illusions. One of our patients said: "I saw black and white women lying in bed with legs separated, as if expecting men . . . some women in the park with nothing on, doing nasty dances, moving their hips. I chased after them." Others state women appear amazingly beautiful. Another patient said: "In the subway I felt very sexy. I wanted to touch every woman that passed."The speeded-up physical motility has its counterpart in rapid speech. There is a feeling on the part of the individual that he is witty, even brilliant; his ideas flow quickly and words come readily to the tongue. Conclusions and answers seem to come to mind ready-formed and surprisingly clear, without the effort of thinking. This feelings of clarity is, of course, spurious. Actually the productions of the intoxicant are hard to follow, for when he wishes to explain what he has thought there is69only confusion. The rapid flow of ideas gives a subjective impression of brilliance of thought and observation. The sense of increased speed of thinking apparently has an effect on memory - hence the confusion that appears on trying to recall what was thought during the intoxication.The smoker finds it pleasant to be with others and to impart his experiences to them. This is reflected in the fact that Marihuana is ordinarily smoked at parties or in groups. It is felt that this need for a social setting is a reaction to an inner anxiety arising from the threat of bodily destruction implied in somatic illusions induced by Marihuana In the ordinary case of smoking Marihuana, especially with one who is used to the drug, this threat becomes converted to euphoria which develops to uncontrollable fits of laughter. Nevertheless inquiry shows that almost every smoker is aware of definite uneasiness at the outset of the intoxication. The description from smokers in Harlem and from experimental subjects agrees on this point. In the words of a user of two years' standing, initiates "shrink together, feel tight inside and get frightened." After they smoke it more than once, the reality of these frightening somatic illusions becomes less. In occasional instances, and these are the cases70which are apt to come to medical attention, the fear of death, of insanity, of bodily deformity and of bodily dissolution are startling. These patients are tense, nervous, frightened, they may develop a state of panic. Often suicide or assaultive acts are the result of these emotional states. The anxiety state is so common in patients admitted to the hospital for uncomplicated Marihuana psychosis, that it can be considered part of the intoxication syndrome.Notes taken on experimental subjects who were psychologically trained illustrate these points:Subject l. Two cigarettes were smoked within 40 minutes. Immediately after the second a feeling of lightness in vertex of head was felt. Head was expanding; there was a feeling of mild excitement. Now the head felt heavy and there was a definite feeling of lengthening in the legs and a tension in the back muscles of the thigh. Head felt alternately light and heavy. There was a sensation as though the top of the head were lifted with about four inch increase in height, accompanied by optic images of skulls and skeletons. Feeling of the arms rising up in the air.Subject was aware of a feeling of confusion. Suddenly he saw images of legs and arms in a dissecting71room which were terrifying.Subject 2. "I felt a little euphoric at first, but with the first draw my heart feels faster, my eyes a little heavier. I feel myself perspiring all over, and shaking. I can feel a slight dizziness. I feel weak; the dizziness has left and I am perspiring (Asked to walk around the room. Refuses to do so and becomes negativistic).On looking back I remembered that I had sexual thoughts during the time of the experiment. Time seems to pass in a peculiar way, there being a combination of fastness and slowness. I took my first inhalation a few minutes after 9 and when I looked at the clock and saw it was 10 after 9. I was very much surprised because it seemed like hours. The whole experiment seems now as if it lasted much longer than it did. Walking home I walked slowly in front of oncoming cars and felt a sense of recklessness connected with not being able to walk faster and not caring."It is remarkable how much anxiety is developed when one looks for experimental subjects among laymen. The drug is popularly supposed to release aggressive and sexual impulses beyond the point of control; it is also regarded as being habit-forming. The legendary history and social connotation of hashish smoking may help to de-72velop in those who have had no experience with the drug, a series of anxieties masking sexual fantasies and aggressive impulses. This has come almost to the point of mass hysteria. Some public officials are unwilling to allow the use of Marihuana cigarettes for experimentation purposes, on the ground that it may be "immoral," tending to foster the development of drug addiction among the public. This frequent anxiety concerning Cannabis may have as its source the feeling of dissolution and other somatic changes induced in smokers which is communicated somehow to the non-smoking public.In clinical material as indicated, Marihuana effects may range from mild intoxications to transitory psychoses which require psychiatric aid. The effects vary and not all the symptoms occur in every case. Illustrative of the Marihuana psychosis with anxiety reactions, and somatic sensory distortions:A 31 year old white man, admitted March 27, 1934, with a history of having smoked just one cigarette. On admission the patient was depressed, retarded, apprehensive. He admitted smoking Marihuana. Was oriented and memory showed no defects. Physical examination was negative. The patient states, "My hand began to feel blue all of a sudden. I felt like laughing and I felt73funny in my head. it was the queerest feeling I ever had. I felt like I was kind of fainting away like. I sweat and then I�d get kind of chilly. I got the scare of my life. I thought I was going to die and everything else. I knew what was happening all the time. I thought my hands were beginning to get blue. My throat began to get kind of dry. It was a little better than getting drunk. I did not want to step down from the curb�it seemed to be so high. I was sitting down and was afraid to get up." Patient improved and on the second day was less apprehensive, was pleasant and cheerful. He was discharged as recovered, after two days.This case demonstrates visual illusions, which recall the megalopsia (perceiving objects larger than they are), and more common micropsia, which has been reported experimentally and clinically. It is this type of illusion, induced by hashish, that may have been the basis for the story of Aladdin who saw the tremendous genie emerge from his lamp spout in the Arabian Nights' tale.A 32 year old Irish-American, admitted September 17, 1937, with a history of smoking Marihuana cigarettes two hours prior to admission. He felt dizzy, wanted to commit suicide by jumping out of windows, bumping head on the wall, floor, etc. On admission was uneasy, ap-74prehensive, impulsive. Said, "I feel sick. I'm going through hell. I saw trucks coming at me getting larger and I wanted to open the door of the cab and jump out." He was discharged as improved in his own custody about 12 hours after admission.A common type of intoxication is indicated in the following case:A 38 year old Negro, admitted April 13, 1934, with history that he had run out of the house poorly clad and that he had smoked "artificial" cigarettes. He was confused on admission, was dazed in appearance and disoriented. He described a lightness of the head, dizziness and seeing star-shaped figures before his eyes after smoking a "doped" cigarette. He was apprehensive on examination. On the second or third day after admission, apprehension had disappeared and he was discharged as recovered, being clear, composed, but unable to account for his earlier excitement.It is not uncommon to find the history of admixture of other drugs or alcohol in Cannabis intoxication. Frequently alcohol intensifies the Cannabis symptomatology.A 27 year old man of old American stock, admitted on June 18, 1933, at his own request. He had been a chronic alcoholic and displayed definite evidences of psycho-75pathic makeup; had marked inferiority because of his eyes and body structure. On admission he appeared to be apprehensive, a little excited, spoke coherently and relevantly. His experiences were rather clearly set forth--"I was down on the water-front. A fellow gave me an Egyptian cigarette to smoke . . . it was hashish. About an hour afterwards I began to see things. I'd see things flying in the air. This made me laugh and I'd laugh at things not worth laughing at. Then I began to see green and other colors flowing before my eyes. Then things got black. I imagined people were following me and I screamed in my hotel and got kicked out. I still see red lines in front of my eyes and other different colors all stuck together. Then I began to hear bells that would get fainter and fainter and then start again. Imagined someone was after me all evening. I thought I heard footsteps and saw people ducking in and out of doorways behind. me. At the time I said to myself maybe it all affect my eyes. I seen a big splotch in front of me � it was scarlet� very bright, exceptionally bright. It contracted, then faded away. I knew all the time it was due to hashish."The second group comprises cases of toxic psychosis due to or initiated by Cannabis. There may be other76toxic agents present, as alcohol, other drugs, infective or other endogenous elements. Disordered sensorium, excitement and agitation, retardation, blocking with emotional rigidity, hallucinations, sensations of somatic change, delusional experiences may appear in the toxic psychosis. The psychosis lasts from weeks to months. Often the mental picture crystallizes out into a schizophrenic or manic depressive psychosis after several weeks or months (see paradigm). At the onset .of the illness what can be considered characteristic Cannabis symptom-atology is discernible. As the underlying functional psychosis develops, the toxic elements recede.A boy of 16, admitted February 27, 1934, with statement from the family that for two months he had been depressed, apprehensive, worried, scratching his hands in a nervous manner, prayed constantly. He complained that somebody read his thoughts. On admission was well developed and showed no physical signs. Patient was agitated, depressed, talked constantly in a bizarre manner about the devil influencing him, etc. Said: "I felt lightly when I was walking - as if I weighed only 10 pounds. I felt like running my whole body was light. I felt like jumping. As if I was walking on air. I felt happy. Then I saw yellow lights all around me. I saw blue and green77too. The colors were more bright than usual. There are just masses of colors - sometimes I see a black cross with everything red behind it. That means there is a God. He is helping me. The devil knows the evil thoughts in me." This agitated condition improved and patient was discharged about 3 weeks after admission as a psychosis due to drugs; acute hallucinatory episode.Patient was readmitted August 1st of that year with a picture of a depression with schizoid features. On this admission there were no evidences whatever of the sensory illusions and somatic feelings that he had previously when he smoked Marihuana. He was transferred to the state hospital, where he remained four years, being diagnosed as Paranoid Schizophrenia with Catatonic Features. There he was restless and overactive. He had a marked push of speech, expressed ideas of reference and religious delusions and was manneristic. Said: "I figured the devil was trying to pull me away from God so I cut a cross on my arm. Physically I am the same, but mentally I am another person. ...I feel that people influence me by touching me - like injecting dope." Later he was manneristic, grimaced, was untidy, repeated practically all questions asked, answered briefly and usually vaguely and would say, "I don' know exactly," or "I don't78know." He remained dull, apathetic, indifferent and mute until the present time.The personality factor is of undoubted importance in this group of individuals. After the toxic state passed off in these patients in whom the intoxication reaches deeply enough into the personality, a basic psy-chotic state developed. At times, the toxic features are in the background, the personality reactions being pre-dominant. What the inner relationship is between Cannabis and the onset of a functional psychotic state is not always clear. From our observation, the inner reaction to somatic sensation seems to be vital. Such reactions consisted of panic states which disappeared as soon as the stimulus (effects of the drug) faded. It is generally known in psychopathology that when the perception of our own bodily sensations is disturbed we are liable to be profoundly affected psychologically. Disturbances in perception of the body-model (Korperschema), which is built up of kinesthetic, tactile, visual and other stimuli, and integrated into the core of the personality, elicit some type of reaction. Such disturbances act as a blow to the ego, invoking defensive reactions of anxiety, apprehension, projection, etc., which approach or are schizophrenic in their clinical manifestations. The79following case illustrates these points:A 20 year-old colored man admitted February 22, 1936. He is said by his mother to have been "nervous" for some time, said he wanted to die, wanted to kill himself. Prior to admission his mother caught him with a bottle of lysol. He had been depressed and despondent. He was a boy of superior intelligence as measured by the Army Alpha test. On admission he stated that he used Marihuana for several months and during this time he had heard people talking about him They said' "Oh, what an ugly boy. How mean-looking he is." For four months, August to October, 1935, he smoked three to four cigarettes a day until he began to feel ill. At first Marihuana made him happy. Then he felt that he made a peculiar noise in his throat; ate once a day; was unable to sleep; and experienced auditory hallucinations. The hallucinations started four months ago and increased gradually. He thought his face was changing. He looked thin, mean, and ugly; he became self-conscious. He felt that every-one in the neighborhood knew it. He stated at times he seemed speeded up, but his mind was keenly alert with the development of the ideas of reference, he became self-reproachful, apprehensive and fearful.He was then transferred to a state hospital on March8013, 1936, where he stated his hallucinations had disappeared and his emotional reaction improved. After three months he was discharged to his home; within five months he was readmitted to Bellevue Hospital, where he had gone in a state of panic, and from where he was re-committed to a state hospital. He was tense, uneasy, still retained ideas of reference, acted oddly at home apparently in response to his delusions. Diagnosis on second admission to State Hospital was Dementia Praecox Paranoid Type, which was made about two years after the onset of the original illness.Some cases showed the manic-depressive reactions, but these were in the minority. It is perhaps to be expected that schizophrenic-like psychoses are more common because individuals who take to drugs have some deep inadequacy to start with. The cyclothymic personality is less prone to require the drug.A man of 28 who was brought to the hospital by his mother on February 13, 1938, with the history that he had been smoking reefers for some time. A year ago he had an episode, was not hospitalized and improved from it. On admission patient was confused, restless, apprehen-sive. He engaged in violent daydreamings. At times he appeared to be reacting to hallucinations. He said he81"had a big head." He became talkative, euphoric, elated and overactive after a day or so. He said: "The best thing for me to do is. . . you look fine. I've got to look like you . I know what it is . . . when a Buick and a Packard get together." His speech was distinctly flighty, his behavior panicky; was constantly restless. Would cry, sing, talk.He was transferred to a state hospital on February 24, 1938. There his condition persisted and he became somewhat depressed, but showed promise of recovery a few months after admission. Diagnosis at State Hospital was Manic Depressive Psychosis, Manic Type.Mixed reactions merge with the toxic psychoses. These reactions vary clinically, some occurring in chronic alcoholics, some in schizophrenics and some in psychopathic personalities, and in all of them Marihuana usage was a factor. It can be clearly seen that aside from the direct toxic effect of the drug, the personality of the patient plays a tremendous role in psychotic states following Marihuana usage.A Cuban, age 34, who was admitted on March 6, 1938, to Bellevue Hospital. He had been taking Marihuana for one and a half years. He had jumped in front of a south-bound subway train without injury. He was very depressed, dull, lackadaisical, despondent in attitude.82He was definitely under productive but still strongly suicidal. He described taking one cigarette every day of Marihuana for a year and a half because it took his worries away. For some time he had been conscious that people were looking at him He feels that his body is heavy all the time. Sometimes he hears deceased persons talking to him. He sees lights at times. At times he sees a photograph of a strange person.His friend corroborated the history, stating that he had been in this depressed condition for 3-4 years. He had a work-house sentence for 2-3 months for Marihuana. He was transferred to a state hospital March 18, 1938. At that time he was dull, preoccupied, but lost his hallucinatory and delusional trends. The State Hospital diagnosed him as Schizophrenia, Hebephrenic Type (?) and he was released after two months.In some cases the drug makes relatively little difference in the content of the psychosis. It is for the clinician to determine how much Marihuana influences the clinical picture. In South Africa, where dagga (equivalent of Marihuana) smoking is very widespread, a diagnosis of Marihuana psychosis is made in any "toxic psychosis where there are very good grounds for assuming addiction to dagga smoking." It is felt that there should83be more exact criteria, as we outlined above, for a diagnosis of Marihuana psychosis, by which we mean the presence of disordered sensorium, characteristic colored visual hallucinations, time changes, subjective and somatic feelings. One is apt to over-estimate the place of Marihuana in the causation of a psychotic picture.A white man of 28, admitted January 23, 1938, to Bellevue Hospital with a history that he was in a state hospital in Arizona for 3 months about two years ago and one in Indiana for 9 months four years ago. "I was smoking this Marihuana weed (at time of admission to State Hospital in Arizona). I ran around the desert for a time, ran out nights and one day knocked on a door and told a woman I was Dillinger. I tried to see how much water I could walk in. I was just like hypnotized and walking in my sleep. Sometimes I feel like something's controlling me. Sometimes I feel just like I'm talking to somebody with my mouth closed. I just ask them a question with my brain and they answer. Sometimes it's a man, sometimes it's a woman's voice; it just works in my temple. I think it's imagination. It's just like a dream. People stare at me. Sometimes I see different colors. I had that years ago - just like a light coming towards me; it's not a light, it's an arc.84His effect was flat and he was dejected and slow-speaking. Showed blocking and evasiveness on. sex experiences. Had ideas of reference and persecutory ideas.He was transferred to a state hospital, where he was noted as being preoccupied, under productive and somewhat dissociated. He stated that he had some sort of seizures that were not really fits, but that when he had them if he had a sword he would not mind cutting everybody's head off. He also believed if anybody got killed near the place where he worked he would be blamed for it. Said that when he looks in bright lights he sees visions like all sorts of different colors, blues, whites, and these seem to blind him. A diagnosis was made of Dementia Praecox, Paranoid Type, and he was still in State Hospital after five months.In psychopathic personalities, those with deep inferiorities, use of drugs is a method of supporting the ego. In these cases Marihuana does not always produce the desirable effect. Apparently it is not strong enough to affect the problems which have involved deeper layers of the personality. Such individuals adopt heroin or morphine very soon after a short experience with Marihuana. The experience of drug addicts seen at the Court of General Sessions confirms this. Persons addicted to85heroin, morphine, cocaine or opium never return to Cannabis. Such individuals are admittedly psychopathic in that they need an increment of drug to make their lives tolerable, In the next case, the use of Cannabis represented the attempt of the patient to overcome his sexual inadequacy. In this respect the social psychology of the drug is a factor, since Marihuana is popularly supposed to free sexual inhibitions.A white man, age 23, admitted to Bellevue Hospital on March 31, 1938, with a history that he felt unworthy and thought he had a venereal disease. He held ideas of infidelity against his wife and was assaultive. Threw a four month old baby across a room. He turned gas jets on. On admission he was rambling, talkative, evasive, depressed, self-absorbed and had somatic complaints.He said: 'I was sentenced to the Workhouse for 4 months for smoking Marihuana. I knew then I was not satisfying my wife and I thought it might help. A year ago some friends gave me the weed, I smoked several. I felt calm and liked to listen to music - very happy - exhilarating feeling - that's all."In the hospital he was talkative, discussed his problem in detail and showed some depression, which improved. The infidelity ideas and his sexual inadequacies concerned him most. He was transferred to a state hospital with a86diagnosis of Psychosis with Psychopathic Personality; Cannabis usage a factor.Often Cannabis intoxication represents a stage in the incipiency of a psychosis. The patient who is developing a functional psychosis strives in the incipient stage to overcome the unconsciously perceived difficulties. In this sense Marihuana usage represents a healthy reaction tendency, even though the mechanism may be unknown to the patient. The next case illustrated this problem. A boy who had made a successful adjustment on a moderate level of social attainment began to show schizoid behavior shortly after the usage of Marihuana. The process continued to a psychotic state. What role did the drug play? Could the psychosis have begun without the drug? Was the use of Cannabis the patient's attempt to cure his developing psychosis? These are problems needing careful judgment and study and wide clinical experience.A young Negro, 20, admitted October 2, 1936 to Bellevue Hospital with a history of having been dull, indifferent for some time. Insisted upon keeping the windows closed, would not leave the house, but denied he heard voices. Would masturbate openly and made sign with fingers, and actions were decidedly peculiar. Mother states she caught him. smoking a sweet-smelling87cigarette with a white man and soon after got a history from his playmates that he had been smoking Marihuana cigarettes for a long time.Observation in the hospital confirmed his withdrawn, retarded attitude. Psychometric gave an IQ. of 75 with rating of Borderline to Dull Normal Intelligence. Was pre-occupied on ward; difficult to obtain his attention; evasive; offered many excuses for closing window and putting out lights. About 10 days after admission he appeared a little more alert and cheerful. He was discharged in custody of mother as Incipient Schizophrenia (?) or Psychoneurosis, Reactive State, on October 13, 1936.He was readmitted a year later, October 15, 1937. At that time mother gave a statement that for past year, since he left hospital, he had been dull, staying in the house in a "deep study." He seems to listen; does not say anything'. At one time he beat up an old man in the house who, he said, called him names. Prior to admission he had attacked a woman for no apparent reason. Sleeps day and night. Often looks as if he is in a dream, Changed personality reactions for more than a year. For two weeks distinctly worse.On admission he was sluggish, dull and lethargic, spoke in a quiet, low voice, showed empty affect, but was88intact in intellectual functions, memory, comprehension, orientation. He was transferred to the State Hospital on October 20, 1937, where he was evasive and dull. He showed no interest in the surroundings and did not mingle with the other patients. He expressed mild ideas of persecution and of electricity, was evasive and suspicious. He said some people called him bad names across the street. Believes that an attempt was made to harm him. "I sometimes have a funny feeling in my legs (electricity)." Their diagnostic impression included the possibility of Dementias-Praecox, Paranoid Type.Gradually he acquired an interest and socialized with other patients. At all times he was neat and tidy in personal appearance and habits. He improved after five months and was ready for parole.Now, so much for the psychopathic. We now come to the criminology.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I thought we would cover that in another subject.We will now adjourn for lunch and come back at 1:30.(Thereupon at 12:20 o�clock p.m., a recess was declared, the conference to resume discussions at 1:30 p.m.)89AFTERNOON SESSION.The conference was resumed at 1:30 o'clock p.m., pursuant to the taking of a recess at noon.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Gentlemen, the Conference will be in order. We may very well start with the general discussion on the pharmacological phases of the problem, and you can direct your questions to Dr. Munch, Dr. Loewe, or Dr. Bromberg.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Munch, I would like to ask you, in respect to the statement made by Dr. Walton that Cannabis has been used as a relief during labor in the Far East, are you familiar with that general picture?DR. MUNCH: Yes. I think that the product that is actually used there is not Cannabis itself, but one of these peculiar mixtures of datura and opium and hashish and other things.Some of the reports refer to the women smoking the cigarettes for a period in labor, but they are not in agreement with the information I have gotten from the Mexicans or out in Nevada, for example, where they have tried it and found it of no value.On the isolated tissues the solutions of the drug have no effect, or have a very mild, quieting action.If I remove the alcohol, they have little effect,90which means that the active principle is not sufficiently soluble in water to produce an action. So that I do not believe the action is very definitely therapeutic. It is more psychological, I believe, than it is physiological.MR. WOLLNER: Who is Willis? One of them refers to the fact that Willis recommends its use in tedious labor where the patient is restless.DR. MUNCH: Let me look at my copy of this book. MR. WOLLNER: It is on page 156.DR. MUNCH: Did you say "Willis", Mr. Wollner?MR. WOLLNER: Yes. On page 156, "EFFECTS DURING LABOR". It starts out, "Willis recommended".DR. MUNCH: Willis has written a book on obstetrics and gynecology, but I cannot give you the reference to it right now.MR. WOLLNER: All right.DR. MUNCH: But he is one of the authors in that field. However, the work I was referring to more particularly was done by Watt (?) and Breyer-Brandwijh, which [sic] I believe is the co-author of the publication on poisonous plants in South Africa.I have had correspondence with Watt along that line.91He refers to it in the last paragraph there after South Africa.MR. WOLLNER: The reason I ask you that question is because of Dr. Bromberg's remarks, which I interpreted as being indicative of the production of a hypersensitivity. Am I wrong in that, Dr. Bromberg? DR. BROMBERG: A hypersensitivity?MR. WOLLNER: On the part of an individual who uses Marihuana; that is, an increased agility.DR. BROMBERG: The effects I refer to are on a motor activity. You refer to those, I presume? MR. WOLLNER: Yes.DR. BROMBERG: By which we mean the promptness to move either aimlessly or purposefully; that is, in acute intoxication the smoker is apt to dance around and move or wave his arms, or go through movements that are more rapid than he would move ordinarily; move his chair, knock it across the room, talk to people, show a general output of activity.Many of those prisoners whom I have contacted state that they rather slow up or would rather be quiet during this period. There are two effects, in other words.The hyperactivity is not universal. The great, ex-92treme activity results in assault, throwing people around. This is similar to what you see in certain types of alcohol intoxication, so-called pathological intoxication, where a few drinks set a man off into a rampage, breaking things, throwing things around, and fighting.I think maybe men come in on that more than women because of the basic physiological pattern. They are more active anyhow. This refers to women, does it not? MR. WOLLNER: Yes, sir.DR. BROMBERG: Certainly the effects are not uniform and cannot be counterbalanced.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Doctor, regarding these 31 admissions out of 100,000, I think it would be interesting to know just what period they cover. Are they of recent origin, or are they scattered pretty well throughout the years?The reason that I bring that up is that the mental hospital at Burma showed, with the increased illicit traffic in Marihuana, the total admissions of insanity cases rose from .87 to 4.35%. I am wondering whether we can expect an increase in such cases, and also whether these 31 cases are more or less of recent origin.93DR. BROMBERG: I can answer that by saying that the admissions already in the past four years of this type of Marihuana insanity is almost twice that which it was during the first four years of our observation, that is, three years of our observation period.Of course, you can realize that many other cases go to private hospitals which pass off without regulatory medical treatment, and there are other factors so great that I would not put much reliance on these figures. I merely give them to you as true data so far as we have available.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have been getting some reports from various sections of the country showing cases of alleged insanity due to Marihuana which have been brought to light.For instance, there were interesting developments in a case in Findlay, Ohio, concerning a fifteen-year-old boy who showed signs of being insane.When asked about his condition he made statements that he had been smoking cigarettes, and an investigation developed the information that there were two defendants, who were brothers, who were in charge of a playground, and they had been selling drugs that is, Marihuana cigarettes, to boys around there; and we found about sixteen pounds concealed above a garage owned by them. These fellows had94stopped selling the drug, because they noticed signs of the boys acting queer, and they became frightened. They were particularly alarmed because of what they thought was an unusual appetite for the drug.We have a questionnaire whereby we ask Marihuana users involved in our cases, all sorts of questions. As a matter of fact, I would like now to revise that questionnaire, after what I have heard here.One-fourth of those users when asked what effect the drug has on them, say, "It gives me a good appetite." "The first cigarette makes me feel hungry." They become hungry after they smoke, have a heavy and exceptionally good appetite. That is their answer without prompting. Yet that question does not appear in the questionnaire.We ask them --- of course, we have to take their word for what they say --- whether they notice any permanent physical or mental effects, and they make statements which confirm the opinions of Dr. Munch and Dr. Bromberg. The answers are:"I believe it has affected my nerves.""I can not keep my mind on one thing long enough to think clearly.""Loss of memory"; "Very bad on nerves"; "Produces twisted thoughts"; "Affects my brain"; "Dulls my head."95"Causes me to become deaf"."I think I�m more intelligent.""Makes me tired".  "Hard to think"  "Headache and weakness".  "Seemingly dulls senses"; and so on. Then the question is asked:  "What effects do you obtain from smoking Marihuana?" I think most of the answers confirm what has been said about the distortion of space, time, vision and hearing.The auditory sensibilities are affected.We are running into a great deal of cases which have to do with illicit traffic among musicians.The next question is,  "Have you acquired tolerance?" Quite a number of the users have developed a craving for Marihuana.  Some of them stop after smoking few cigarettes, and there is no sign here that they increase the number that they smoke in a day.Some of them vary between one cigarette and twenty cigarettes a day. Others have smoked it once; some have smoked it for ten years.MR. WOLLNER:  I was wondering whether it would not be better, unless there are other specific questions, to postpone this portion of the Conference, which relates to bio-assay, which pertains to a chemist, because all of those questions are related, and go on with the rest of96the program.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: All right, unless there are questions.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Loewe, do you wish to say some thing?DR. LOEWE: Among other things, I have tried Marihuana's action on a monkey, and I went to it with great hopes because I thought really that the psychic action would come out in this patient.The observations were that the monkey reacts like the dog, and is one more of the few laboratory species which really show the ataxia action.The other observation was that the monkey required higher doses per kilogram body weight than the dog, which was somewhat unexpected, and that all of the lower doses to which I have climbed up through the ratio of higher doses did not show anything which indicated a psychic action.The monkeys do not show this type of abnormality which occurs in Dr. Bromberg's material.MR. WOLLNER: What is the relation in the dosage per kilogram of weight of dog and human being?DR. LOEWE: The dog dosage per kilogram of weight and the human being per kilogram of weight, are fairly97close. The higher doses used in humans are capable of showing the slightest ataxia symptoms, which would point to the fact that the dosage is almost the same.DR. MATCHETT: This ataxia is never apparent in humans at all?DR. LOEWE: I have no experience; I never saw it. DR. BROMBERG: I never saw it either.MR. WOLLNER: Have you any observations about ataxia symptoms comparable to those in dogs as to humans?DR. BROMBERG: No; but I have never seen a large enough quantity, certainly not the tincture or the fluid extract.Dr. Munch can perhaps answer that.DR. MUNCH: I have given doses up to twice that re-cognized, but I have not noticed ataxia in students.DR. LOEWE: There is one factor which, of course, is important, and it is a fact which we notice from tobacco smoking, and that is that the dosage in the form of the cigarette is probably high enough to produce great ataxic symptoms in humans by way of the administration of inhala-tion.DR. HERWICK: I should like to ask Dr. Bromberg, clinically, whether there is a direct physiological addiction to this; that is, are withdrawal symptoms produced or do98you think it is purely a psychic addiction?DR. BROMBERG: My idea of habituation on this matter is different, and there happen to be several, and we should have the thing clarified.Habituation must rest on three cases, two of them being habit forming.The first are the symptoms appearing of withdrawal of the habit forming drug.The second is that the patient develops tolerance. The third is that because he needs more drug he gets the pleasure of addiction, and all medicine agrees that there must be withdrawal.A morphine addict becomes intolerant of withdrawal. He has abdominal pains and various symptoms. When morphine is given he feels better. And that is the basis of a well known treatment.Secondly, there are the people who take increasing doses to feel well. Those two are well acknowledged criteria.In the New York County jail, the physician in charge thinks he sees withdrawal symptoms, but the offenders are not allowed to discuss the offense with anyone except counsel. They say they did smoke it, or they did not. You do not know whether the symptoms are tied up with the99drug.So, I dare say that there are no clear withdrawal symptoms. The thing is not settled. Patients come in after being cut off without the drug.The third is addiction of pleasure-loving, and in that category comes smoking and colorful music and things of that nature. You can say that one has to have pleasure after he becomes addicted to luxury, and that can be looked upon as a valid psychiatric observation.So I would stop there and say that we can say that in the absence of other evidence, that it is essentially hedonistic addiction.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Loewe, you mentioned in your experiment on dogs that you had injected some of these extracts, but, nevertheless, in most of the experiments that had been previously done, I gather, the drug had been taken orally. Of course, we know the stuff is smoked.Your introduction of injection as a method of administration raises the question in my mind as to whether we might, at some future date, anticipate the use of that on humans, in this way? Is there any possibility of this sort? Similar to that which obtains in heroin, for example?DR. LOEWE: Only after the isolation in pure form100I would say, because, at the present time, by use. of the extracts it will not be an element in the whole picture to introduce it by intravenous injection. It has to be injected in alcohol solution, and a slight injection introduces a bad local infection, pain, and so on.MR. WOLLNER: Why were you impelled to use it as an injection as a method of administration, rather than giving it to your dogs orally, Dr. Loewe?DR. LOEWE: It goes faster. In view of the long period of latency, it is much more convenient to use it intravenously injected, because the peak of the curve is reached sooner.MR. WOLLNER: Would you conclude from that that on dogs, for example, as a medium for standardization, that they are not as radically different when the stuff is in-jected as compared to when it is administered orally?DR. LOEWE: Probably that is true, but only to an inconsiderable extent. In a slighter extent the variations have been reported by various examinators [sic] after oral administration.MR. WOLLNER: Will you recommend it as the preferred procedure for bio-assay.DR. LOEWE: I am not sure that I should give the preference to the intravenous way. I have to collect more101experiences.DR. MATCHETT: Are the effects otherwise identical? DR. LOEWE: Identical.MR. WOLLNER: The curve is more rapid; I mean you achieve the peak of the curve more rapidly. DR. LOEWE: Comparatively more rapidly. Beginning after only twenty minutes, and reaching the peak after half an hour or an hour.MR. WOLLNER: Your experiments with mice were continued under the same circumstances?DR. LOEWE: No. As to mice, they were injected orally only.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We can now go on to the sociological phases.In 88 users there were 86 males and only 2 females. I do not know if that holds true generally. We might have got off the rails on the selection, but that is what those figures show.There were 47 white, 20 colored, 15 Latin Americans. The age, of course, is much younger than among opium users. Most of the users were between 17 and 35. The greatest number was between 21 and 25.I believe that was true of a survey made in New York City of the users.102MR. SMITH: We had 100 arrests there between January 1st and October 1st that ran: 99 Negro, 60 white, and 1 yellow; and the nativity, (and this nativity includes New York City and up-state New York:) 5 Mexican, 1 Chinese, 32 Puerto Rican, 2 Greek:, some from South America, Cuba, Panama, and other places with 130 native born.Then, in addition, I have 12 other cases, which to me were more interesting, because those persons who were held for crimes other than possession, and they ran such as unlawful entry, 3 for grand larceny, in addition to their possession; 1 for grand larceny, who admits he is a user.Of course, the other possessor cases probably were users, but they are charged with possession. One with felonious assault with a pistol and possession; One, exposure of person; one felonious assault, both users; and another, felonious assault with possession; and one a wayward minor who admits, in addition to using Marihuana, that he is using heroin; one with assault and robbery, and one who was a policy peddler. They were held on other charges, rather than on mere possession charges.MR. WOLLNER: What is the distribution in sexes, there, Mr. Smith? MR. SMITH: I have not the age nor sex distribution on those.103In at least four cases up-state we can show a definite connection with prostitution. In one we had a good report, not proven, but a good report that the Negro who was in possession was also running a school, teaching youngsters how to smoke Marihuana. Actually, we are not certain about the facts as to that, but that is the report that has been current with that individual. 	COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Do you have anything on occupations of the users? MR. SMITH: We have four as musicians, two as farmers, and those two farmers were actually growing Marihuana on their farms. Many of them state "unemployed". But where most of those that report unemployed are laborers, they usually are associated with prostitution, policy, and some of the allied types of minor grade crimes. Prostitution, to me, seemed the most evident connection.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our 88, the occupation runs anywhere from bartender to unemployed. There are probably 50 different occupations, musicians are second to laborers,-of the 88.The rest were distributed throughout the various104occupations.MR. SMITH: I can give you a breakdown on that section. I have it here in another portion of my data.There were 5 women arrested as sellers, and 8 women arrested for possession, and 147 males arrested for possession, and 7 for selling.MR. WOLLNER: About 10 per cent. MR. SMITH: Yes, sir.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In our geographical distribution, we show the larger number of these around New York; a few in the New England areas; a few in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, several in the Middle Atlantic States, about 5 in the South, Kentucky and Tennessee, four; Michigan-Ohio, 13, Michigan-Ohio is second to New York.And then they string out through the rest of the States, with California probably third.MR. SMITH: In States with equal population ratios, as to the metropolitan district, as against up-state New York, our arrests for Marihuana violations in the State, excluding New York City, are about 10 per cent; 15 cases, actually, against 160.They probably will vary, though, as to the development of prosecution and apprehension, as in the various up-state cities they are just beginning to realize in the105last year that Marihuana is a problem, and the figures for 1938 will be higher than 1937. I expect 1939 will again be higher in up-state New York, so that that ratio of about 10 percent should rise.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Bromberg, you were about to start on the sociological phases. Will you give us the benefit of your views on that?DR. BROMBERG: The material that I have collected comes from the Court of General Sessions. This is the criminal court of New York City.Our material is limited to New York County, although it must be remembered that the courts clientele comes from many sections of the country.We must also note that there are many racial types in our material. This is important, because the British investigators have noted in India that Cannabis does not bring out the motor excitement or hysterical symptoms among Anglo-Saxon users that occurs among natives. There are several other difficulties in selecting reliable material, one being the dependence on statements from prisoners without opportunity for objective tests or other corroborative checks, as in the case of other drugs, e.g., heroin or morphine.During the routine interviews of some 17,000 offend-106ers during six and a half years, we have come across several hundred who have had direct experience with Cannabis. Their testimony checks with experimental results and clinical experiences in regard to symptomatology of intoxication, the absence of true addiction, and the negative connection with major crime. Especially is this noteworthy among sexual offenders, and in cases of assault or murder.The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the press, that crime is caused by Marihuana addiction, demand careful scrutiny.The cases analyzed in this study cover a period of more than six years, from 1932 to 1938. Out of over 16,000 prisoners in this six-year period, 200 offenders were convicted of drug charges or found to be users of drugs, although convicted of other charges, in the Court of General Sessions.Cases of possession for sale are handled in the Court of General Sessions which has jurisdiction over felonies. There is no distinction made in the indictment in the Court of General Sessions as to the nature of the drug sold.Of this group of 200 drug offenders, 67 were indicated to be users of Marihuana in any degree and for any duration of time whether convicted of the crime of selling Marihuana or another crime.107The remaining 133 offenders were morphine or heroin users.It is important to note that the only measure of Marihuana usage is the statement of the offender. Since statements of use are conceived by them to be prejudicial to their interests in court, we meet evasion and denial fairly consistently.Our most reliable source of information is from those not arrested for traffic in drugs and questioned in the routine course of psychiatric study.Now, this leaves out thousands of smokers who were never arrested, people who were never arrested, and people that we deal with who were arrested for major crimes, including the one of selling drugs. Those people were all questioned about Marihuana.Those who were arrested for selling drugs, specifically Marihuana, were questioned as to the use of it. Some of those admitted using it, and some did not.All the criminological material that we have has to be taken with a very large dose of salt, and they are either convicted by the time we see them, or about to be, and are still frightened, and want to keep their fair records clean.The only useful record which we have in which we can108throw out and include material as it sounds reasonable to us, and it is checked, so far as the use of the sociological aspects of it, and the effect of it, and so forth, so that in the General Sessions of Criminal Court the 87 cases of Marihuana users consisted of 21 whites (native born and European extraction), 23 Negroes, 20 Puerto Ricans (some of whom are considered to be racial mixtures), 2 Mexicans, and one Negro and Indian mixture.Of the 67 studied, 46 were convicted of possession and sale of drugs, and 21 other charges. Among the 21 cases convicted of crimes other than the possession of and sale of drugs, were eight charges of burglary, five of grand larceny, three of robbery, two of assault, one each of petit larceny, forgery, and first degree murder, and none of sexual offenses. Burglary, grand larceny, and robbery, then, account for 16 of the 21 cases. There were but two sex cases of any description in the history of the Marihuana cases, in both of which sodomy occurred as previous offenses. In three cases, the individuals were what might be called constant users of Marihuana. One of these had commenced to use the Marihuana three years previous to the current conviction; another, with a sixteen year record, indicated Marihuana, had been used for fifteen years; the third referred to his use of Marihuana as109"several years� duration. None of the offenders reported any lasting effects from Marihuana. Interrogations as to the habit-forming nature of Marihuana were all answered in the negative by the prisoners.So that in the General Sessions of Criminal Court the 67 people who were offenders were involved in selling Marihuana or gave some history of using it. Most of those people had previous charges, not including drugs, as to being criminals of other types. The largest proportion were not drug users.The next largest number had no previous connection with the 67. Fifty had never been arrested for taking any drugs. This was their first contact with the court. These were all special cases in the Special Sessions Court, which deals with misdemeanors and other cases.Here, there were 202 cases. Thirteen were there on the first charge of any kind, that being a Marihuana charge. Those things do not mean very much to me, as they simply give a certain picture, a picture of people being picked up and brought in for using Marihuana, and there is not a very heavy weighted criminal record behind them. Drug users are not Marihuana users in the main.In the Court of Special Sessions in the same picture, in the same six-year period, of approximately 75,000 in-110dictments for all crimes, there were 6,000 convictions for possession and use of drugs. Since neither the law, the district attorney, nor the police department make any distinction between the several kinds of narcotics, their arraignments or indictments, in Special Sessions as well as General Sessions, there were no figures from which to estimate the number of Marihuana users as distinguished from the number of users of other drugs. We therefore adopted a system of sampling the 6,000 cases in order to arrive at an approximate estimation of the total number of Marihuana users who came into conflict with the law. In this sampling, we examined the records of l,500 cases, or 25 per cent of the total of 6,000. Of these, 135 were Marihuana charges. From this, it was estimated that about 540 cases, or 9 per cent of all drug cases coming to Special Sessions over a period of six years, were users of Marihuana. Analyzing this sample of 135 cases, it was found that 93 had no previous record; 8 had a previous drug charge or charges, only; 5 had previous charges, including drugs; and 29 had records not including drug charges. Among those with longer records, that is, from four to seven previous arrests, none showed progression in crime from drugs to other crimes.111	In considering all the Marihuana cases in both General Sessions and Special Sessions Courts, a total of 202 convictions, it is an impressive fact that only 30 offenders had been arrested before for drug charges. This does not argue very strongly for Marihuana as a  drug that initiates criminal careers. Where there is a series of crimes committed by one individual, our records show that he passes from other forms of crime to the use of drugs. Thus, in only three cases out of our series of 67, in which an arrest associated with Marihuana was recorded, did the criminal career start with the use of Marihuana, and in 7 cases out of 67 criminal activity started with other drugs. Ninety per cent of the group is accounted for by those who (1) have no criminal record except as drug users, and (2) have a previous record from which they turned to drugs This leaves a small minority of offenders whose criminal careers started with drugs and went on to other crimes like larceny, assault, and so on. As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions in the General Sessions cases (our only method of estimation), it can be said that drugs generally do not initiate criminal careers. Similarly, in Special Sessions, only 8 had previous charges of drugs, and 3.7 per cent has previous charges of drugs and other112petty crimes. In the vast majority of cases in this group of 135, then, earlier usage did not apparently predispose these offenders to crime, even that of drug usage. Whether the first offender Marihuana cases go on to major crime can only be ascertained by referring to the findings of the General Sessions Courts. The expectancy of major crimes following the use of Cannabis, then, is small, according to our experiencesThe problem of habituation of Cannabis is one of grave importance According to the statements of confirmed heroin or morphine addicts, Marihuana is not a habit-forming drug. Naturally, where it is used in conjunction with heroin, morphine or cocaine another problem presents itself.Occasionally, an astute drug peddler will adulterate Marihuana cigarettes with morphine or heroin in order to retain his clientele. Care must be exercised in evaluating the question of Marihuana habituation, so that we are not dealing with this type of adulterated Cannabis.The medical diagnosis of habituation depends on the accepted criteria of acquired tolerance and after-effect upon withdrawal of the drug. Regarding the subject of tolerance, users of Marihuana examined in the clinic universally state that an increase in dosage is not neces-113sary to achieve the desired effect as time goes on.The increase in cigarette consumption, sometimes noted, is simply related to how often and how long the smoker wants to experience these effects.As to the question of withdrawal symptoms, cases have never, to the knowledge of the writer, been observed systematically in an environment where control of the drug can be exercised. Although of secondary value in deciding the problem of habituation, it should be noticed that experience with experimental subjects indicates that after usage of the drug and its cessation no withdrawal symptoms are reported.It has not been possible to observe satisfactorily Marihuana users upon their entrance into custody to establish their behavior after cessation of usage. For one thing, the law does not allow questioning of a defendant prior to trial regarding his charge. The history of the offense cannot be discussed except with counsel, but an offender can be questioned in the course of medical treatment. The fact that Marihuana cases do not request medical treatment upon their incarceration argues for the absence of withdrawal symptoms.As is well known, morphine, opium, etc., users become violently ill upon being taken in custody, away from the114source of their drug, and are vociferous in their demands for treatment.Nevertheless, the wide discrepancies between the reports of other jurisdictions and ours in the question of addiction to Cannabis demands a serious attempt to establish the facts in the case.Up to March 26, 1938, Cannabis was classed as a habit-forming drug in Section 1751 of the Penal Code, based on Public Health Law, Article 22, Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. Due to difficulty in this Court in proving it to be a habit-forming drug (case of People vs. Williams), the Law Revision Commission, appointed by the New York State Legislature, was requested to amend the Penal Code to read "narcotic" rather than "habit-forming" drug.From a legal point of view, therefore, the problem of whether it is habit-forming or not is not vital in this and many other States, since its use as a narcotic by un-authorized persons is an offense.The writer believes it highly desirable and important that a Commission be appointed to examine the matter scientifically as was done in the case of narcosan and other reputed drug cures in 1921 at the Bellevue Psychopathic Hospital under Commissioner Patterson of the Department of Correction.115The most that one can say on the basis of ascertainable facts is that prolonged Marihuana usage constitutes a "sensual" addiction, in that the user wishes to experience again and again the ecstatic sensations and feelings which the drug produces. Unlike morphine addiction, which is biochemically as well as psychologically determined, prolonged Marihuana usage is essentially in the services of the hedonistic elements of the personality. Those are the main conclusions I have developed from that.Then we took the cases of the Marihuana users and tried to break those down. It indicates that no murderers were found among this group of 67, not one murder committed in these six or seven years by a Marihuana user.There were no sex cases among these 67. We have, however, seven hundred odd sex cases, from first degree rape down to exhibitionism, and in the course of the six or seven years not one of them was a Marihuana user, according to history or physical examination.At the time of our examination, two of them had sex cases in their history some years before. One was sodomy, and the other some other type of offense.Of all of these people, only three called themselves116constant users.  One for three years and twelve months, and the others nine months.There is one other point which I would like to mention and that is the case of a man named Joseph Ogden who is reported among others in Mr. Merrill's paper as having been an addict.I saw him and spent some time with him. He was a psychopathic individual. I think he had been in the State hospital at Lexington, and had had several other arrests. But nothing in his history indicated Marihuana.  In other words, the newspaper accounts must be discounted. The fact of the matter was that he had not even been a drug addict, but was a homosexualist. The offender was murdered by him and shoved into a trunk.  I do not know whether he disarticulated his arms or not, but he sent the trunk to the express station, and they saw blood oozing out of it, and picked him up.He told the story rather frankly. It was a horrible crime. I think Marihuana was innocent of that. I am sure of that, because I have been able to check that very carefully.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER:  We have observed two cases of sex crimes where we have been able to prove the connection with Marihuana.117A boy named Perez, in Baltimore raped a ten-year-old girl, and of course he blamed it on Marihuana.It so happened that, just a year before that, Perez had been picked up by the Baltimore police for the sale of 2,500 grains of Cannabis, and got three months in jail. This sex offense happened the following year.And there is another case down in Corpus Christi that we have been able to establish, where an oil worker with a good reputation, obtained and smoked a cigarette, after which he raped his young daughter.Those are two cases that I know of in which we have proof.In the case of Perez, we do not know what else might have been wrong with him, but he was definitely a user and a seller of Marihuana.I believe that Mr. Smith has had a great deal of experience up through New York State.MR. SMITH: We have had one case in the last two or three months, which has been of great interest to the Motor Vehicle Department. A youngster in Mount Kisco, close to New York City, was involved in an automobile accident in that village by hitting three parked cars during the evening. When he was apprehended by the police, he literally tore the officer's blouse from his shoulder,118and he had great difficulty in subduing him. During the evening, they first thought it was alcohol, but later the youngster admitted having used a "reefer". From the information we obtained from him, we apprehended an individual who was growing it, and I think we picked up about six pounds. We had another case farther up-state, not as well established, but apparently pretty well shown, of the inability of the automobile driver to perceive distance and speed. So that factor will be of considerable interest to those interested in traffic control. Because of that recent case in White Plains, we have had some inquiry from the State Motor Vehicle Department, and they arc considering, I believe, the advisability of revoking the licenses of operators who can be shown to be users of Marihuana, in the same fashion that we are now able to do after showing evidence of narcotism. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Is that in your State law now?MR. SMITH: No, sir, it is not in our State law now.In fact, I do not know if it was decided that we could get away with it, but through the Motor Vehicle Department we could, as one of the requirements in the matter of119ability on the questionnaire in New York up-state you have to state whether or not you use narcotic drugs.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Marihuana users, when arrested, want to fight.Their motor impulses seem to be working It takes, sometimes, four or five officers to subdue a man, and they sometimes wreck the living quarters in doing so.We do not have anything like that in arresting opium users.The agents proceed very cautiously when arresting a Marihuana user.MR. SMITH: It conflicts with alcohol which seem to be the worst cases yet, and we have had a few cases who used both. Those are perhaps the few that you have run across. Then, of course, we have those who have just been on the reefer alone.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER, I have noticed a tendency towards more gunplay among Marihuana users than among opium users.MR. SMITH: Than among opium users?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Yes. And there has been some gun play.The first case that we arrested under the Marihuana Act, (I happened to have been present in the Denver court120when they brought this fellow up before the judge.) had been a user for a number of years. He was only 23 years old, but many of his arrests were for assault.I have noticed that many of these violators have a record of assault.In Wilmington, Delaware, there was the case of John Rhodes, who attacked an officer with a knife and was shot and killed resisting arrest.MR. SMITH: I have four out of twelve in one city where the charges, in addition to possession, are assault.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: In many cases, particularly around Ohio, the officers are called in cases of disturbance and they find a Marihuana user with some stuff on him.DR. MUNCH: A chap I talked to told me that the use of gin came in very particularly with the use of a reefer. Is that true with opium? Do Marihuana users tend to take gin along with smoking of the reefer?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I do not know about that. We have not run into that.DR. MUNCH: The point I am asking could be that the alcohol there would tend to increase the solubility of any material that has been swallowed, and, therefore, they would get greater effect under such conditions than if they. had not taken the alcohol.121DR. MATCHETT One of the Internal Revenue officials, formerly in Texas, has told us that down there persons use alcohol and Marihuana together, and where they were very wild it took four or five officers to bring a man in. He attributed that to the combined effect rather than the effect of either one.MR. SMITH: Still, there is a good deal of fancy on the part of some officers, whose experience with Marihuana is new.I have had some experience with one or two sheriffs. I know of one who recently employed the services of two other sheriffs and four deputy sheriffs to secure the arrest of a farmer on a farm where the material was growing.Any youngster, 18 or 19 years old, could have gone there and done it alone. This was because of the first experience of those officers with it. I think the men were anxious to capitalize on the possible publicity which might attend the arrest. So that sometimes you run up against that problem, where they report that it is necessary for a number of them to subdue an individual. That may be an effort to make it appear a more serious type of crime.So that I think we have to put our tongues in our122cheeks as to this, also.DR. MATCHETT: This story came from Deputy Commissioner Berkshire, of the Alcohol Tax Unit.MR. SMITH: We did have in White Plains this additional situation: The fact appeared there that with children of high school age with good financial and social background, that two of those individuals, who were in difficulties there, stated that the smoking of reefers had become a part of the initiation in certain clubs or school fraternities.That probably is a little bit unusual, as an incident, but that has been definitely reported in that vicinity. DR. WRIGHT: Where was that?MR. SMITH: That was in White Plains, New York.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Did you not arrest a youngster sixteen years old for selling?Mr.. SMITH: Yes, sir. There were two youngsters of excellent background, and fine social connections. That was probably a larger factor, as compared to anything else, I think, and that was that they probably had too much financial and social backing. That may be more true in that particular county than in other counties in that State.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: You mentioned a case of a123young man using Marihuana and heroin.MR. WITH: Yes, sir. That was in New York City. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: What had he used first, do you know?MR. SMITH: I do not know. That, I extracted from the Police Department records last Tuesday, but I did .not have time to go back and get the individual cards, and I doubt very much whether the information which appears in the police cards will show that.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have not run into many peddlers of heroin who also handle Marihuana, and we have not run into many users of Marihuana who are also heroin users. However, as Dr. Bouquet points out, in Tunis there is a tendency to switch from Marihuana to heroin.Have you run into any cases like that, Doctor? DR. BROMBERG: I have seen many drug addicts, who have, once or twice, they say, tried Marihuana, and have dropped it, because it was not strong enough. Most true addicts start with heroin or opium.MR. SMITH: Do you not think that that might be more the association with individuals than the association with the drug?DR. BROMBERG: Perhaps. And there is one other fact, and that is that alcohol and Marihuana have a more potent124effect than alcohol alone.I had a case where a man started smoking Marihuana. The seller introduced heroin, he noticed the effect, and he became a user, but, of course, that was not through any choice.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: As to this question of using alcohol with Marihuana, I recall a case in Indiana where a man was arrested who had an infusion of the drug in alcohol. How do they do that? Drink it and smoke a cigarette?DR. BROMBERG: No. I think it is a sociological matter. He uses the gin with it, or otherwise, and it depends on the amount of money and the locality, and they smoke, and it represents having some fun, the effect which they look for.MR. WOLLNER: I wonder how much can be deduced from the present figures in the matter of crime, in view of the fact that these figures represent a static picture whereas the entire Marihuana picture, so far as I know, is on an up-curve.Have you noticed any tendencies that are not static over a period of years Dr. Bromberg?DR. BROMBERG: That is a very good question, because the alcohol thing depends on the relationship between the two.125But I have been in contact with the court for about five years, and the number of Marihuana peddlers has not increased, but the number of Marihuana users we do not know about.MR. WOLLNER: In what order, would you say?DR. BROMBERG: It is impossible to say. These are only approximations, I admit. It all depends on the police activities.They make a drive, and the figures go up. They forget about it, and there are no figures.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Are there any questions as to this phase of the problem?I must say that we are still sort of groping as to a lot of those questions.DR. MUNCH: May I intrude there, just as a matter of difference in mind, as to any sort of figure representing the total number of users of Marihuana? I mean, has anybody said anything as to the number of heroine users being the same as the opium addicts, or less or more, or as to the Marihuana?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: It is impossible to say. The eradication of 16,000 acres of Marihuana during the past year means nothing as to numbers of users. We are sure it was never meant for the illicit traffic. Probably12615,000 of the 16,000 acres was wild growth.DR. BROMBERG: You mean additional acreage than that which had humans on it?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have arrested over 1,000. The Bureau of Prisons is a little concerned about that, because it is causing a definite increase in their jails.Puerto Rico is starting to send a lot of these sellers and users to jail, which they did not do before. There has been a tremendous up-grade in apprehensions.I do not recall just what the arrests have been by states throughout the country. These are Federal arrests. State arrests are probably over that figure.I should say that the 16,000 acres represent only a drop in the bucket, because I know in one State there are 300,000 acres of the wild growth. We have a job here on eradication that is just stupendous.Fortunately, a lot of this acreage that is discovered we hear about through people who do not tell anybody else about it.The illicit trafficker is looking for growth. I cannot understand why the New York trafficker had to go out to Minnesota and strip some of those hemp fields.MR. SMITH: We had two instances where the material was either reported to be, or actually was, of western127growth, and they were getting a higher price than was paid apparently for New York grown. Whether that was bona fide, as to the material from New York State, or as to the material from Minnesota, I do not know, or whether it was a question of price boosting as to the New York sales prices, we still do not know.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I think within a couple of blocks from where Dr. Munch lives you can walk into as much [as] fifty acres that has not been destroyed.DR. MUNCH: They went over about 300 acres of that this year and ran out of C.C.C. men and then stopped.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: That is a tremendous problem with us. We have used many of the agencies of the Government, the W.P.A. has helped, and other agencies. We have discouraged all of these well-meaning people throughout the country who want to use Boy Scouts in the removal of' Marihuana.DR. MUNCH: We have had considerable cooperation through Admiral Foote, and the Automobile Vehicle Department of our State.DR. WRIGHT: May I ask Dr. Bromberg whether or not his contacts with these patients show whether or not there is any indication of whether these cigarettes used were tobacco which had been adulterated with Marihuana?128DR. BROMBERG: My source of information is the Police Department, and the cigarettes that they have gathered up are filled definitely with Marihuana, and no other compound.MR. SMITH: I would like to ask Dr. Bromberg, or anybody else who has had experience as to the likelihood of development of perversion.Has anybody had any experience on that?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Dr. Kolb, have you run into anything on that? DR. KOLB: No, sir. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: How many of these users have you in Lexington?DR. KOLB: There are about one hundred patients who have used it occasionally, but they are mostly opium and heroin users. About twenty-five have used nothing but Marihuana alone. But, just as Dr. Bromberg has stated they use it occasionally, just to see if it is another drug that they need.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Are these Marihuana users, as such, a younger group than your opium smokers?DR. KOLB: Most of the time.129For instance, we had a man from Puerto Rico, about fifty years old, who had been a judge, and who said it was a political plot that he should get four years. I do not know how politics came into it.He said, "Well, they are trying to get rid of me."He never had any criminal record. That seemed to be a rather strong sentence for users.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We have noticed the tendency in Puerto Rico, even with heroin users, to give them five years for use only.DR. KOLB: Yes, they give them a very severe sentence.The district attorney wrote me and wanted to take it up with judge Cooper. I told him that, from the stand-point of rehabilitation, it was a rather harmful matter to put a man in prison for four years. He is liable to learn a lot of things in prison and then go out and hate society and use them against society.It is my idea that users should get one year, and especially the fellow who does not have a criminal record.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: I do not think the courts here are being too severe.DR. KOLB' No, they are not.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: They are giving the seller130a great deal more than the user, on the average. DR. KOLB: Of course.MR. WOLLNER: What does your investigation represent as to these twenty-five users of Marihuana alone, as compared to those who use other drugs other than Marihuana?DR. KOLB: Of course, we get them after they have stopped using the drug, and after they have escaped the acute effects of the drugs, There is only one psychiatric case, which we are not quite sure of, that has been due to using the Marihuana drug.MR. WOLLNER: I am going to ask an awfully unfair question.What percentage of these people would have been in jail if they had not smoked Marihuana? DR. KOLB: Well, very few of them.MR. WOLLNER: They would hot have been in jail?DR. KOLB: That applies to a great many users of drugs.A great many of them have done other things, particularly thievery, or other slippery types of work. MR. WOLLNER: Are they slightly impaired?DR. KOLB: They are slightly impaired, partly due to the psychiatric condition, and to the distress of needing the drug.131There are very few violent types of crime with the opium addict.Our experience with the Marihuana addicts is not enough to give an answer. I rather think that with the alcoholic-Marihuana user, that he would become a type of drug addict that would cause many crimes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER:  There was a case in Canada, Mr. Lancaster, there a Marihuana user had withdrawal symptoms similar to those of an opium user.MR. LANCASTER: Yes, sir. That was the boy who was picked up and had used Marihuana for a long time. He was out of work, had no continual employment.He tried to smoke Marihuana, rather liked it, and after several months of usage, he was jailed, and kept there for about a week.His case was remanded, and he reported feeling tingling pains and needles in the hands and feet, and he was greatly upset and pleaded for a narcotic again. He was suffering with an imparity of that order. I do not think it was tried to see whether giving him Marihuana should relieve that case or not.The general impression is that there is no great suffering, and if they are relieved from it after the first five days, naturally they want it again, but they do132not break down if they do not get it.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Bromberg, have you come across any occasion of drinking Marihuana in the form of tea extract, or something of that sort? DR. BROMBERG: No.MR. SMITH: Is there any evidence of it being used in Canada? On any convictions, have you had any evidence of it ?MR. LANCASTER: Not there, no. No, sir, so far there have been no samples submitted to us as yet.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: None that I know of.But I understand they do mix them, mix it with sweets, in northern Africa.MR. SMITH: There have been one or two reports that they do mix it in California.MR. WOLLNER: For your ears, I can tell you, Mr. Smith, that all of the chemists are sitting on the edge of their seats, worrying about that happeningMR. SMITH: And there is a question as to the toxic effects which could be present.MR. WOLLNER: And there may not be any way in which we can examine it. We are hoping that they do not guess that gasoline will extract it.DR. MATCHETT: Is it true that that is a common form133in the Far East?COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: No, not in The Far East, but in the Near East. DR. MATCHETT: In the Near East, yes. COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: We seem to have covered the  sociological phases, so far as we are able to and I am going to turn the choir over, at this point, to Dr. Wollner, who will proceed with the chemical phases. This is where most of the spade work has got to be done, anyway.STATEMENT OF MR.. H. J. WOLLNER, CONSULTING CHEMIST, TREASURY DEPARTMENTMR. WOLLNER: The problem is not yet resolved. We are not yet in a position to know exactly what it is we are looking for, and, within four walls, I am perfectly frank to admit that al]. the chemists I have met, who are interested in this field, are at a complete loss when asked to prophesy the character of the narcotic principle, which we are going to eventually disclose.The situation is as bad in the chemical literature as it is in all of the other phrases.I should certainly be within the reasonable bounds of correctness when I say that ninety percent of the stuff that has been written on the chemical end of Can-134nabis is absolutely wrong, and, of the other ten percent, at least two-thirds of it is of no consequence.That ninety per cent has had, however, to be dealt with, and chemists all over the world have been interested in Cannabis, and in the past few years have spent a goodly portion of their time upsetting a lot of this shibboleth and tradition which has been set up, probably a thousand years, so as to clear the ground and to be able to proceed in a more orderly fashion.In this work the evidence, by force of circumstance, compels us to turn to the pharmacologist for guidance.As Dr. Loewe ably expressed before, since we have no test in the chemical laboratories for indicating the presence or absence of the narcotic principle, every bit of the exploratory work of consequence that has been engaged upon had to be paralleled with work in the field of bio-assay.The chemical problem is so obvious that it does not require much delineation.Chemists, enforcement administrative chemists, are interested in two things. First, and immediately, they want to know how to find and detect the presence of Cannabis sativa, or any of its products that are narcotic in character.In other words, most enforcement officers will make135a seizure in some form, solid or liquid, and the question asked is, "Is this Marihuana?" And no satisfactory technique for answering such a question obtains today.That does not say that in most of the cases that come before the chemists they are not in a definite position to make a definite statement, that before them the substance is definitely Cannabis sativa, but they can not do it as definitely as in the case of morphine, opium, and heroin.The second question they would like answered is,"What is the narcotic principle, or what are the narcotic principles present?"That question is not one of enforcement so much as of general administration.The Commissioner of Narcotics has the problem of deciding, at times, what regulations shall be invoked in respect to an industry or an agricultural phase of this problem.The question arises, how long shall we have to wait before the resin is decomposed, during the rotting process, for example, and the only way I would know how to answer that question is to know how long that principle will exist during that rotting exhibition. Of course, we do not know. We can not answer that question.The question arises, can recommendations be made to136exempt the use of certain portions of the plant and certain industrial directions, as far as governmental regulation is concerned, be given by virtue of the fact that they are harmless. No statement can he made on that score.So, it becomes important, from an administrative point of view, for administrative chemists, associated with the carrying out of the Marihuana Act, to have a more competent picture of the drug, as competent as obtains at the present time in respect to the poppy and its secretion, opium, and its products, morphine, heroin, codeine, and so on.This drug, peculiarly enough, has withstood competent attack for an extensive period of time.Before the laws were passed controlling the opium picture, chemists were able to supply a fairly excellent background, against which such legislation and regulations might have been and were in fact predicated.But, in the case of Marihuana, there is no such background. It is just a fog; without question the psychiatrists and bioassayists and agricultural people know far more about Cannabis than do the chemists.So far as knowing anything about the plant, today, is concerned, all they can tell you is that such and such137a product is not a narcotic, such and such a product is non-narcotic, and they are trying to shrink the residue further and further, but they have not touched it.Of great assistance in clarifying the issue has been the work undertaken by Dr. Blatt, in reviewing the literature.Dr. Blatt has prepared a paper consisting of a critical review of the literature on narcotics, published in the journal of the Washington Academy of Sciences on the 15th of November. I have a number of copies of the paper here, and also a chart setting forth the general character of the critique, so that a person who is a technical man can get a picture of the thing.I am going to ask that only these people who have a working knowledge of chemical symbology receive them, and we will try to get enough copies to mail them out to you later.I am going to ask Dr. Blatt if he will be so kind as to offer a picture of his survey as to the chemical constituents of Cannabis Sativa.STATEMENT OF DR. A. H. BLATT, HOWARD UNIVERSITY.DR. BLATT: That will not take very long, because as Mr. Wollner has said, we are only dealing with two-138thirds of ten percent of the material. Very briefly, the story is, you can take Cannabis and extract it with one of several solvents, or combinations of solvents and obtain a physiologically active extract. The only successful technique that has been applied to that so far has been a distillation process, and through the distillation you can get out of it three substances, which I will simply name and pass on. One of them is a paraffin hydrocarbon known as nonacosane, that is, physiologically, inactive. If you do a distillation, you get a definite distillate, and all chemists who have worked with Cannabis know it as red oil. Unfortunately, it also was known as Cannabinol, and that has been the cause of much trouble. 	This red oil looks a good bit like a lubricating oil of a rather poor quality, a semi-solid material at room temperature. That material we will simply call narcotic-active by a physiological test. The real nasty principle about the situation is that that material behaves as if it were a chemical substance, and there have been three different formulas proposed for it. One of the formulas has Cot so far as two individuals having agreed upon it. Then the hitch comes. In about139forty years, three English workers succeeded in preparing and isolating one pure chemical substance from this red oil.They called that Cannabinol, and the one individual substance derived from it is also called Cannabinol. For thirty years, nobody following them was ever able to get this pure Cannabinol.So, we went ahead and worked with Cannabinol, and assumed that we were working with the pure substanceThen, roughly about eight years ago, the pure chemical individual, pure Cannabinol, again was secured for the second time, and apparently it can be repeated.Pure Cannabinol is the fourth chemical substance to be gotten out of Cannabis, and it is the fourth one to be lacking in narcotic activity. It is toxic, however, and it is quite possible that some of the .activity of Canna-binol, some of this complex activity that has been referred to during the morning, is due to pure Cannabinol as a chemical individual.The chemical structure of pure Cannabinol has been fairly well worked out. It is not definitely settled. We do not need to go into that There is one more thing that should be pointed out, and that is the fact that for thirty years perfectly com-140petent chemists have taken this red oil, distilled, and worked with it as if a pure chemical. It not only gives analytical values of resin, but they are even more complex. You can carry out the chemical reactions with this.So, let us refer to red oil as the crude Cannabinol; and the chemical individual as pure Cannabinol. You can run chemical reactions. You can reduce an acetylate and the products you get out are still analyzable for the proper derivatives of crude Cannabinol. That is, where everybody has gone haywire.There is one ray of hope, and a pretty definite one, as to the confusion of a mixture which was taken to be a definite chemical substance, and that is why progress has been so slow, and that is the fact that we have no way quantitatively of following the definite reaction of the chemical principle..The one ray of hope I mention is the fact that you can take red oil, crude Cannabinol, remove one-fourth, which is inactive as pure Cannabinol, and the residual three-fourths still retains chemical activity. There is where the work begins. That is as far as has been gotten chemically.There is just one more point here. As far as I have been able to find, and I received corroboration at noon, there not only is no correlation, or no correlation has141been made, so far as I can find. out, between the various color reactions for Cannabis and the narcotic activity, and I was told at noon that, not only had there been none made, but it was because there definitely is none. So we can not fail to follow the activity as to this color test.I may be getting off in deep water, but that is the apparent final analysis. There is one more thing, and that will finish it up.I hope not many people will be misled by the principle that the active principle of Cannabis is Cannabinol. You will find it even there. The active fraction which you will find, which is more or less of a mixture, is called Cannabinol.You can find a chemical substance which is not active. I think that covers it.MR. WOLLNER: I think that adds oils to the fire. DR. MUNCH: Is there an active substance there? MR. WOLLNER: I will take your word for it, and Bromberg's on the basis of his research in New YorkIt leads us pretty much to where we started.I think if all the research work done so far were dumped together by a group of chemists, or if they started out today on this investigation, that they would be exactly the same as they are now inside of six months;142	that is, all of the information which we have, which is very little, could be accumulated in six months. Recognizing that situation, the Treasury two years ago undertook to lay the basis for a competent attack on the problem. We did not know what that would consist of, but we knew sound, fundamental, reproducible information and data had to be obtained. The first thing we did was to contact the Department of Agriculture, and with their cooperation, there was planted a plot at Arlington Farms over here, last summer, and the summer before, where the plant was observed in its various stages of growth, and which furnished us all of the criteria the literature offered us in the past. As I mentioned earlier, about ninety percent of all of it was thrown out. The report of the first year's investigation was published in the journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association. I have a number of copies here, if there are any technical men who have not soon that report. An equivalent report is being prepared at the present time on the basis of this summer�s work.We have obtained several tons of Marihuana. We have extracted or are extracting huge quantities of that mater-143ial, in an effort to provide a satisfactory amount on the basis of which a broad attack on the problem may be predicated.Dr. Matchett is in charge of the Treasury's own immediate attack on the problem, and I believe he has some information which he can lay before you this afternoon. Is that correct, Dr. Matchett? STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN R. MATCHETT, TREASURY DEPARTMENT. DR. MATCHETT: The problem is clarified a little bit by recognizing that there are two distinct phases involved, the first of which must be pretty well finished before the second can begin. First of all, there is the separation of the active principle from other material, and second, the characterization of it. Before a competent separation can be undertaken, we must be in possession of suitable assay methods. We, of course, are interested in those manifestations of Marihuana that lead to the effects, which have led in turn, to the passage of the ActWe are not sure, I take it, whether the substance produces ataxia in the dog, or sleep in the mouse, or corneal(?) anesthesia in the rabbit is the same as the one in which we are interested.144Nevertheless, something must be adopted, and by common consent, a dog assay, with all its faults, has been the method of choice.It seems obvious that these various principles, if more than one exists, will be each characterized on its own merits.In considering this phase of it, also, it must not be forgotten that any one of the effects may be combinations, and any of the effects that we are able to measure may possibly be combined effects, of which the bad effect of the drug itself may be only one. With that so disposed of, it is possible to recognize that certain characteristics of the so-called resin are fairly well defined already, although I think we must recognize that the resin itself is variable, and to what extent, we are not yet able to say very definitely.As Dr. Blatt said, there have been certain individuals isolated in pure form, of which the most important are Cannabinol and the hydrocarbon nonacosame.There is also present definitely in the resin a substance that responds to the alkaline Beam test.There are still other substances among all those responsible for the psychological and physiological activity; of such there may be one or more.145And finally, there are those volatile oils, in which there is no tremendous interest other than to dispose of them before being able to isolate the drug.Now, little or nothing is known of the nature of the active substance. All attacks on the problem have, thus far, broadly speaking, produced negative results. The thing, in any event, is not an alkaloid, because we are not able to extract it into acid solutions from solvents, nor does it contain any nitrogen. It is not an acid, since it does not extract into alkaline solution. And it has not been shown to contain any carbonyl groups because it does not form any derivatives with the common reagents for such.There is evidence on the other hand that it forms esters and that it is an aromatic substance, the latter from the refractive index of the most active fraction. From that it would appear to be a phenolic compound. The substance is thermostable under rather rigorous conditions, but it is quickly destroyed in the presence of oxygen.It is also quite likely that it is unsaturated since reduction by hydrogen is possible.But all those, unfortunately, are properties of the active mixtures that Dr. Blatt referred to, rather than of any chemical individual. They are all of some assis-146tance though, in considering methods by which the problem may be attacked.Now, only distillation in a rather high vacuum has been of any assistance thus far in fractionating the mixture, known as Cannabis resin. The volatile oils are so separated with relative ease. The substance responsible for the acid Beam test, whatever it may be, is removed, the acid test no longer appearing in the distillate.The hydrocarbon which does appear in the distillate can be removed by crystallization from alcohol or some other solvent, and pure Cannabinol can be removed as a crystalline acetate or paranitry benzoate.As Dr. Blatt pointed out, this point is where the trail ends at present, with the exception of a brief note indicating that it is definitely possible to find physiological effects in the material remaining after Cannabinol has been removed.It is at that point that we purpose ultimately to actually begin.The former distillation has been carried out at pressures anywhere from atmospheric down to a reported pressure of about five-one thousandths of a millimeter.From the character of the work in which this was reported it would appear that the reported pressures must147be taken with a grain of salt. No essential difference however has appeared in the products of fractionation. The material, as you may be aware, is an exceedingly difficult material to work with, a heavy tar-like oil, and it does not lend itself readily to distillation by any means.We have considered that at this point it might be preferable to resort to molecular distillation in an effort to obtain a more competent separation. If this hope be realized, a number of avenues of attack are opened or re-opened. That is, among other things the action of solvents may be reinvestigated, and of particular interest will be the action of solvents at low temperatures.Then there are possibilities of preferential adsorption, and also it may be possible to prepare crystalline derivatives. They fail to appear from treatment of the present mixtures.Now, the molecular distillation outfit that we have chosen for this work is of the static type, rather than the cyclic still with which you are probably more familiar, because the higher boiling fractions of this material are so viscous that they probably would not cycle with in that still without special precautions to maintain a high temperature.148The original material has been distilled before passing it into the molecular still in a flash apparatus that operates under a good vacuum. This is necessary since the crude oil is particularly prone to spit in the molecular still and ruin the distillation.More specifically, the process that we are following is extraction from the plant material with cold alcohol, alcohol being chosen as a solvent rather than petroleum ether, on account of fire hazard. This process is followed by a liquid extraction from the alcohol by pentane, which does away with a lot of water soluble material, and tarry material of a nondescript character.We have not yet thoroughly satisfied ourselves that all of the active material is extracted by pentane, but we believe we have every reason to think it is.Then the pentane, which incidentally, extracts quite a little alcohol, is removed, and the alcohol is also removed.The material is then passed through the flash process that I referred to a moment ago, and the distillate from here is placed in the molecular still. That is the point which the investigation has reached at this parti-cular moment.Now, it is expected to divide the oil into about ten149fractions in the stills, then to remove Cannabinol as the acetate and the hydrocarbon by precipitation from a suitable solvent, and then to refractions, to the remaining material.The work from that point, of course, all depend upon the results of the fractionations, and can not be very definitely foreseen, other than that those processes, to which I referred a moment ago, will be applied.Now, it would have been possible to have attacked certain phases of the problem along a number of other lines, a few of which I will suggest in conclusion. The first would be a characterization of those volatile oils, which have been referred to, and which would be of interest from a purely chemical point of view.They are separated with relative ease, by steam distillation, for example. No one, of course, has been very much interested in them, and that line of attack has not been followed.Again, someone might become interested in the substance which responds to the acid Beam test. It can be removed from a solution in petroleum either by means of alkali, and presumably would be isolated with relatively little difficulty, but experience shows that resins so prepared are not physiologically active, hence little in-150terest is attached to that substance.A third possible line of attack would have been in connection with the Beam test itself. The development of the color is due to a product resulting from oxidation of some substance which is present In the resin. This substance is soluble in aqueous alkali, and is precipitated by acid. It can be readily extracted from acid solution. It, of course, is not actually the substance which responds to the alkaline Beam test, but it would be of great interest from the purely scientific point of view.MR. WOLLNER: I would like to make a couple of announcements.Those of you who are not particularly interested in the chemical attack here may find this part of the program a little arduous, and I want you to understand that you are at liberty to leave and interrupt if you want to, as I think this part of the program might be a little obtuse at certain points.Dr. Blatt has just indicated that there are some errors in the material which he distributed on the critical review.Do you want to indicate those?DR. BLATT: There is one error in the literature, for example on page 469 in the middle of the page are three151formulas, just one the paragraph beginning in the middle of those formulas. There is a carbon atom, a "C", a single line to an oxygen "0", and that should be a double line to make it conform to the other two.Then, on that flow sheet, on the left-hand half of the page, the second of those errors reads "dihydrogenation with sulphur," and that should be �dehydrogenation", and not "dihydrogenation".MR. WOLLNER: As you gathered, Dr. Matchett's attack there is directed at the heart of the problem; that is to say, the isolation and characterization of the extreme number of active principles.I indicated at the beginning that there is another phase of the problem, and that was identification. We at this time do not know whether the chemical attack is destined to determine the active principle in one year or sixty years.The Treasury has issued a little manual of identification, consisting largely of photographs, and it is being distributed. In this country we are mostly dealing with the drug in its plant form, and in this manual they are showing the separate parts of plants, and so on, and it is helpful in that direction.I am going to ask Mr. Levine to give us a picture152of the Beam test.STATEMENT OF MR. LEVINE,CHEMIST, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS.MR. LEVINE: The Beam test seems to be the most widely used chemical test for the identification of Marihuana, and was first introduced by Dr. W. Beam, of the Wellcome Tropical Research Laboratory, of Khartoum.The alkaline test in 1911 and the acid Beam test in 1915 have come to be accepted as specific for Marihuana, although a lot of samples have failed to respond.Workers in Europe and north Africa have used it and tried it on a large number of plant materials.In general it is agreed that no other material responds characteristically to the test.It has been attacked by some chemists, notably Trolle and Rende, who said they obtained the Beam test on a mixture of drugs consisting of ginger, coriander, licorice, nutmeg, and several other things.Other workers, notably Fahamy and Keiy in Egypt, and Papavassiliou and Liberato, in Greece, applied the test to these materials, both individually and in the mixture, and failed to get a positive response to any of them.As I stated before, a large number of authentic samples of Marihuana failed to respond to the Beam test, or153gave a very slightly dirty purple color, which might be mistaken for just a dirty color. So a number of modifications of the Beam test have been introduced to try to improve the results obtained in the test.One of the steps taken to improve the test was the use of adsorbent charcoal to remove chlorophyll from the solution of the resin.This was reported independently by Fahamy and Keiy, Bouquet, and by the Bureau of Narcotics Laboratory.One of the tests developed in the Bureau of Narcotics Laboratory is the ethyl acetate test. Ethyl acetate is used as a solvent, because it is a good solvent for the resin, it has a low boiling point, hence is easily evaporated and it can be treated with activated charcoal, which removes most of the chlorophyll, and other substances, which would interfere with color development, but takes out very little of the material responsible for the Beam test.In carrying out the test, a sample of Marihuana is extracted with a portion of ethyl acetate. The solvent is treated for a few seconds with darco or norite and filtered.The filtrate is divided between two porcelain dishes and evaporated on a steam bath before a fan. To one of154the dishes is added several drops of the alkaline Beam reagent, and to the other, several drops of the acid Beam reagent.In a large number of tests, no samples which were negative to this modification were found to be positive by the original Beam test, or any of a number of other modifications.It seems, therefore, that this is the most satisfactory modification of the Beam test.Dr. Bouquet, in Tunis, has developed two amyl alcohol tests, one of which uses charcoal, and the other does not.His test consists of grinding a sample of Marihuana with potassium Hydroxide, and then adding a portion of alcohol, mixing thoroughly, and filtering, whereupon a purple color appears in the filtrate.Then, to a portion of this filtrate he adds about a ten-fold volume of water, and extracts with one cc. of amyl alcohol. The purple color is extracted into the amyl alcohol.In his test involving the use of charcoal, he adds a small amount of animal charcoal to the mixture of the alcohol, KOH, and Marihuana, presumably to remove chlorophyll, and then lets it stand for two hours before filtering.155The resultant filtrate is free of chlorophyll, and the tests obtained are better.We have found that his test, involving the use of charcoal, works better with activated charcoal, such as norit or Darco than with the animal charcoal prescribed.Also, we find that we get results by filtering immediately after the addition of charcoal, instead of letting the mixture stand for two hours. We have not found any case of failure to respond upon immediate filtration, which would respond after standing.Another modification which we have developed in our laboratory, and which may be considered a modification of the Bouquet test, is probably most convenient of the modifications to run, because it involves the least manipulation. It consists merely of shaking for a few seconds the sample of Marihuana with a two percent alcoholic solution of potassium hydroxide. Add to this is an amount of activated charcoal equal in weight to the Marihuana. The mixture is shaken for a few seconds, and filtered immediately. The filtrate is purple and on dilution with water, the purple colored substance may be extracted by amyl alcohol.Other modifications of the technique have been proposed by Dr. Myttanaere, Viehoever, Placencias and others.156As I said before, a large number of plants fail to respond to any of these modifications of the Beam tests. We have followed the appearance of the Beam test in plants with regard to age, parts of plant, and variety.In regard to age, some plants three inches tall have been found to respond to the Beam test. Some plants, at all states of growth, up to their decadence, respond.Many male plants, which are all withered, and consist of nothing but a skeleton with a few dried flowers sticking to the top still respond to the alkaline Beam test.As far as an individual plant goes, the order of response is best in the top, both with the male and female plants, followed by the upper leaves, lower leaves, upper twigs, upper stalk, lower twigs, and lower stalk. In other words, as you go up towards the top of the plant you get the best response.Where the top responds very strongly, you generally get a weak response in the skin of the lower stalk. If the tops respond very weakly, the upper leaves will probably be negative, or just give a trace of response. We have never been able to get any response at all from the pith or roots of the plant.157This last summer we tested six varieties of hemp, as Dr. Robinson indicated this morning. Three of them were Roumanian varieties; one of them was Italian, one, Manchurian; and one of Chinese origin.Of the three Roumanian varieties, about a percent could be positively identified by the alkaline Beam test, as Dr. Natchett pointed out this morning.The other three gave a trace of response to the test.The Italian variety was very close to this, having about 98 percent attainable by the Beam test.Of the Manchurian and Chinese, only about 20 to 50 percent could be positively identified, and of these, practically none of the tests were as strong as the tests obtained from the Roumanian and Italian varieties. The largest number of the plants were absolutely negative, or showed merely faint trances of response, which we would not consider to be suitable for identification if the plants were unknown.We studied the effect of heating the plants towards response to the alkaline Beam test. We found that heating parts of the plant at 100 degrees with air blowing over them for up to five hours did not have any harmful effects on the material response for the alkaline Beam test.In fact, some of the plants showed better response158after heating than before. Although some workers in Europe say in no case should the extract be heated. over 50 degrees Centigrade.However, heating the plant at 150 degrees under the same conditions did prove to have a deleterious effect.Another treatment we tried was permitting the plant to mold. We subjected the tops of some of the plants, both negative and positive, to molding, in a very moist atmosphere, for a period of about five weeks. After this period, the whole plant was covered with slimy mold. Response to the alkaline Beam test was as good as it was originally.Some negative plants which were molded remained negative after the molding period.Oxidization is an essential part of the Beam test. Beam, in his original article, pointed out that if the tests be applied in the absence of air, a dirty brown color will result instead of the purple color. We have taken up some of the resin in alcohol, and added an equal volume of 2 per cent alcoholic KOH solution. The resultant solution was colorless, but on passing oxygen through it, the characteristic purple color developed.Shaking the solution with charcoal had the same effect. Presumably this is because oxidization is effected159by the oxygen adsorbed on the charcoal.Oxidation must be done in alkaline solution. Charcoal plays a dual role in the test. In the case of the ethyl acetate test the effect is merely to remove extraneous matter, since no oxidation is effected in this solution.In certain solvents, such as petroleum ether, the activated charcoal will entirely remove from solution the material responsible for the Beam test, while animal charcoal does this to a much smaller extent. In fact, animal charcoal may be used in petroleum ether, although its effect as a cleaning agent is not very large.The second role of charcoal is that of an oxidizing agent.The oxygen adsorbed on activated charcoal is effective in producing the necessary oxidation of the material responsible for the alkaline Beam test. Animal charcoal is effective to a very much smaller extent, and is therefore unsatisfactory for use in this process.MR. WOLLNER: I think we will have a recess now for about five minutes before we resume.(A short recess was taken, after which the proceedings were resumed as follows:)MR. WOLLNER: Now, after that rather exhaustive160treatise on the Beam test, I would like to have Mr. Benjamin tell us something about this so-called Duquenois test.The reason time is being given on these tests is this: Every so often a new test is obtained, and this is the experience in every phase of chemical activity, and until several months or years have been put in on it, everyone gets highly enthusiastic about it.Efforts are made to introduce it as witness material in court, and the first thing you know you run into a situation where you are yourself out on a peninsula and you can not possibly get back.We have asked the Treasury Department not to employ any tests unless they are absolutely tests on a theory of so-called triangulation, so that when our men go to court to testify on a seizure that their evidence is sound.Mr. Benjamin, will you tell us briefly about the Duquenois test and what our experience has been with that.MR. BENJAMIN: I think this was proposed in the early part of 1938. Reagent number 1 is an alcoholic solution with vanillin and acetaldehyde.The second reagent is concentrated hydrochloric acid;161The technique consists of extracting hemp with petroleum ether and driving off the solvent by heat.One then takes one cc. of the alcoholic reagent, adds it to the residue, and into the solution thus prepared, puts two c.c.�s of concentrated hydrochloric acid.There is a change in color from green to slate blue to violet blue.Now, since we have had this, we have tested approximately 165 substances, including some of the alkaloids, the essential oils, C. D.  alcohols, everything I could get my hands on that might show up with this reagent.So far, not one sample of hemp has failed to respond to this test. When I say "hemp" I am referring to solid extracts, fluid extracts, and ether available preparations. They all show positive.Certain essential oils when treated by the test procedure ran through the same changes as the hemp, namely, oil of bay, geranyl acetate, rhodinyl acetate, and one or two others.There was also a compound known as Denol, that gave practically the same reaction as hemp. That is used in C. D. alcohols. I do not know exactly what it is composed of, but I think a mixture of higher alcohols and ketones.162MR. SCHICKTANZ: Yes, higher alcohols.MR. BENJAMIN: I must emphasize the fact that not one sample of Cannabis or fluid extract of Cannabis or solid extract has failed so far.MR. WOLLNER: Would you recommend the test as an eliminative test for hemp; that is to say, hemp would have to give a positive test of the Duquenois agent in order to be considered hemp, and then proceed? MR. BENJAMIN: Yes.MR. WOLLNER: To apply another test to see whether it is another substance?MR. BENJAMIN: I think the fact that ia the Duquenois test for Cannabis fails to respond, then one should hesitate to call the sample Cannabis.MR. WOLLNER: That is predicated---MR. BENJAMIN: (Interposing) On the 165. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Munch, you have had some experience with some other tests, which we do not think very much of.DR. MUNCH: That is fine. MR. WOLLNER: What is your experience with that test?DR. MUNCH: I started about three or four years ago with the method developed by an official in the British pharmacopoeia for ergot, using paradimethyl amino benzal-163dehyde.The results I obtained I then dropped, because I got busy on something else, but I have had occasion this last spring to review and finish up that work, which was reported at Madison and the American Pharmaceutical Association. The manuscript is in the hands of the editor of the American Pharmaceutical Association, and ought to be out next month.In it I tried various modifications and found the 2-1/2 per cent solution of paradimethyl amino benzaldehyde in 65 per cent sulphuric acid, or in 65 per cent phosphoric acid, which is my principal reagent.The material to be tested is shaken with 10 parts, or approximately 10 parts, of low boiling petroleum ether, (below 40 degrees Centigrade) which has been redistilled and a half part of Merck�s activated charcoal or norit, or any other U. S. P., activated carbon for five or ten minutes, then filtered. The filtrate is evaporated, and the reagent applied to the residue. The direct application of the reagent causes charring, or does not cause anything, according to how much material has been removed.But on the addition of a drop of water there is an immediate development of a blue color, shifting toward the violet end of the spectrum, and disappearing within164two seconds or two hours, depending on how much material is present.Ergot gives a blue color similar to that of Cannabis, but the color shift is toward the red. The red is much slower than with that of Cannabis, and it persists for several days.I went to two neighborhood drug stores, and got ten or eleven materials out of their prescription department, and sent them through the same tests. Many of them gave no color. Others gave colors of some sort.But, to make a long story short, none of them gave the same type of color as the blue shift that I obtained with Cannabis. I have tried about 50 samples of Cannabis, so far, and every one of those gave the same reaction. While my eye is not too good, still there is a symmetric trend between the potency on dogs and the degree of color developed here. By degree I mean intensity and duration, considering them together. But a product stronger on the dog has given me a stronger color. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Matchett, what is your experience with that Ghamrawy test? DR. MATCHETT: We found too many other substances, which we regard as giving colors too similar to that165given to Cannabis, to have any value in the hands [of] anyone not very definitely expert in the use of it. Even in such hands it is our judgment that colors given tobacco and certain other substances were still too near the color given by Cannabis for use in the case of extracts.Of course, where we have a plant to look at, we realize a different situation exists.DR. MUNCH: Even with tobacco? DR. MATCHETT: Tobacco was very close. DR. MUNCH: Is that right? DR. MATCHETT: This was not used with charcoal. DR. MUNCH: If I do not use charcoal, I get inconclusive results along that line. DR. MATCHETT: I am coming 'to that. It was our experience that the U.S.P. activated charcoal would remove either the hemp or tobacco test substance from petroleum ether. The result being that the test in hemp was about the same as it was in tobacco. I will ask Mr. Benjamin if that is a correct statement.MR. BENJAMIN: That is correct. MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Lancaster, have you had any experience with these tests in Canada?MR. LANCASTER: Yes, Dr. [sic] Wollner.166Some years ago our interest was aroused as to whether or not Canadian Cannabis would be at all active. As some of you know, the plant thrives in all climates. We have it in all altitudes. There are no cultivated plants. But some years ago we wanted to satisfy ourselves about the activity of the Canadian produced Cannabis. Some was grown in western Canada for windbreak purposes, that is the only economic function it had with us. 	After applying the alkaline Beam test, as put out from Geneva we obtained positive reactions, and the pharmacologists tried it on dogs and we found it responded, so we concluded that some of the Canadian Cannabis was active.From the standpoint of the administration of the Narcotic Act, our interest is entirely limited to the illicit traffic, and it is confined to the reefer or cigarette, where we have the advantage of a physical. diagnosis, rather than chemical.The chemical work on this we intend to follow up as of extreme importance, because it is difficult to predict to what extent the extracts may come into use.There is a possibility of developing a non-reactive type of plant, but it is not of an immediate concern, although there again conditions of world trade and combined167complications might become such that Canada might be asked to take up that problem again. Who knows?So we can not afford to lose interest in these chemical phases of the testing.Our experience with the Beam test has been that it is somewhat erratic, and does not always give the equivalent results in the hands of different operators, for some reason.Of course, there again, we have run some of our tests on plants where we know we have had them in storage for some years.It is rather puzzling there is no reaction there.MR. WOLLNER: No reaction? MR. LANCASTER: On prolonged storage. MR. WOLLNER: Under what conditions was that hemp stored? MR. LANCASTER: In a large glass stopped bottle. However, we have to check that again, because of the results of this vegetation which remained an open field, which is another puzzle.MR. WOLLNER: That is where we all find ourselves at the moment.What I would like to hear from the group is something in the way of suggestions as to how this problem can be168most competently attacked. What is to be done? The problem is not a simple one, although there is no indication as to its complexity. I say it is not a simple problem, because if material has not been advanced after several thousand years of experience there must be some barrier there. Is there any technique which should be considered which has not been considered?Dr. Hibben, have you any suggestions along this line?DR. HIBBEN: That is rather a difficult question. I think we are proceeding correctly.I think the first thing that has to be done is developing an adequate method for determining the content of the active principle, and until such a method is developed, there is not going to be very much room for improvement.MR. WOLLNER: The only difficulty has been that this problem has been very much the problem of peeling an onion--the more you peel, apparently the more peels you can take off, until you peel away the onion and then there is nothing left.DR. HIBBEN: That is quite true. But I do not think there has been any comprehensive, systematic work done on the problem, by an adequate chemical staff, under ade-169quate direction.MR. WOLLNER: The first thing seems to be to find the active principle. That is a different proposition.DR. MUNCH: Has any work been done on the chlorophyl of the leaf?DR. MATCHETT: All the work we know of is what you have done.DR. MUNCH: The only thought I have is, if the chlorophyll of Marihuana happens to be different from all other chlorophylls in the universe, it can be identified microscopically.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Hibben, you have run some microscopic tests on Cannabis direct for the chlorophyll. DR. HIBBEN: I did not look for chlorophyll. I say that is very desirable, but I say they would be very doubtful on the chlorophyll alone.DR. MATCHETT: Of course, there are some points about that. MR. VALAER: The chemistry of opium was very uncertain for a long, long time. We had a crude mass to work with, and gradually they pulled out one hundred pieces or more. I believe, after all, we have not been interested in this more than about two years. I believe the chemical crude resin Marihuana will work out in the same way. We have two stills upstairs. We have a good many people170working on it in extracts and various ways, even now in this brief time.MR. WOLLNER: Dr. Couch, do you have anything to offer?DR. COUCH: I would like to say that this problem is in no more desperate condition than a great many other problems in which a solution has not been reached. They all present this picture before the real work is done in solving it which makes it all seem extremely baffling.It is very curious that by plugging along and keeping infernally at it, that one of these days the problem is solved almost before it is realized, and it seems to me that the lines that have been projected here and the lines that have been followed are exactly those that should be followed, and will, in the course of time, lead to the solution of the problem; I mean the information that you desire to have.There is one thing that occurs to me that has not been mentioned, and that is if any work has been done upon the smoke from Marihuana, as the smoke is physiologically active.It may be different from the resin taken by mouth or injected into the veins. That is another matter. But it seems to me that there is something there that might171be developed as a test for identity.MR. SMITH: I think Dr. Hershfield did something on that chlorophyll work which he did two years ago.DR. COUCH: Of course, along that line is also the possibility of reaction from the protein. It simply rests on the possibility and probability that that is, of course, the leafy tissue, and the extract probably would not serve.The leafy portion would contain some propein. That with a water extract or salt extract of the plant itself, in a very short time would get positive results, one away or the other.The difficulty there is there may be present some protein that is also present in another plant. That difficulty arises, but the precipitation reactions are amazingly specific and amazingly direct.When one goes from one animal tissue to another he has to wash his hands extremely carefully as he changes over from one to another, so as not to spoil the test in the next tissue. There is that sort of delicacy.I simply offer that as a test. I presume there has already been a lot of thought discounted on that subject.MR. WOLLNER: I do not know of that test. Dr. Loewe? DR. LOEWE: If I may bring up the encroachment which172is in doubt, it has been known thousands and thousands of years that sex cells contain an active principle. However, it has taken up to this century to get hold of those active principles, and the reason was not the difficulty with respect to chemistry, but the difficulty was that there was no test for the active principle only as an active principle, and no chemical tests were given.This is the same situation in Cannabis with one exception, and we know the physiological test for the active principle is given. It is much more easily accessible. This biological test is much more easily accessible, so there is a test, and the thing which has not yet been done, at least not yet systematically enough, is to dovetail the identification of the active principle by its active nature by a biological test.I think this specific picture of the dovetail work gives immediately the solution, unless somebody is inclined to drop the whole thing.But I again remember that same situation in the female hormone and the male hormone, which involves just this one property to give a beautiful color reaction. However, it did not take more than five years after finding the right test and using the right test in the right way from the first isolation of the principle. I think173this is the way prescribed.MR. WOLLNER: Do you know of any experiments, Dr. Loewe, that have been performed on the smoke itself? DR. LOEWE: No.DR. BLATT: I know of where they took the Marihuana smoke and passed it through solvents.DR. LOEWE: Through chloroform? DR. BLATT: No, through water. DR. LOEWE Water, rather than chloroform?DR. BLATT: Yes.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: There is a great deal of work being done at the present time with respect to the use of opium smoke. A paper has just been prepared by someone in a laboratory in London, which has just been issued. Are you familiar with Dr. Nicholls?MR. LANCASTER: Yes, Dr. Nicholls was mentioned in connection with the research today.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Is that the same Nicholls who is on the Opium Assay Committee?DR. BLATT: I was going to say very much the same thing as Dr. Loewe said; that is, that I can not see any reason for being discouraged as far as chemistry is concerned.Now, you have got a perfectly good point of attack.174The amazing thing about this whole problem is that nothing has been done with the exception of this one matter in 1932, when it was established that crude Cannabinol behaves like a pure substance, and the customary high vacuum distillation technique fails to separate it into its constituents. The work has been apparently dropped from that time on.The surprising thing is that someone has not jumped into that.MR. WOLLNER: Of course, there has been no commercial demand in that respect, .and that is one of the reasons for that.DR. BLATT: It is difficult to get hold of the material. DR. HIBBEN: If you want to get something on spectroscopic methods, when these chemists leave the point where there are spectroscopic methods for determination and for determining the structure, they would aid greatly in facilitating this problem.MR. WOLLNER: It would aid greatly.DR. MATCHETT: We would like to ask Dr. Hlbben if there are not some such methods which may be correlated to the bioassay?175The essential or volatile oils come out of this material very readily. It can be narrowed down to relatively few compounds.If we knew, separately, the spectra of these various materials, would it not help to follow the separations at that stage of operations?DR. HIBBEN: Yes, I think it would. You can start in by that procedure on hormones.DR. MATCHETT: And I believe also carotenoids. DR. HIBBEN: Yes.DR. MATCHETT: As the fractionation goes further and further, the number of bioassays increases almost without limit, and that is one reason we were particularly interested in it.Also, the quantitative phase has to be considered. DR. LOEWE: But, as an economic matter, and the rational method is to proceed in an economical way, which can be done by carefully choosing fractions to test.DR. MATCHETT: I do not believe we could quarrel about that.DR. MUNCH: Doctor, there is the other thought, and that is that we have not been picking on any of the prisoners lately.COMMISSIONER ANSLINGER: Doctor, we are not dealing176with the same problem as opium, where we can take the addict to a hospital at Lexington and go through all of the experiments.There is a little danger that this drug might affect a man permanently. He might do something which we may be sorry for later.I think that must be given serious thought.DR. WRIGHT: Dr. Wollner, I will not be very long now, but I just want to clarify a point, and it would seem from reports and other information that the tests are rather indicative of hemp rather than of the active prin-ciple.I am saying that for this reason: We would like to be in a position to approach the development of strains that were free from the active principle,Now, until we have a test it seems to be that we can not do anything.MR. WOLLNER: Yes, and no.DR. WRIGHT: I will say it is possible that one of these tests may be useful from a breeding standpoint, but it seems to me it is working entirely on a guess,It would seem to me that any approach would be resolving the strains in pure breeding alone. In other words, approach the inbreeding situation in a hybrid manner;177that is the approach we want, but it would seem to me that all we could do at this state would be to develop those lines at random.In other words, set up as many facilities as we could for pure breeding lines. Any individual plant that would be tested would be very indefinite as to what its progeny would be, and it would seem to me that that is more or less a blind approach; shall I say a lick in the dark; and we would have to develop as many as we could. We can do that, develop as many lines as possible, like in Prussic acid in Sudan grass.My point is, and I am mentioning it to you chemists, that we can get nowhere without a test of consequence. We might be lucky. About ten thousand chances to one, we might be lucky until we have a test.MR. WOLLNER: In the last analysis, you are unquestionably correct about that. Really, before significant progress can be made by the agricultural people, we will have to provide you with a formula.Before we adjourn, I would like to invite any of the visiting friends present to come upstairs for a few minutes and see our laboratory set-up for tackling this job, the molecular stills, and extraction equipment, and I am quite sure you will enjoy it.178And I want to really express my appreciation and thanks for your kind cooperation in helping to clarify these issues.(Whereupon, at 5:10 o'clock p.m., the Conference was adjourned sine die.)1Wollner�s book???