WT01-B23-1IA087-000632-B016-84http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091456 text/html 14835HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:14:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:26 GMTContent-length: 14617 Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Table of Contents The Report Letter of Transmittal Introduction I. Marihuana and the Problem ofMarihuana Origins of the Marihuana Problem Visibility Perceived Threats Symbolism The Need for Perspective Historical Perspective Cultural Perspective The Search for Meaning Skepticism The Limits of Rationality Formulating Marihuana Policy Scientific Oversimplification Philosophical Oversimplification Sociological Oversimplification Legal Oversimplification The Report II. Marihuana Use and Its Effects The Marihuana User Demographic Characteristics Patterns of Use Profiles of Users Experimental Users Intermittent Users Moderate and Heavy Users Very Heavy Users Becoming a Marihuana User Parental Influence Situational Factors and Behavioral Correlates Social Group Factors The Dynamics of Persistent Use Becoming a Multidrug User Epidemiologic Studies Profiles and Dynamics Sociocultural Factors Effects of Marihuana on the User Botany and Chemistry Factors Influencing Drug Effect Dosage Method of Use Metabolism Set and Setting Tolerance Reverse Tolerance Duration of Use Patterns of Use Definition of Dependence Effects Related to Pattern Use Immediate Drug Effects Subjective Effects Bodv Function Mental Function The Intoxicated State Unpleasant Reactions Anxiety States Psychosis Conclusions ShortTerm Effects Long Term Effects Very Long Term Effects Tolerance and Dependence General Body Function Social Functioning Mental Functioning Motivation and Behavioral Change Summary III. Social Impact of Marihuana Use Marihuana and Public Safety Marihuana and Crime The Issue of Cause and Effect Marihuana and Violent Crime Marihuana and Non Violent Crime A Sociocultural Explanation Marihuana and Driving Marihuana, Public Health and Welfare A Public Health Approach The Population at Risk Confusion and Fact Assessment of Perceived Risks Lethality Potential for Genetic Damage Immediate Effects Effects of LongTerm, Heavy Use Addiction Potential Progression to Other Drugs Preventive Public Health Concerns Summary Marihuana and the Dominant Social Order The Adult Marihuana User The Young Marihuana User The World of Youth Why Society Feels Threatened Dropping Out Dropping Down Youth and Radical Politics Youth and the Work Ethic The Changing Social Scene IV. Social Response to Marihuana Use The Initial Social Response The Change The Current Response The Criminal Justice System Law Enforcement Behavior Law Enforcement Opinion The Non Legal Institutions The Family The Schools The Churches The Medical Community Summary The Public Response V. Marihuana and Social Policy Drugs in a Free Society Drugs and Social Responsibility A Social Control Policy for Marihuana Approval of Use Elimination of Use Discouragement or Neutrality Implementing the Discouragement Policy The Role of Law in Effective Social Control Total Prohibition Regulation Partial Prohibition Recommendations for Federal Law Recommendations for State Law Discussion of Federal Recommendations Discussion of State Recommendations Discussion of Potential Objections A Final Comment Addendum Ancillary Recommendations Legal and Law Enforcement Recommendations Medical Recommendations Other Recommendations Index of Contributors, Contractors and Consultants The Appendix The Technical Papers of the First Report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, March, 1972 Letter of Transmittal Members and Staff Preface Part One -- Biological Aspects I. History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant History of the Medical Use History of the Intoxicant Use II. Biological Effects of Marihuana Botanical and Chemical Considerations Factors Influencing Psychopharmacological Effect Acute Effects of Marihuana (Delta 9 THC) Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term Cannabis Users III. Behavioral and Biological Concomitants of ChronicMarihuana Smoking by Heavy and Casual Users Part Two -- Social Aspects I. Marihuana Use in American Society Surveys of Marihuana Use The Incidence and Prevalence of Marihuana Use The Future of Marihuana Why People Use Marihuana Becoming a Marihuana User Circumstances of First Marihuana Use The Marihuana User The Patterns of Marihuana Use Marihuana Use and the User: 1972 II. Marihuana and the Use of Other Drugs Empirical Data on the Escalation Process Youth Drug Use Survey Summary III. Marihuana and Public Safety Problems in Assessing the Effects of Marihuana Marihuana and Violence Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime Marihuana and Driving Part Three -- Legal Aspects I. Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco History of Marihuana Legislation History of Alcohol Prohibition History of Tobacco Regulation II. The Legal Status of Marihuana International Control The Control of Marihuana Under Federal Law Control of Marihuana at the State Level The Role of Ancillary Offenses and Constructive Possession in Controlling Marihuana Marihuana Control at the Local Level Analysis of Statutes Requiring Physicians to Report Drug Addiction III. Trafficking Patterns of Marihuana and Hashish Marihuana Traffic From Mexico Marihuana Traffic From Jamaica The Growing Hashish Traffic Part Four -- Response of the Criminal Justice System toMarihuana Use Introduction I. Enforcement Behavior at the State Level Enforcement Behavior at the Federal Level General Trends Federal Enforcement of the Marihuana Laws: 1970 III. Opinion Within the Criminal Justice System Prosecutorial Opinion Opinion of Court Officials Part Five -- National Survey I. A Nationwide Study of Beliefs, Information and Experiences Main Report Methods and Procedures Part Six -- Social Policy Aspects I. The Constitutional Dimensions of Marihuana Control Substantive Limitations on the Criminal Law Federal Preemption of Marihuana Control II. Models and Statutory Schemes for Controlling Marihuana Law and Social Policy Legal Implementations of Marihuana Control Policies Formulating a Legal Scheme Implementation of Alcohol Prohibition Marihuana and Education Drug Programs in American Education State Departments of Education Survey Commission Visits Drug Education Programs of Special Interest Marihuana Education in State Programs Surveys of College Drug Courses The Federal Government and Drug Education Research Needs and Directions Biomedical Psychosocial Legal and Law Enforcement Index of Contributors, Contractors and Consultants Research Papers Prepared for the Commission Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B23-2IA087-000627-B013-271http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/cptstaff.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050908 text/html 2676HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:08:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:01:16 GMTContent-length: 2459 Cannabis Therapeutic Program Staff California Research Advisory Panel Cannabis Therapeutic Program Panel Members Edward P. O'Brien, J.D. Panel Chairman Appointed by the Attorney General, Frederick H. Meyers, M.D. Panel Vice-Chairman Appointed by the University ofCalifornia Donald W. Holsten, Pharm.D. Appointed by the Department of Health Services Luis Icaza, Pharm.D. Appointed by the State Board ofPharmacy Nancy C. Miller, R.N. Appointed by the Governor Carmel M. Roberts, Ph.D. Appointed by the University of SouthernCalifornia Designated private university Donald R. Wesson, M.D. Appointed by the California MedicalAssociation Designated professional medical society William Stanton, M.D. Appointed by the Research AdvisoryPanel Allan J. Flach, M.D., Pharm.D. Appointed by the Research Advisory Panel Staff Members David W. Schieser, Ph.D. Executive Secretary Brenda J. Crommie Secretary CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-3IA087-000627-B013-303http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ctpexec.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050929 text/html 43246HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:09:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:48 GMTContent-length: 43028 Cannabis Therapeutic Program EXECUTIVE SUMMARY California Research Advisory Program Cannabis Therapeutic Program EXECUTIVE SUMMARY EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy for cancer isoften so severe as to limit treatment. Drugs currently used tocombat that nausea and vomiting have very limited effectivenessand unpleasant side effects. In 1979, the Legislature becameconcerned that the status of marijuana as a stringently regulateddrug might be inhibiting research into its possible therapeuticeffects and that many cancer patients were being deprived of apossibly effective treatment for nausea and vomiting. TheLegislature therefore directed the Research Advisory Panel,created by the Legislature in 1969, to provide compassionateaccess to marijuana, or its active componentdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), by establishing a clinicaltrial conforming to federal and ethical standards for researchusing human subjects and a new drug. The Panel recruited 486 oncologists from throughout the Stateand 321 of these provided oral THC for 2,356 patients andmarijuana cigarettes for 119. The limited efficacy of THC was inthe meantime being established by double-blind studies carriedout elsewhere. The Panel study was a "Phase III" studyproviding experience under conditions of actual practice.Throughout the program over 1,716,000 dosage units ofinvestigational drug were provided without charge by the NationalCancer Institute (NCI) and the National Institute on Drug Abuse(NIDA) to 114 approved pharmacies. The cost of the CannabisTherapeutic Program for the eight years was $400,000. Oral THC has been shown to be clearly efficacious for reliefof nausea and vomiting in some patients, but not a total answerto the terrible emetogenic effect of current anticancerchemotherapy. Side effects were frequent but not serious, butwere a factor in limiting patient acceptance. The Panelestablished a cumulative dose schedule for THC, not previouslystudied, that provided the same efficacy with fewer troublesomeside effects. In addition to the major study of smoked marijuana or oralTHC alone, the Panel sponsored research into an analogue of THC,delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol, combinations of THC with otherantiemetics and the use of THC for nausea and vomiting fromcauses other than cancer. In 1984, the Legislature added to its mandate a study of thesame drugs in the treatment of glaucoma. Only 9 patients from theentire State received THC under the new program. The drug givenchronically is safe, but not demonstrably effective. The program was effectively ended in October, 1986, when THCwas marketed as dronabinol (Marinol). The California experiencewas a factor in the decisions of the U. S. Food and DrugAdministration (FDA) to permit its marketing. The Research Advisory Panel does not recommend an extensionof Article 6 of Chapter 5 of Division 21 of the California Healthand Safety Code. California investigators can still carry outresearch using human subjects and THC, but the Panel can nolonger provide the drug free. The Research Advisory Panel wishes to express itsappreciation to the Legislature for directing the establishmentof a program which resulted in meeting the needs of that time forcompassionate access, as well as satisfying a continuing need forresearch on the medicinal effects of such a controversial drug. January 24, 1989 CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY, NAUSEA AND VOMITING The Problem With the development of effective cancer chemotherapeuticagents and multi-drug regimens, the prognosis for many patientswith even advanced cancer has improved. However, the widely usedchemotherapeutic regimens induce nausea and vomiting withregularity. as does radiation therapy to the abdominal area. Insome cases, the treatment for cancer may cause more immediatediscomfort than the disease itself, often leaving patients withnausea and vomiting so severe as to impede their leading even asemblance of normal life. For many patients, the mereanticipation of chemotherapy induces vomiting and causesdepression, occasionally leading to the refusal to receivefurther potentially life saving treatment. This nausea, vomitingand loss of appetite may have not only a profound psychologicalimpact on the patient, but also produce significant weight loss.Cancer itself may also produce significant anorexia and weightloss and the problems are compounded by chemotherapy. Inadequacy of Drugs in Current Use Drugs to control the side effects of nausea and vomiting fromanticancer treatment have proved to be inadequate. Whenadministered with chemotherapy, phenothiazine derivatives such asprochlorperazine (Compazine) and thiethylperazine (Torecan) havebeen only partially successful in controlling the nausea andvomiting caused by many anticancer drugs and their side effects,especially a subjectively unpleasant sedation, are severe.Patient compliance is therefore limited. Other drugs, e.g..metoclopramide, loperamide, and high dose corticosteroids havehad brief vogues of extensive use. Early Experience with Marijuana and THC Anecdotal reports from cancer patients suggested that smokingmarijuana provided a significant antiemetic effect. In 1975,Sallan and associates initiated a small controlled study toevaluate the efficacy of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), aprincipal active component of marijuana, as an antiemetic agent.Additional small controlled trials2' including some carried outin California and approved by the Research Advisory Panel, showedthat THC given by mouth provided some benefit to some patientssuffering from nausea and vomiting of chemotherapy. Although thispreliminary research partially confirmed the anecdotal findings,the reported degree of effectiveness, as well as reported adverseeffects varied considerably among research studies. The promising research studies furthered a widespreadinterest in marijuana by patients undergoing chemotherapy.However, marijuana was and is a Schedule I controlled substance(i.e., a drug with a high abuse potential that lacks an approvedmedical use under federal law) and only a very limited number ofpeople were eligible to legally use it and only at the fewlocations of the ongoing research studies. Some very sick peopleresorted to illegal use of this Schedule I controlled substance. 1. Sallan SE. Zinberg RE. Frei NE 111. Antiemetic effect ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients receiving cancerchemotherapy. M Engl J Ned 1975: 293: 795-7. 2. Card S. Beers AL Jr. Bogard M. McMahan RT, Nangalik A.Ashman AC. Levine S. Two-pronged study of tetrahydrocannabinol(THC) prevention of vomiting from cancer chemotherapy. IRCS NedSci 1980; 8: 203-4. Orr LE. MKeran JF. Sloome S. Antiemetic affect ortetrahydrocannabinal compared with placebo and prochlorperazinein chemotherapy associated nausea and emesia. Arch Intern Ned1980: 140: 1431-3. Sallan SE. Cronin C. Zolen 14. Zinberg NE. Antiemetica inpatients receiving chemotherapy for cancer. New Engl J Ned 1980;302: 135-8. CANNABIS THERAPEUTIC PROGRAM Legislative History The California Legislature found that the potential medicinalvalue of Cannabis sativa had received Insufficient -study due toa lack of financial incentives for the undertaking of appropriateresearch by private drug manufacturing concerns. Individualphysicians could not utilize cannabis in their clinical practiceand it was not feasible for them to conduct research because ofgovernmental controls which include time consuming applicationswith rigorous approval and monitoring procedures and reports. TheLegislature decided that 'compassionate access' to thiscontroversial drug should be provided for cancer patients. At thesame time, the Legislature recognized that treatment should beprovided under the general controls that apply to all new drugresearch. To accomplish the two aims: 1) compassionate access 2)achieved by research meeting the U.S. Food and DrugAdministration and ethical standards and without contributing tothe drug's availability through illicit channels, the Legislatureturned to the Research Advisory Panel, an agency established andutilized by the Legislature since 1969. The Research Advisory Panel The Legislature established the Panel as an autonomousmultidisciplinary committee of experts with diverse backgroundswho serve without pay and without vested interests in the mattersdiscussed. Panel members are appointed, not by a single elected officialor State office, but by various public and private agencies: theAttorney General, the University of California, the Department ofHealth Services, the State Board of Pharmacy, a privateUniversity designated by the Governor, the California MedicalAssociation, and the Governor. For the purposes of thisassignment, the Panel was authorized to appoint two additionalmembers with expertise in oncology or glaucoma. Appendix Icontains the sections of the California Health and Safety Codepertaining to the Research Advisory Panel. The Research Advisory Panel has existed since 1969 when itwas created by the Legislature to encourage research into thenature and effects of abused drugs, to review and approveresearch involving Schedules I and II controlled substances andto function as a human subjects' protection committee in researchinvolving scheduled substances. The Panel established, approvedand monitored methadone maintenance programs, providing treatmentunder the guise of research, until such programs became legal astreatment. Because of its legislated mandate and the compositionof its membership, the Panel is in a unique position to provide alevel of control over research beyond that required of anindustrial sponsor or a University. Prior to the new assignmentwhich is the subject of this report, the Panel had sponsored asymposium on marijuana research in California And provided seedfunds for twelve California investigators, two of whom havesubsequently developed comprehensive and influential programswith federal funds. In 1978, the Panel was monitoring some twentyfour research projects involving marijuana or THC. Panel's Role in Development of Legislation In 1979, when Senator Presley and the Legislature beganconsideration of the need to provide compassionate access tomarijuana, the Research Advisory Panel had approved five researchprojects employing marijuana or THC and involving as many as fivehundred cancer patients suffering severe nausea and vomitingcaused by their cancer treatment. The Panel counseled that State sponsored trials would berequired because the patent protection necessary to attractindustrial sponsorship was lacking. It was also pointed out thatstandardized THC and marijuana cigarettes from the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) be used rather than confiscatedmarijuana that would be of variable and unknown potency andgenerally unsuitable for oral use; that initial trials be limitedto patients receiving cancer chemotherapy; and that the treatmentof glaucoma, then seen as unpromising by available experience andliterature, be added later. Summary of Legislation The goals of the Legislature and of the Panel, to providecompassionate access through a multicenter research-project thatcomplied with FDA regulation were incorporated into Senate Bill184 (Appendix II) that became law on January 1, 1980, as Chapter300, Statutes of 1979 (Therapeutic Marijuana Project. Article 6,Chapter 5, Section 11260 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code).The law mandated that the Research Advisory Panel establish a4-year pilot research program into the medical use of cannabisand its derivatives, particularly in treating patients sufferingfrom cancer. The law stated that making marijuana available toindividual physicians in a State-sponsored program for theinvestigational use of cannabis and its derivatives would enablequalified physicians and surgeons in the State to study thebenefits of the drug in a controlled clinical setting and to gainadditional knowledge with respect to dosage and effects. In addition, the law required the Panel to develop guidelinesand protocols for the program and to approve physicians forparticipation in the program. It authorized the Panel to contractfor pharmaceutical formulation, distribution and testing ofcannabis and cannabinoids, to obtain such substances fromdesignated sources, and to charge participating physicians forthe cost of obtaining the materials supplied. The Panel wasrequired to report ,annually to the Legislature on the status andresults of the program. The legislation, with its mention of qualified physicians indiverse geographic areas, was clearly intended to providepatients with 'compassionate access, to these controlled,investigational drugs. The intent was not to foster undisciplineduse of marijuana but rather to increase knowledge about the useof this drug. Thus, both the legislation and the investigationalstatus of the drug enforced the Panel's obligation to conductuseful clinical research and to investigate several stillunanswered questions about THC. Extension of Law and Provision for Glaucoma Studies At the end of 1983, with the Cannabis Therapeutic Programunderway, the Panel made an appraisal of the need for extendingthe Program. At that time, because of the expressed need ofpatients to continue having compassionate access to marijuana,and because of the ongoing research into the use of THC withother antiemetics, the Panel requested an extension of theprogram. Noting that over 1700 patients had enrolled in the studyover the past four years, Legislation was introduced by SenatorPresley to extend the original statute. On July 11, 1984,Governor Deukmejian signed SB 1765 (Chapter 417, Statutes of 1984-Appendix III) into law. This legislation extended the CannabisTherapeutic Program four years beyond its previously scheduledending with a termination date of June 30, 1989. This legislation also directed the Panel to establish anotherstatewide program to make marijuana and THC available to patientsundergoing treatment for glaucoma. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NEW LAW Protocol Development The Panel immediately began to prepare an application forInvestigational New Drug Exemption (IND) to the FDA for approvalto study cannabis in humans. The Panel drafted a protocol for thepilot project, appointed consultantoncology members, andscheduled public meetings for comments from practicingoncologists, pharmacists and nurses before finalizing theprotocols and submitting an IND to FDA. The Panel, throughnegotiations with the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and theNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) arranged a supply of THCcapsules and marijuana cigarettes to approved pharmacies withoutcharge. Before the Program was fully implemented, a number ofadditional steps were taken: an Investigator's Brochure wasdeveloped; an informed consent document was written and reviewedby an outside human subjects' committee to assure patientprotection; a data processing unit was contracted to analyzeresults of investigators' reports; and a uniform investigatorreview and approval process was developed to assure that accessto ordering the drug was controlled. Drug Supply Marijuana is available as a raw plant, dried and minimallyprocessed for smoking or cooking. Its most active ingredient;delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) was available as asynthetically derived chemical and formulated as a solution inoil in a soft gelatin capsule. Although the Californialegislation provided that seized illegal marijuana could be used,the Panel decided that the only reliable source of standardizedmarijuana would be NIDA and that NCI was the only economicalsource of the encapsulated THC. The investigational drugs would be made available by NCI andNIDA at no cost to California participants. To further conservethe limited State funds, the Panel arranged with NCI and NIDA toship drug supplies directly to designated pharmacies, a procedurethat cut costs to the State by eliminating warehousing anddistribution. The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)retained its authority for accountability and to inspect storagefacilities. Investigational THC and/or marijuana cigarettes were shippedto 114 of the 132 approved California pharmacies during the lifeof the Cannabis Therapeutic Program. The total quantities shippedwere as follows: Marijuana cigarettes 27,650 Tetrahydrocannabinol l0mg capsules 5,640 Tetrahydrocannabinol 5mg capsules 1,033,300 Tetrahydrocannabinol 2.5mg capsules 649,900 Due to limitations of shelf life, the above quantities aregreater than the quantities actually administered to patients. The Panel is pleased to report its investigators andpharmacies maintained effective control of this large inventoryof controlled substances. The Panel received no reports of anydiversion, or even inventory discrepancies, of investigationalmarijuana or THC capsules. Cost The Cannabis Therapeutic Program was funded with an initial appropriation of $100,000for the start-up costs and the first year of program operation.Funding for subsequent years of this research project was throughthe standard budgeting process of the State. Overall, the totalcost of the Cannabis Therapeutic Program from 1979 through 1988was $400,000. The Principal items over those years were salariesfor one research project coordinator (Research Assistant II), aparttime student research assistant, data analysis services andconsultation at critical junctures. Panel members or theiremploying agencies volunteered their time. Investigator Eligibility Investigator status was granted to physicians who were boardeligible or board certified medical oncologists. radiationoncologists, hematologists, or otherwise qualified physicians(e.g., pediatric oncologists) and who: a. completed an Investigator Application, b. held a current license to practice medicine in California, c were otherwise qualified by their training and/orexperience, d. completed the Federal FDA Investigator's Form (FD Form1573), and e. agreed and certified in writing that they would follow allprovisions of the protocol. Participating investigators were required to assume fullresponsibility for determining that their patients conformed tothe admission requirements. Continued participation wasconditioned upon the investigator's compliance with the protocolincluding adequate record keeping on treatment outcome and timelysubmission of data forms to the Panel. The Panel assured allparticipants that it would carefully monitor this program, and anumber of site visits were made. Physician Enrollment The legislation directed that access be provided overgeographically wide areas of the State. The Panel made extensiveefforts to publicize the Cannabis Therapeutic Program throughoutthe State to encourage qualified oncologists in diversegeographical locations to apply. The Panel's program wasannounced in the newsletter of the Board of Medical QualityAssurance which is mailed to all California licensed physicians.All acute are hospitals were provided with a notice announcingthe program and explaining the enrollment procedures. Recipienthospitals were asked to circulate the notice to oncologydepartments and to post a copy. At the meeting of the AmericanSociety of Clinical Oncology in San Diego in May 1980, the Panelannounced the Cannabis Therapeutic Program to Californiaoncologists, provided application forms to them and answeredtheir questions; thus, the application review and approvalprocess continued through the spring and summer. In July and September 1980, investigator training meetingswere held in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Sacramento, and SanDiego and two more held in April 1981, one in Los Angeles and onein San Francisco. Ample time was allowed for questions andanswers. In addition to oncologists, these meetings were attendedby nurses, pharmacists, and data managers. The agenda of these meetings included presentations onproblems on the clinical pharmacology of marijuana of potentialconcern to the seriously ill, the elderly and the very young; areview of the research procedures; information on drug ordering,storage and dispensing; and a review of data collection andreporting requirements. These meetings were considered crucial toobtaining standardized protocol implementation, statewide, inthis large scale clinical study with only a small staff formonitoring. Investigators, new to the State or new to practice,who had no opportunity to attend the training meetings wereinstructed individually by project staff. Although newspaper andtelevision interviews were used to inform the general public, thePanel relied primarily on oncologists to inform patients of theprogram's existence. At the conclusion of the initial enrollment period inSeptember 1980, three hundred and twenty physicians applied forparticipant status and 218 investigators from 21 countiesactually met all registration requirements by attending one ofthe four investigator's seminars. By the time the program endedin 1988, 486 investigators had registered and 321 had enrolledpatients. At the conclusion of the enrollment-period in September 1980,over 80 designated pharmacies were registered with DEA todispense Schedule I controlled substances, THC and marijuana. Bythe end of the program, 132 pharmacies had been approved todistribute THC and/or marijuana. Research Subjects Initially, eligible patients were males and non-pregnantfemales, five years of age and older, with histologicallydocumented malignancies receiving chemotherapy or radiation andexperiencing nausea and vomiting which was not relieved bytreatment with conventional antiemetics. Participation in the program was completely voluntary.Therefore the study population was self-selected. The limitationsplaced on the Panel by the conflicting aims of the program didnot permit the establishment of a control group. Each patientacted as his/her own control, and previous experience withconventional antiemetics was compared with the experience withTHC treatment. Research Subject Protection The use of either THC or marijuana for therapeutic purposeswas experimental; therefore. the Panel required investigators toobtain a voluntary, informed consent before enrolling any cancerpatient into the program. The Panel prepared a written consentform which disclosed the potential benefits as well as theattendant risks of participation in the experiment. This documentwas reviewed and approved by the Human Subjects' ProtectionCommittee of the California Department of Health Services. Theconsent form, written in lay language without unnecessarytechnical terms, ambiguous phrases or exculpatory clauses, madeclear, among other conditions, that participation, both initialand continued, was entirely voluntary. Pursuant to Section 24170 et seg of the Health and SafetyCode, the Rosenthal 'Protection of Human Subjects in MedicalExperimentation Act,' each subject also received a copy of the'Research Subject's Bill of Rights.' Physicians practicing inhospitals or other institutions were also subject to review bytheir own research or human subjects committees. At theinvestigators' meetings, the Panel stressed that informed consentis not a mere formality. English and Spanish versions of the consent form wereprovided. Patients who did not speak either language wereenrolled only if a competent translator was available to explainthe consent form pointby-point and to attest in writing to thepatient's understanding of it. Patients aged 5 to 17 wererequired to have parental consent before enrolling in the studyand must have joined with their parents in giving consent. STUDY OBJECTIVES There were two objectives set forth in the statutes: 1. to allow qualified oncologists in diverse geographicallocations to provide the drug on a compassionate basis toseriously ill persons not responding to conventional treatment,and 2. to facilitate clinical trials of Cannabis and itsderivatives in cancer patients pursuant to the federal INDprocedures. Both the legislation and the investigational status of thedrug under federal law obliged the Panel to conduct usefulclinical research to address several unanswered questions aboutTHC and marijuana effects. However, compassionate access madesome of the basic research processes unusable, e.g., adouble-blind controlled study. Therefore, to accomplish these twopotentially conflicting objectives, the Panel planned a largecollaborative Phase III3 trial. At the time the Panel designed its protocols, severalcontrolled studies of THC's effect on nausea and vomiting hadbeen completed. Controlled studies demonstrating efficacy resultswere variable and optimal dosage was not established. Individualdoses in most other studies were inflexible and ranged from 2.5to 15mg THC/m2 body surface area. The time at which the firstdose of THC was administered in these studies varied from 1/2hour to 24 hours prior to the initiation of chemotherapy. Thefrequency of THC administration varied from every 2 .hours toevery 8 hours. Therefore, a major research objective was todetermine the optimal THC dose and dosing schedule. Other research questions to be addressed were: 1) Does theantiemetic effectiveness of THC (and marijuana) vary with theanticancer agent? 2) What are the nature and incidence of theside effects of THC ',,and marijuana) in typical oncologicalpatients7 3) What is the general acceptance of THC and marijuanaby practicing oncologists and by cancer patients7 4) Once aneffective dose has been established, does tolerance develop toTHC's antiemetic effect7 3. Among the safeguards for developing an investigational newdrug in a step-wise testing process: the drug is tested inanimals before humans. in normal volunteers before patients. andin small groups of people before large groups. Preclinical refersto non-human experiments. e.g.. toxicity and pharmacologyexperiments in animals. Phase I is conducted in small numbers ofnormal human volunteers to determine dosage levels and otherpharmacologic parameters. Phase 11 clinical trials typicallyinvolve small numbers of patients and comparisons to othertreatment and must be controlled and almost always double blind.Phase III is to confirm effectiveness and to assess adverseeffects in a large and diverse patient population. Usually thesestudies are uncontrolled. represent the conditions of actualpractice, and evaluate toxicity rather than efficacy. Phase IV isto report on drug safety and effectiveness after marketing. Protocol History With all of the above considered. protocols were prepared anda comprehensive investigational new drug application (IND) wassubmitted to the Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) March28, 1980. The initial application included four protocols for THCand marijuana administration. See Appendix IV. Protocol I was the study of oral THC capsules as anantiemetic in adult cancer patients receiving cyclicchemotherapeutic agents known to produce nausea and vomiting.(Cyclic chemotherapy was defined as single or multiple doses ofchemotherapeutic drugs given within a two-day period, with eachtreatment cycle separated by one week or more.) To be eligible,patients must have failed to benefit from conventional antiemeticdrugs such as Compazine or Tigan during at least one previoustreatment episode. Protocol II was similar to Protocol I except that adultpatients would be receiving daily anticancer therapy which couldeither be chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Protocol III (Pediatric Protocol) was similar to Protocol Iexcept that it was designed for pediatric patients aged 5 through14 years. Also, patients receiving up to five consecutive days ofchemotherapy could be enrolled provided that treatment episodeswere separated by three weeks or more. Special safeguards such asthe minimum age of 5 years, consent by both parents and by thechild. lower starting dosage of THC, and special mental healthevaluation, were incorporated into this protocol. Protocol IV (Smoked Marijuana Protocol) was an evaluation ofsmoked marijuana in adult cancer inpatients receiving one or moreof three extremely emetogenic chemotherapeutic agents, e.g.,Cisplatin, dacarbazine or 5-azacytidine alone or in combinationwith other agents. This protocol was initially limited topatients 15 years of age or older who were marijuana experienced. The goal of these first four protocols was to obtain patientdata rapidly and as safely as possible on the critical issue ofTHC dose and side effects. The plan was to quickly define apractical safe dose and then modify, eliminate or add to theprotocols as necessary. The above research protocols were modified several timesduring the course of the Cannabis Therapeutic Program, to ensurethe broadest compassionate access and as much useful data aspossible. At the outset of the program, pediatric consultantssuggested that the usual treatment lasted for 48 hours or lesswith treatment separated by one week or more. The duration ofchemotherapy allowed by Protocol III was limited accordingly.However, the Panel soon learned that a regimen of 5 days ofchemotherapy repeated every 3 weeks was frequently used inpediatric practice. Therefore, the Panel modified the criteriafor Protocol III to include those chemotherapy regimens lastingfor five consecutive days, provided that treatments are separatedby three weeks or more. After the first 150 patients were treated with cannabis underProtocols I and II, the data were scrutinized by Panel members,staff and consultants. Two-thirds of patients reported benefit,but the Panel noted that a large number of patients complained oftroubling, although not dangerous, side effects from THC. It alsoappeared that these side effects influenced a patient'scontinuation in the program with an initial dropout rate of 48percent. Therefore, in August 1981, the Panel lowered thestarting dose of THC capsules from 7.5mg THC/m2 to 5mg THC/m2 inProtocols II and III. The rationale for this change was acontinuation of the attempt to achieve an optimum dose of THC,balancing antiemetic efficacy with troublesome side effects. Oral THC Protocol. During site visits the Panel learned thatinvestigators perceived the Cannabis Therapeutic Program to bemuch more complex than it actually was. Therefore, to encouragethe participation of cancer specialists and to provide greatercompassionate access of cancer patients to THC, the Panel revisedits protocols in July 1981. The three protocols for oral THC werecombined into one streamlined protocol to simplify the programand to avoid investigator confusion. Also, the new unifiedprotocol, referred to subsequently as the Oral THC Protocol, wasmodified to enable radiation patients who experienced nausea orvomiting to receive THC. Cumulative Dose Protocol. In September 1981, the Panelhypothesized that small oral doses (e.g. 2.5mg/m2) of THC wouldbe more useful than larger doses (e.g. 5.0mg/m2) if the repeatedsmall doses were started sufficiently long enough beforechemotherapy (e.g. 4 doses prior to chemotherapy). THC is a longacting drug with an appreciable latent period before its effectdevelops. The development of side effects that caused patients todiscontinue THC could be predicted by the size of the single doseof THC that was used. Given cumulatively, that is, in smallerdoses begun at a longer interval before chemotherapy, aneffective level should be achieved with fewer side effects thanif a single large dose is used in effort to achieve a rapideffect. See Appendix VI. Cumulative Protocol for Oral THC Adopted. in 1982, thecumulative, low-dose regimen was adopted, for the Oral THCProtocol to reduce the number of patients who stopped THC therapybecause of side effects that were discomforting rather than lifethreatening. The lower initial dose (2.5mg/m2) beginningapproximately 24 hours prior to anticancer therapy allowedpatients to accommodate better to THC as an antiemetic. SeeAppendix VII. Combination Antiemetic Protocol. By 1983, it became apparentthat oncologists were prescribing several antiemetics incombination in an effort to maximize the benefit. This approachto treatment led investigators in the cannabis study to suggestusing THC in combination with other antiemetics. Only two studiesinvolving THC used in combination with another drug had beenconducted and in both cases, the other drug was a phenothiazine.The effectiveness of THC tied in combination with a variety ofother antiemetics was not established and further clinical trialswere needed. Additive effects, particularly if the drugs haddifferent mechanisms of action, were expected to enhance theeffectiveness of THC. Appendix VIII includes the CombinationAntiemetic Protocol, consent form, patient package insert,investigator brochure. and the combination protocol for pediatricpatients. Smoked Marijuana Protocol. In March 1982, the Panel alsorevised the protocol for smoked marijuana to broaden access.Based on suggestions from oncologists and the absence ofassociated problems, the protocol was expanded to includeoutpatients and marijuana-naive patients who were taught astandardized smoking technique. In late 1982, the Panel further revised the Smoked MarijuanaProtocol. This protocol made any cancer patient receivingradiation therapy or any chemotherapy drugs known to cause nauseaand vomiting eligible to participate, and permitted analternative smoking technique to humidify the smoke and reducethe smoke's harshness by water filtration. Appendix IX containsthe initial versions of the Smoked Marijuana Protocol whichfinally was also included in the Combination Protocol above. Controlled Studies. In addition to the statewide open studiesdescribed above, the Panel sponsored two double-blind, cross-overcontrolled studies conducted by a small group of investigators. THC in Combination with Scopolamine. One protocol wasintended to test the efficacy of THC use in combination withTransderm V, a patch which is applied to the skin behind the earand releases an antinausea drug, scopolamine, through the skincontinuously over a period of two to three days (Appendix X).Transderm V was supplied by CibaGeigy with double-blind labelingand was to be randomly substituted with an identical placebopatch. THC in Combination with Dexamethasone. The second protocol,also a double blind cross over study, was intended to test theefficacy of THC used in combination with dexamethasone, anantiinflammatory steroid which has been used as an antiemetic(Appendix XI). Dexamethasone was supplied by Merck Sharp &Dohme Research Laboratories with double-blind labeling and was tobe randomly substituted with an identical placebo tablet. Theseprotocols began in late 1983 and continued to be available untilDecember 1987. Delta-8-THC. Some reports in the medical literature claimthat delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-8-THC), a syntheticcannabinoid not present in natural marijuana, possesses actionssimilar to those of delta-9-THC, but possibly caused fewercentral nervous system side effects. The Panel, with theassistance of Marie Perez-Reyes, M.D., developed a pilot researchproject to study the effects of delta-8-THC as an antiemetic. In October 1983, the Panel submitted IND 124,094 to the U.S.Food and Drug Administration (Appendix XII). Patients were firstenrolled in October 1983. The Pilot Protocol (protocolexceptions) and the Glaucoma Protocol (Appendix XIV) arediscussed in detail later in the sections on findings. Each protocol change was duly reported to FDA and discussedas necessary with that agency's representatives. No revisionrequest was denied. Table A provides a summary of the history of protocol changesfor the Cannabis Therapeutic Program. Data Collection Initially, data on patient history and the physician'sevaluation of treatment were collected at the time of treatmentusing three standardized forms. The "Chemotherapy andMedical History Prior to THC" form requested informationregarding patient characteristics and past chemotherapy andantiemetic experience. The 'Physician's Treatment Episode Report'included information on THC dosage, chemotherapy, performancestatus of patient, overall THC effectiveness rating on a 4-pointscale, and ratings of the incidence and severity of 13 designatedTHC side effects. Every day that patients received THC, theycompleted a "THC Evaluation Form,' rating nausea, vomiting,food intake and overall effectiveness using 4- and 5-pointscales. If a patient dropped out of the study, the specificreason was noted. Details of serious adverse reactions werereported separately. Much of the pilot testing and design of data collection formswas conducted in collaboration with investigators and theirstaff. The Cannabis Therapeutic Program paperwork, including thePatient Package Insert and the Treatment Report forms werethoroughly reviewed by many of these persons. As protocols were changed, data forms were also revised in aneffort to increase enrollment by reducing the burden of paperworkfor investigators and patients. Revisions were color-coded foreasy identification. All data forms are attached to the protocolsincluded in the appendices. The latest revision of the protocol (2/11/83) requiredcompletion of only one data form for each treatment episode andrequested only that information which was considered essential. - For the purposes of evaluation and analysis, data from theearlier forms were transcribed by Panel staff to the newer formfor consistency in coding. Independent contractors were utilizedfor data entry and analysis for the first phases of the study.Thereafter, Panel staff conducted the analysis for the concludingphases. Data Quality Control In general, there were few problems with protocol compliance.Physician cooperation was exemplary despite protocol details,controlled substances prescription forms, and reports to becompleted. This is particularly noteworthy in view of the factthat the funding usually provided by drug companies. An important result from the site visits was the initiationof Cannabis Therapeutic Program Newsletters designed to keepinvestigators, nurses, and pharmacists abreast of programdevelopments and research findings. Dissemination of Findings and Results The Panel kept the Legislature, the medical community, andthe public informed about the program and its findings throughthe Panel's Annual Reports to the Governor and Legislature,newsletters and announcements to investigators, presentations atprofessional meetings and publication in professional journals.The FDA received quarterly reports as required. By invitation of the Illinois Dangerous Drug Commission, thepreliminary results of the California Program were presented atthe National Conference on Marijuana and Cannabinoid Therapeuticsin Chicago in March 1982. The legal, administrative andoperational aspects of the California program were shared withthe professionals attending the meeting. The Panel also published in scientific publications severalreports on research findings and program development: Gordon J. Dow and Frederick H. Meyers, The California Programfor the Investigational Use of THC and Marijuana in HeterogeneousPopulations Experiencing Nausea and Vomiting from AnticancerTherapy, Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21:128S-132S, 1981. Dow, G.J. and others. Serious reactions to oral delta-9-THCin cancer chemotherapy patients. Clinical Pharmacy 3:14, 1981. Meyers, F. and others. Reduced adverse effects with optimalanti-emetics dosage schedule of delta-9-THC. Proceedings of Am.Soc. Clin. Oncology, p94, 1984. Devine, M. and others. Adverse reactions to delta-9-THC givenas an antiemetic in a multi-center study. Clinical Pharmacy6:319-22, 1987. Flach, A. and others. Experience on Treatment of Glaucoma with delta-9-THC,presentation for meeting of American Academy of Ophthalmology, inpreparation. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-4IA087-000627-B014-40http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ctp2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050945 text/html 64051HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:09:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:01:13 GMTContent-length: 63833 Cannabis Therapeutic Program DETAILED PROTOCOL RESULTS California Research Advisory Panel Cannabis Therapeutic Program DETAILED PROTOCOL RESULTS Interpretations of efficacy of THC are limitedby the fact that in this study no control group could beestablished for comparison with the treatment group. Thus, someof the findings are more anecdotal than quantitative. However,the following results are clear, reasonable and documented. Number of Patients Treated A total of 2,475 patients were treated withTHC or smoked marijuana under one or more of the followingprotocols: Smoked Marijuana Protocols 119 The compassionate access THC protocols 2400 Dexamethasone Protocol 4 Transderm-V Protocol 65 Delta-8-THC Protocol 10 Pilot Protocol (protocol exceptions) 19 Glaucoma Protocol 9 Because of the protocol revisions previouslydescribed, data had to be tabulated separately for each of theseveral compassionate access THC protocols (subjects who receivedTHC for nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy): a) Initial Trial 856 patients enrolled in the initialProtocols I, II, and III between November 1980 and April 1982,and followed until October 1982. b) Cumulative Dose Protocol 365 patients enrolled in theCumulative Dose Protocol. c) Combination Antiemetic Protocol 657patients enrolled in the Combination Antiemetic Protocol, whosetreatment report forms were returned to RAP after January 1,1984. Initial Trial Summary. These first results reflect data from an openmultisite cooperative study conducted to evaluatedelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in patients receivinganticancer therapy who previously had been treated with otherantiemetics. Oral THC was found to be effective in reducingnausea, vomiting and anorexia. Effectiveness was related to chemotherapeuticregimen, generally being most effective with the less emetogenicagents. Side effects were common. Serious adverse reactions were reportedby physicians for nine patients, but none of these were lifethreatening. There was no significant difference between theeffectiveness of the 5mg/m2 and 7.5mg/m2 doses, but 5mg/M2 wasassociated with fewer side effects, a lower dropout rate due toside effects and a greater number of patients continuing THCtreatment. Thus, 5mg/m2 is the preferred dose. The incidence ofclinically serious adverse reactions to oral THC was less thanone percent. Patient and Investigator Demographics Ofabout 300 board certified and eligible oncologists, one hundredseventy-nine enrolled 856 patients, of which 706 were evaluable.Patients were enrolled between November 1980 and April 1982, andwere followed until October 1982, at which time a finaldisposition was obtained on each patient. A total of 150 patientswere excluded from analysis due to incomplete report forms,enrollment at dosages other than 5mg/m2 or 7.5mg/m and enrollmentby 26 investigators who did not adhere to the protocol. To avoid bias caused by selectivedropping-out, only results from the first treatment episode areanalyze in this report, although over half the patients receivedTHC in two or more discrete episodes for a total of 1622treatments in this initial trial. Results of second andsubsequent episodes are statistically more favorable sincepatients with disturbing side effects and those with good resultsself-select for continuation or termination. Sixty percent entered the study at a THC doseof 7.5m 2g/m2 ; 40% entered at the 5mg/ml dose level. Sixty-twopercent of the patients were female. The median age for women was49, and for men was 38. Sixty-four percent of the patients hadbreast, lung. ovarian, or hematopoietic neoplasms. Seventysevenpercent of the patients were able to carry on normalactivities despite their disease (Karnofsky performancestatus of 80 or more). Ninety-nine percent of patients had failed tobenefit significantly from other antiemetics, which werephenothiazines (87Z), butyrophenones (6%), metoclopramide (6%),and others (3%). A wide variety of chemotherapeutic agents wereused, usually in combinations. The number of patients perparticipating physician varied widely: 69 physicians or 41% ofthem had one or two patients while 25 physicians (15%) had 10 ormore patients in the program (Table B). Proportionately, among men there were moreyoung persons than among women: 30% of the men compared with only132 of the women were below 30 years. 44% of the men and 611 ofthe women were in the age group 30-59 years. The age groups above60 years were equally represented among men and women (26%)(Table C). The tumor sites most commonly representedamong the patients in the THC program were, for women, carcinomaof the breast (38%) and cancer of the ovary or uterus (21%). Themost common primary tumor sites among the men were Hodgkin'slymphoma (18%) and lung carcinoma (18%) (Table D). It should beemphasized, however, that the distribution of primary organlocations is not representative of the prevalence by site in thegeneral population. Table B Frequency Distribution of 167 Physicians by Number of Patients Treated with THCCapsules ------------------------------------------------ Number Frequency Number Frequency of of of of Patients Physicians Patients Physicians -------- ---------- -------- ---------- 1 33 13 2 2 36 14 3 3 18 15 2 4 18 5 12 15 1 6 5 1 7 8 21 1 8 5 9 5 28 1 10 6 11 3 29 1 12 5 --------------------------------------------------------- 167 physicians treated 809 patients with THCcapsules. Table C Characteristics of Study Population of the Initial Trial ------------------------------- Male Female No. Percent No. Percent --- ------- --- ------- Sex: 306 37.92 501 62.08 Age Distribution: 19 yrs or less 23 7.52 29 5.79 20 - 29 yrs 67 21.90 36 7.19 30 - 39 yrs 57 18.63 81 16.17 40 - 49 yrs 30 9.80 99 19.76 50 - 59 yrs 44 14.38 125 24.95 60 - 69 yrs 56 18.30 96 19.16 70 yrs or more 23 7.52 32 6.39 Unknown 6 1.96 3 0.60 -------------------------------------------------------- Base: 890 patients receiving capsules. Exclusions: 2 patients with sex unreported. Table D Distribution of Primary Tumor Site by Sex ----------------------------------------- Primary Tumor Site Males Females No. Percent No.Percent Lip. Oral Cavity & Pharynx 7 2.3 5 1.0 Digestive Organs & Peritoneum 36 12.0 21 4.2 Examples: Stomach 6 2.0 1 0.2 Colon, Caecum, 11 3.7 10 2.0 Pancreas 6 2.0 4 0.8 Respiratorv & Intra- thoracic Organs 68 22.6 49 9.8 Examples: Lung-Trachea 53 17.6 40 8.0 Thymus, Heart & Mediastinum 12 4.0 6 1.2 Bone. Connective-Tissue, Skin & breast 3913.0 216 43.3 Examples: Bone & Articular Cartilage 20 6.6 10 2.0 Connective & Other Soft Tissue 10 3.3 11 2.2 Female Breast 191 38.3 Genitourinarv Organs 41 .13.6 124 .24.8 Examples: Uterus 6 1.2 Ovary & Other Uterine Adnexa 106 21.2 Prostate 10 3.3 Testis 24 8.0 Lymphatic & heamatopoeitic Tissue 73 24.3 46 9.2 Examples: Hodgkin's Disease 55 18.3 30 6.0 Myeloid Leukemia 9 3.0 8 1.6 Other unspecified sites 37 12.3 38 7.6 ----------------------------------------------------------------- 499 100.0 Total (n-800) 301 100.0 Study design. TheCalifornia statute that established the cannabis program includesthe objective of providing 'compassionate access' to marijuanafor cancer patients receiving chemotherapy and radiotherapy.Strict experimental control measures were thereby precluded.Patients served as their own controls. however, throughcomparison with previous antiemetic trials. Drug dose and schedule. The drug was supplied by the National Cancer Instituteas soft gelatin capsules containing 2.5, 5 and 10mgdelta-9tetrahydrocannabinol dissolved in sesame oil. Based ondosage, two cohorts of patients participated in this initialstudy. Patients in the first cohort received 7.5mg THC/m2 everyfour hours while awake starting six hours prior to anticancertherapy, and continuing for 24 to 48 hours after its completion.If severe side effects occurred, the physician had the option toeither delay, omit, or reduce the next dose, or discontinue THCtreatment. Preliminary results from the 7.5mg/m2 dose regimenindicated that a lower starting dose of THC might be bettertolerated. Thus, patients in the second cohort were those given5mg THC/m2 in the same manner. Efficacy. In 482patients, the identical anticancer treatment was used with theTHC treatment episode and with the prior treatment episode,allowing comparison of the efficacy of THC to a standardantiemetic. As illustrated in Table E, nausea and vomiting werebetter controlled by THC than by previous antiemetics in 752 and731 of patients respectively. Fifty-five percent of patientsreported improved food intake. Although some nausea and vomitingoccurred in most patients during the THC trial, as shown inTables F and G, nausea was absent in 17% and mild in 38% of thepatients. Vomiting was absent in 30% of the population. and inanother 33% occurred an average of less than four times daily. Asillustrated in Table B. 62% of patients rated THC moderately tovery effective. Physicians' effectiveness ratings for THC used inconjunction with various chemotherapy agents are summarized inTable I. Depending on the anticancer agent used, THC waseffective in anywhere from 38% to 662 of the patients. Nostatistically significant associations were found betweeneffectiveness and age, sex or primary tumor site. Effectiveness and Chemotherapeutic Drugs. Because of the size of this statewide cooperativestudy, assessment of effectiveness of THC was possible withspecific chemotherapeutic regimens. As rated by physicians THCwas most effective with chemotherapy regimens known as CMF5*,FAC**, and AC***. Physicians rated THC as moderately or veryeffective in 82 percent of the treatment episodes involving CMF,76 percent of those involving FAC, and 75 percent of thoseinvolving AC. THC was least effective with DTA**** and CISCA*****, yet over 40 percent of thesepatients benefitted significantly. 5. CMF Is Cyclophosphamide. nethotrexate& 5-FU FAC is 5-FU. Adriamycin & cyclophosphamide *** AC Is Adriamycin & cyclophosphaside *** DTA Is Decarbazine & Adriamycin :**** CISCA in Cisplatin, cyclophosphamide& Adriemycin Table E Patient's Assessment of Symptoms: THC Compared to Previous Antiemetic* ----------------------------------- Severity of Nausea Vomiting Anorexia Symptoms No. No. % No. ----------- ---------- ----------------------- Less with THC 363 75 350 73 264 55 Same 78 16 61 13 119 25 Greater with THC 41 9 67 14 93 20 Total 482 100 478 100 476 100 ----------------------------------------------------------------Onlyincludes patients whose anticancer treatment was unchanged. Table F Nausea during THC Protected Anticancer Treatment --------------------------- Nausea Rating Number of Patients Percent ------------- ------------------ ------- None 112 17 Mild 248 38 Moderate 166 25 Severe 130 20 Total 656 100 ---------------------------------------------- Table G Vomiting during THC Protected Anticancer Treatment ----------------------------- Amount of Vomiting Number of Patients Percent ------------------ ------------------ ------- None 197 30 1-3 times 218 33 4-6 times 83 13 7 or more times 158 24 Total 656 100 ----------------------------------------------------- Table H Patient Overall Assessment of THC Effectiveness -------------------------- Degree of Effectiveness Number of PatientsPercent ----------------------- ------------------------- None 152 24 Slight 92 14 Moderate 196 30 Very 203 32 Total 643 100 Table I Physician's Effectiveness Rating of THC by Chemotherapy Regimen ----------------------------------- Chemotherapy Regimen Total Number Moderate orVery of Patients Effective Rating -------------------- ---------------------------- No. 5 Fluorouracil, Adriamycin and cyclophosphamide 32 21 66 Cyclophosphamide, metho- trexate and 5 fluorouracil 56 37 66 Adriamycin and cyclophosphamide 90 57 63 Cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, vincristine and prednisone 51 28 55 Cisplatin, cyclophosphamide and Adriamycin 50 20 40 Dacarbazine and Adriamycin 34 13 38 Safety.Physicians were required to make a separate report of anyclinically serious adverse reaction, defined as a reaction whiletaking THC that required the use of drugs or hospitalization ofthe patient. During the course of this trial, five clinicallyserious adverse reactions were reported among the first 856patients treated with THC. There were two instances of severepsychological distress (anxiety), and one case each of myoclonicjerking, postural hypotension, and grand mal seizure.Complicating factors, for example, brain metastasis associatedwith the seizure, were present in three cases. All patients withserious adverse reactions had the drug immediately discontinuedand recovered fully with no sequelae. Generally, no other drugtreatment was needed. Side Effects.Side effects were common: even at the lower dose, about 80% ofpatients had at least one side effect, and in 26% of thosepatients, at least one side effect was considered severe. Thesevere side effects with an incidence of 5% or greater were allcentral nervous system effects. A significant difference betweenthe sexes was observed: nine percent of women reported severeanxiety as compared to 4% of men (p=.025). Influence of DoseLevel. The THC dose level was found to influence the frequency ofside effects and drug-related reasons for dropping out of thestudy, but did not influence drug effectiveness. The frequency and nature of various sideeffects rated as moderate and severe for both THC dose levels are listed in Table J. Dose level influencedwhich side effects were reported most frequently as severe. At7.5mg/m2, the two most common severe side effects were confusionand anxiety. At 5mg/m2, these were sedation and confusion.Patients receiving 5mg/m2 reported an average of 3.3 moderate andsevere side effects, compared with 4.4 per patient receiving7.5mg/m2. Side effects were almost always less severe when thelower dose of THC was used, and this difference was significantfor seven of the 13 categories of side effects. While there was no statistically significantdifference between the high overall dropout rates associated witheither dose level, patients receiving the higher dose were morelikely to drop out because of side effects than were those on thelower dose. Forty seven percent of the patients receiving 5mg/m2and 492 receiving 7.5mg/M2 dropped out of the study beforereceiving a second THC treatment. Approximately 20% of patientsin both groups dropped out for non-drug reasons (e.g., moved,died, completed chemotherapy). 2 Of the patients who received5mg/m 682 dropped out because THC was ineffective, and 32%droppedout because THC produced side effects judged by the patient to beintolerable. In contrast, in the 7.5mg/m2 group, only 521 droppedout due to drug ineffectiveness, and 48% dropped out due tointolerable side effects, a significant difference between doses(P<.05). There was no difference in the overall drop-out ratebetween the two dosage groups. Safety.Physicians were required to make a separate report of anyclinically serious adverse reaction, defined as a reaction whiletaking THC that required the use of drugs or hospitalization ofthe patient. During the course of this trial, five clinicallyserious adverse reactions were reported among the first 856patients treated with THC. There were two instances of severepsychological distress (anxiety), and one case each of myoclonicjerking, postural hypotension, and grand mal seizure.Complicating factors, for example, brain metastasis associatedwith the seizure, were present in three cases. All patients withserious adverse reactions had the drug immediately discontinuedand recovered fully with no sequelae. Generally, no other drugtreatment was needed. Side Effects.Side effects were common: even at the lower dose, about 80% ofpatients had at least one side effect, and in 262 of thosepatients, at least one side effect was considered severe. Thesevere side effects with an incidence of 5% or greater were allcentral nervous system effects. A significant difference betweenthe sexes was observed: nine percent of women reported severeanxiety as compared to 42 of men (p=.025). Influence of DoseLevel. The THC dose level was found to influence the frequency ofside effects and drug-related reasons for dropping out of thestudy, but did not influence drug effectiveness. The frequency and nature of various sideeffects rated as moderate and severe for both THC dose levels arelisted in Table J. Dose level influenced which side effects werereported most frequently as severe. At 7.5mg/m2, the two mostcommon severe side effects were confusion and anxiety. At 5mg/m2,these were sedation and confusion. Patients receiving 5mg/m2reported an average of 3.3 moderate and severe side effects,compared with 4.4 per patient receiving 7.5mg/m2. Side effectswere almost always less severe when the lower dose of THC wasused, and this difference was significant for seven of the 13categories of side effects. While there was no statistically significantdifference between the high overall dropout rates associated witheither dose level, patients receiving the higher dose were morelikely to drop out because of side effects than were those on thelower dose. Fortyseven percent of the patients receiving 5mg/m2and 492 receiving 7.5mg/M2 dropped out of the study beforereceiving a second THC treatment. Approximately 20% of patientsin both groups dropped out for non-drug reasons (e.g., moved,died, completed chemotherapy). Of the patients who received5mg/M2, 681 dropped out because THC was ineffective, and 32Zdropped out because THC produced side effects judged by thepatient to be intolerable. In contrast, in the 7.5mg/m2 group,only 52% dropped out due to drug ineffectiveness, and 482 droppedout due to intolerable side effects, a significant differencebetween doses (P<.05). There was no difference in the overalldrop-out rate between the two dosage groups. Table J Comparison of the Incidence of Side Effects with 5/mg/m2 vs. 7.5mg/m2 THC ------------------------------------- Side Effect (Incidence as Moderate Severe percentage) 7.5mg/m2 5mg/m2 7.5mg/m2 5mg/m2 ------------- ------ -------- ------ Dry mouth** 46.5 35.4 3.9 3.2 Tachycardia 12.0 10.9 2.0 1.1 Ataxia** 21.9 18.3 5.4 1.1 Dizziness 41.7 27.1 8.7 4.6 Orthostatic hypotension 16.8 14.1 3.0 2.5. Anxiety** 22.3 14.4 3.8 Sedation* 56.9 47.7 6.8 7.0 Depressed mood*** 24.0 13.3 7.1 3.5 Elated mood 31.1 35.4 4.1 3.9 Panic 7.6 4.6 6.4 4.2 Confusion** 34.4 27.5 10.4 5.6 Distortion of perception 26.3 22.1 6.6 3.5 Fantasizing 16.0 15.1 4.0 2.1 ----------------------------------------------------------------  (5mg) - 285-285 n (7.5mg) - 404-413 * P<.05 ** P<.Ol *** P<.001 However, in those patients reporting two ormore severe side effects isolated as separate groups, patientsreceiving 5mg/m2 were more likely to continue on to a second THCtreatment, regardless of the number of severe side effectsreported. Forty-three percent of the patients who had experiencedtwo or more severe side effects continued on to a second THCtreatment when started at 5mg/m2. This compared with 29% of thosestarted at 7.5mg/m2. Discussion. Thisfirst study included patients with a wide variety of cancertypes, covering a broad age range, and receiving treatment fromoncologists in community as well as university settings. It thusserved as a test of the antiemetic effect of THC under conditionssimilar to those which would exist in clinical practice were thedrug generally available. Oral THC was found to be a safe and effectiveantiemetic for most cancer chemotherapy patients. This studyshows that a single THC dose of 5mg/m2 causes fewer side effectsthan 7.5mg/m2 while maintaining equal effectiveness. The largerdose, 7.5mg/m2, should be considered for patients not derivingsufficient protection from 5mg/m2 The results of this study are particularlynoteworthy for two reasons: 1) The large number of patients studiedstrengthens conclusions reached regarding the effectiveness andsafety of THC. As of Cocchetto's 1981 review of the literature,the largest sample size of the studies reported was only 116patients. Ungerleider, et al., reported on 214 patients in 1982.This Research Advisory Panel study, on the other hand, collecteddetailed treatment reports and patient histories from 706patients. 2) Most of the patients enrolled in thisinitial program had not responded to conventional antiemetics,thus posing a more difficult therapeutic test than if THC hadbeen the first antiemetic drug used. The high drop-out rate and observations of individual patientssuggested that the rapid appearance of side effects in patientswith limited experience with disinhibiting drugs led to anxietyand even panic. THC has an appreciable latent period, and, if thedrug is given immediately before chemotherapy a relatively largesingle dose must be given to get a rapid effect. Such doses maybe effective but, when the effect is fully developed, will causemore pronounced side effects. THC is known to have a longhalf-life. Giving THC in a cumulative manner, that is, givingrepeated smaller doses at a longer time period prior tochemotherapy, should allow more time for behavioral tolerance todevelop and achieve better patient acceptance but maintainefficacy. To test that hypothesis a second trial was designed. Cumulative Dose Study Summary. The Cumulative Dose Protocol was designed to testthe above hypothesis, that the patient acceptance of oral THCcould be improved by using a cumulative dose schedule without thelose of efficacy. The data below support that hypothesis. Patient and Investigator Demographics.Patient demographics are similar to those of the first study andare summarized for both protocols in Table K. Patients had a widevariety of tumor types and received an assortment ofchemotherapeutic agents. In age, sex distribution, tumor types,and anticancer treatment, the two cohorts did not differsignificantly. All patients had failed to achieve satisfactorybenefit from standard antiemetic before starting the study. Themost common antiemetic drug used prior to THC wasprochlorperazine. Study design.Patients enrolled in the Cumulative Dose Protocol received 2.5mgTHC/m2 orally q4h, starting 4 doses prior to anticance treatment.These patients were compared to a previous group of patients whowere treated under the standard protocol in which they received5.Omg THC/m2 orally q4h, starting only 2 doses prior toanticancer treatment. Results. The following is an analysis of theresults reported by California oncologists of their patientsenrolled in the Cumulative Dose Protocol. In this report, onlythe first THC treatment was used in the comparative analysis ofthe effectiveness and side effects to avoid bias due to overrepresentation of results from repeated trials on patients withgood response. Efficacy.Physician ratings of nausea, vomiting and overall effectivenesswere similar in the initial and the cumulative protocols. Table Lcompares the two cohorts as regards oncologists or nurses ratingsof nausea, vomiting and overall THC effectiveness. Although thereis a slight trend toward less nausea and less vomiting withhigher dose, with 952 confidence it is found that thedistribution of nausea and vomiting ratings are similar for bothprotocols.' Similarly, 571 of patients rated THC as 'moderately'or 'very' effective, exactly the same for the two dosageschedules, indicating that side effects influence the overallevaluation. Side Effects.Table M summarizes the reports of moderate and severe THC sideeffects and their severity as recorded by oncologists or nurseson a standardized list. In no case was the percentage for amoderate or severe side effect increased by the cumulative dosingregimen; and the incidence of twelve of the thirteen side effectslisted was significantly reduced when compared to patients usingthe initial THC protocol. THC Related Dropouts. After the first treatment episode 27.5% of patientsreceiving the cumulative dosing regimen and 22.9% of thosereceiving the standard THC dosage dropped out of the trial. Thereis no statistically significant difference in these dropoutrates. Conclusion. Basedon the preceding findings, it appears that prolonged exposure tolow dose THC is superior to standard THC therapy as an antiemeticregimen for cancer chemotherapy patients. The cumulative dosemethod decreases the number of moderate and severe side effects.The cumulative dose method had no affect on the drug's reportedefficacy and had no affect on drop-out rate. Table K Patient Demographics -------------------- Cumulative Dose Initial Protocol Protocol ------------------ ---------------- (2.5mg THC/m2 with (5.Omg THC with 4 loading doses) 2 loading doses) n - 134 n - 231 Sex Males 38 % 46 % Females 62 % 54 % Age 19 yrs or younger 7% 8% 20 - 39 years 28% 34% 40 - 59 years 44% 34% 60 yrs or older 19% 23% -------------------------------------------------------------- Table L Comparison of Nausea, Vomiting and OverallEffectiveness Between two THC Treatment Regimens -------------------------------------------------------- Ratings of Cumulative Single Dose ---------- ---------- ----------- Nausea n - 124 n - 221 None 17% 18% Mild 27% 32% Moderate 34% 31% Severe 22% 19% Vomiting n - 124 n - 221 None 32% 33% 1 - 3 times 23% 29% 3 - 4 times 14% 13% > 4 times 31% 26% Overall Effectiveness n - 122 n - 221 Not Effective 25% 20% Slightly 18% 23% Moderately 25% 25% Very 33% 32% Table M Comparison of the Incidence & Severity ofSide Effects from THC Using Two Different Dosing Methods --------------------------------------------------------------- Side Effect Rated as Moderate Rated as Severe (Incidence as Cumulative* Single Cumulative* Single percentage) Dose** Dose** ----------- ---------- ------ ---------------- Dry mouth** 19 40 3 6 Tachycardia 2 5 0 1 Ataxia** 2 15 2 1 Dizziness 11 19 6 5 Orthostatic hypotension 3 8 2 5 Anxiety** 2 8 2 2 Sedation* 19 46 9 9 Elated mood 5 20 0 7 Confusion** 8 24 2 5 Distortion of perception 5 14 0 2 Fantasizing 6 13 0 C Depressed mood 5 7 0 4 Panic or fear 2 0 0 4 ------------------------------------------------------------- * Cumulative N - 134 ** Single Dose N - 224 Combination Protocol Summary. Toprovide a more systematic and structured approach to the commonpractice of combination antiemetic therapy, the Panel offered aprotocol for the optional use of THC alone or THC in combinationwith prochlorperazine or other antiemetics. The Panel hoped thatrequired reporting of combinations of antiemetics used. wouldprovide additional information about efficacy and side effects ofvarious combinations. Under the Combination Protocol, themajority of investigators either chose to use THC alone or THC incombination with prochlorperazine. The results of the Combination Protocol studysupport prior Cannabis Therapeutic Program studies in terms ofeffectiveness and side effects. Only one clinically seriousadverse reaction was reported during the treatment of anadditional 657 patients with THC. Also, tabulation of the datademonstrates no significant differences in reports of efficacy orside effects between those cases where THC was used alone, caseswhere THC was used in combination with prochlorperazine or otherantiemetics. Too few treatment reports alluded to combined use ofTHC with other antiemetics to draw conclusions on the individualcombinations. Patient Demographics. The Panel tabulated 2,263-reports of treatmentepisodes on a total of 657 patients treated after January 1,1984, the effective date for the combination protocol. Thesenumbers include treatment reports for 98 patients who wereadministered marijuana cigarettes (including all prior protocolswhich permitted use of smoked marijuana) and records for 70patients who had received prior treatments with THC capsulespursuant to protocols other than the Combination Protocol. Therewere 489 patients who had not been previously treated with THCunder a prior protocol and who first received oral THC under theCombination Protocol. A total of 1,674 discrete treatmentepisodes were reported for these 489 patients. See Table N for adescription of patient characteristics. Table 0 tabulates theemetogenicity ratings of the chemotherapy for the first treatmentepisodes and Table P presents the distribution of types of tumorstreated. Study design. ThePanel had indications that some physicians were using otherantiemetics in combination with oral THC but not informing thePanel or including such data on the treatment report forms. Asidefrom THC as an antiemetic, it was clear that many oncologistswere now using polypharmacy antiemetic therapy, with someof the cocktails ranging up to 5 or 6 antiemetic drugs. Thecombination protocol gave oncologists the option to startpatients either on THC alone or in combination withprochlorperazine or dexamethasone. These combinations wereencouraged by the protocol but other combinations were permitted. Table N Patient Demographics -------------------- THC THC and Combination used other Protocol alone Antiemetics Totals n - 257 n - 232 n - 489 No. % No. % No. % --- ----- --- ----- --- ----- Sex Males 118 45.9 104 44.8 222 45.4 Females 139 54.1 128 55.2 267 54.6 Age 19 yrs or younger 31 12.1 31 13.4 62 12.7 20 - 39 yrs 74 28.8 101 43.5 175 35.8 40 - 59 yrs 85 33.1 63 27.2 148 30.3 60 yrs or more 67 26.1 37 15.9 104 21.3 --------------------------------------------------------------------- Table 0 Comparative Ratings of Emetogenicity of the Chemotherapy ------------------------------------ THC THC and Combination used other Protocol alone Antiemetics Totals n - 257 n - 232 n - 489 No. % No. % No. % ----- --- ----- Emetogenicity Rating Mild 17 6.7 13 5.6 30 6.1 Moderate 138 54.1 95 41.1 233 47.6 Severe 61 23.9 85 36.8 146 29.9 Radiation 22 8.6 25 10.8 47 9.6 Unknown 19 8.5 14 6.0 33 6.7 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- Table P Distribution of Tumor Types --------------------------- THC THC and Combination used other Protocol alone Antiemetics Totals n 257 n 232 n 489 No. % No. % No. % --- ----- --- ----- --- ----- Primary Tumor Site 01 Hodgkins 24 9.3 44 19.0 68 13.9 02 Other lymphomas 15 5.8 32 13.8 47 9.6 04 Lymphoid leukemia 7 2.7 6 2.6 13 2.7 05 Myeloid leukemia 3 1.2 2 0.9 5 1.0 07 Other leukemia 2 0.8 2 0.4 08 Leukemia unspec. 2 0.9 2 0.4 09 Lymphosarcoma 5 1.9 5 2.2 10 2.0 41 Tongue 2 0.9 2 0.4 47 Nasopharynx 2 0.8 1 0.4 3 0.6 49 Other oral cav. 1 0.4 1 0.2 50 Esophagus 1 0.4 1 0.4 2 0.4 51 Stomach 4 1.6 3 1.3 7 1.4 53 Colon 11 4.3 1 0.4 12 2.5 54 Rectum, rectosigmoid 2 0.8 1 0.4 3 0.6 55 Liver and intra 3 1.2 3 1.3 6 1.2 56 Gallbladder ... 1 0.4 1 0.2 57 Pancreas 3 1.2 5 2.2 8 1.6 59 Other dig,torg. 3 1.2 3 0.6 60 Nasal cavities ... 1 0.4 1 0.2 62 Trachea, bronchi 40 15.6 18 7.8 58 11.9 64 Thymus, heart ... 2 0.8 8 3.4 10 2.0 70 Bone and articul 12 4.7 6 2.6 18 3.7 71 Connective, other 12 4.7 4 1.7 16 3.3 72 Melanoma of skin 3 1.2 2 0.9 5 1.0 74 Female breast 58 22.6 41 17.7 99 20.2 79 Uterus ... 2 0.8 1 0.4 3 0.6 80 Cervex, uteri ... 2 0.9 2 0.4 83 Ovary... 24 9.3 19 8.2 43 8.8 85 Prostate 3 1.2 1 0.4 4 0.8 86 Testis 4 1.6 5 2.2 9 1.8 88 Bladder 2 0.9 2 0.4 89 Kidney and .... 2 0.8 2 0.9 4 0.8 90 Eye 1 0.4 1 0.2 91 Brain 2 0.8 5 2.2 7 1.4 95 Other and ill-def 3 1.2 2 0.9 5 1.0 96 Secondary... lymph 1 0.4 1 0.2 99 Without spec. o 3 1.2 3 0.6 Missing 3 1.3 3 0.6 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Objectives of the study included: 1. Does THC have a greater therapeutic effectwhen used in combination with other standard antiemetics? 2. Are THC/Compazine, THC/dexamethasone andTHC/Compazine/ dexamethasone combinations safe and free fromintolerable side effects? 3. Which THC antiemetic combination ispreferred by cancer patients? Drug Dose andSchedule. THC was to be given using the cumulative dose method.Prochlorperazine, at a dose of 10mg orally, was to beadministered at the same time as the THC. Dexamethasone was to begiven 2 hours prior to chemotherapy as a single oral dose of20mg. If a patient had not received a good response from theTHC/prochlorperazine or THC/dexamethasone combinations, insubsequent treatment episodes the patient could be given THC,plus both prochlorperazine and dexamethasone (at the dosage andschedule outlined above.) Results from first treatmentepisodes are emphasized because of the self-selection biasexpected in results from subsequent treatment episodes. Approximately one half of the treatmentreports indicated that the physician investigator chose to useTHC alone. Thus, in the tabulation of these reports "THCalone' serves as a 'control' for presentation of data for the'THC used in combinations group. Little or no differences arenoted. The results of the Combination Protocol studysupport prior Cannabis Therapeutic Program studies in terms ofeffectiveness and side effects. Tabulation of data did not provide an answerto the question of which THC antiemetic combination is preferredby cancer patients. This is due in part to the small numbers ofreports on many of the antiemetic combinations. Also, in general,the reports of efficacy and side effects are very similarregardless of 'THC used alone' or 'THC used in all combinations'. Tabulation of this data also did notdemonstrate any significant differences when results reported forwomen were compared to results reported for men, nor for youngvs. old subjects. Efficacy. Table Qprovides a summary of nausea and vomiting ratings for thefirst treatment episodes which were protected by THC alone, THCcombined with other antiemetics and as a total for the overallexperience with the 489 patients analyzed for this phase of theCannabis Therapeutic Program. Table R similarly summarizes theoverall effectiveness ratings. Side Effects.Overall, side effects do not constitute a major problem in thetherapeutic use of THC. This study not only confirms the firststudy, but serious side effects ceased being reported asphysicians learned better how to use THC, lower doses, andcumulative doses, and not on persons with brain damage. Table Stabulates side effects reported for the first treatment episodefor patients treated with THC, treated with various combinationsof THC and other antiemetics, as well as the totals for theCombination Protocol Study. Dropout Rate.Table T summarizes the reasons for dropping out from the studyafter the first treatment episode. Discussion. Theonly significant difference between this and the first THC studyis the use of combinations of antiemetics. Data on subjectsreceiving polypharmacy have been compared with data on subjectsreceiving THC alone. The similarities of results of the twogroups is remarkable. The only apparent difference is percent ofsubjects willing to continue to additional treatment episodesusing combinations of antiemetics (70%) as opposed to thosetreated with THC alone (46%). This study tended to confirm the findings ofthe first study. An additional 657 patients were treated with THCand their reports of impression of efficacy were similar to thoseof the first study. Similar side effects were noted and only oneserious adverse reaction was reported. The lower dose, and to alarge extent, the cumulative dosing was being used. Additional information. The popular polypharmacy does not appear to offer anyadvantage in terms of effectiveness and little if any advantagein terms of side effects. Again, no differences were found whenthese data were analyzed by sex, or age. Table Q Comparative Ratings of Nausea andVomiting ------------------------------------------ THC THC and Combination used other Protocol alone Antiemetics Totals n 257 n 232 n 489 No. % No. % No. % ----- --- ----- --- ---- Nausea Rating None 38 15.1 50 21.7 88 18.0 Mild 85 33.9 71 30.9 156 31.9 Moderate 73 29.1 57 24.8 130 26.6 Severe 55 21.9 52 22.6 107 21.9 Missing 6 2 8 1.6 Vomiting Rating None 89 35.3 70 30.4 159 32.5 1 - 3 times 69 27.4 58 25.2 127 26.0 4 - 6 times 35 13.9 40 17.4 75 15.3 > 6 times 59 23.4 62 27.0 121 24.7 Missing 5 2 7 1.4 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Table R Comparative Ratings of OverallEffectiveness -------------------------------------------- THC THC and Combination used other Protocol alone Antiemetics Totals n - 257 n - 232 n - 489 No. % No. % No. % --- ----- --- ----- --- ----- Overall Effectiveness Not effective 62 24.7 35 15.2 97 19.8 Slightly 45 17.9 55 23.8 100 20.4 Moderately 68 27.1 60 26.0 128 26.2 Very 76 30.3 81 35.1 157 32.1 Missing 6 1 7 1.4 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Table S Comparative Ratings of Side Effects ----------------------------------- THC THC and Combination used other Protocol alone Antiemetics Totals n 257 n - 232 n 489 No. % No. % No. % --- ----- --- ----- --- ----- Incidence of Side Effects Dry mouth Severe 4 1.6 4 1.7 8 1.6 Moderate 31 12.4 31 13.5 62 12.7 Mild 77 30.8 57 24.8 134 27.4 None 138 55.2 138 60 276 56.4 Missing 7 2 9 1.8 Tachycardia Severe 0 0.0 Moderate 6 2.4 3 1.3 9 1.8 Mild 19 7.6 14 6.1 33 6.7 None 225 90 213 92.6 438 89.6 Missing 7 2 9 1.8 Ataxia Severe 1 0.4 1 0.2 Moderate 4 1.6 7 3 11 2.2 Mild 26 10.4 23 10 49 10.0 None 219 87.6 200 87 419 85.7 Missing 7 2 9 1.8 Dizziness Severe 5 2 1 0.4 6 1.2 Moderate 16 6.4 19 8.3 35 7.2 Mild 46 18.4 50 21.7 96 19.6 None 183 73.2 160 69.6 343 70.1 Missing 7 2 9 1.8 Orthostatic hypotension Severe 1 0.4 1 0.4 2 0.4 Moderate 4 1.6 10 4.3 14 2.9 Mild 27 10.8 31 13.5 58 11.9 None 218 87.2 188 81.7 406 83.0 Missing 7 2 9 1.8 Anxiety Severe 7 2.8 1 0.4 8 1.6 Moderate 8 3.2 15 6.6 23 4.7 Mild 32 12.8 34 14.8 66 13.5 None 203 81.2 179 78.2 382 78.1 Missing 7 3 10 2.0 Table S (Cont.) THC THC and Combination used other Protocol alone Antiemetics Totals No. % No. % No. % --- ----- --- ----- --- ----- Sedation Severe 13 5.2 15 6.6 28 5.7 Moderate 46 18.4 54 23.6 100 20.4 Mild 101 40.4 74 32.3 175 35.8 None 90 36 86 37.6 176 36.0 Missing 7 3 10 2.0 Elated mood Severe 6 2.4 8 3.5 14 2.9 Moderate 22 8.8 20 8.7 42 8.6 Mild 33 13.2 49 21.3 82 16.8 None 189 75.6 153 66.5 342 69.9 missing 7 2 9 1.8 Confusion Severe 2 0.8 5 2.2 7 1.4 Moderate 30 12 19 8.3 49 10.0 Mild 47 18.8 65 28.4 112 22.9 None 171 68.4 140 61.1 311 63.6 Missing 7 3 10 2.0 Distortion of perception Severe 2 0.8 1 0.4 3 0.6 Moderate 12 4.8 13 5.7 25 5.1 'Mild 43 17.2 32 13.9 75 15.3 None 193 77.2 184 80 377 77.1 Missing 7 2 9 1.8 Fantasizing Severe 3 1.3 3 0.6 Moderate 7 2.8 7 3 14 2.9 Mild 22 8.8 15 6.5 37 7.6 None 221 88.4 205 89.1 426 87.1 Missing 7 2 9 1.8 Depressed mood Severe 3 1.2 1 0.4 4 0.8 Moderate 11 4.4 8 3.5 19 3.9 Mild 19 7.6 18 7.9 37 7.6 None 217 86.8 202 88.2 419 85.7 Missing 7 3 10 2.0 Panic or fear Severe 3 1.2 3 1.3 6 1.2 Moderate 4 1.6 2 0.9 6 1.2 Mild 12 4.8 13 5.7 25 5.1 None. 231 92.4 212 92.2 443 90.6 Missing 7 7 1.4 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- Table T Comparison of Reasons for Termination ------------------------------------- THC THC and Combination used other Protocol alone Antiemetics Totals n 257 n - 232 n - 489 No. % No. % No. % --- ----- --- ----- --- Reasons for Termination Ineffective as an antiemetic 40 15.6 20 8.6 60 12.3 Side effects too severe 23 8.9 13 5.6 36 7.4 Expired or completed treatment 69 26.8 26 11.2 95 19.4 Other 6 2.3 11 4.7 17 3.5 Continued study 119 46.3 162 69.8 281 57.5 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-5IA087-000627-B014-86http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ctp3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051022 text/html 47214HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:10:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:59 GMTContent-length: 46996 Cannabis Therapeutic Program Results of Study with SmokedMarij California Research Advisory Panel Cannabis Therapeutic Program Results of Study with Smoked Marijuana The Protocols.Three protocols were developed based on experiences since Marchof 1980: Protocol IV, Revised Operational Protocol for SmokedMarijuana, and Revised Protocol for Smoked Marijuana (AppendixIX). The initial Smoked Marijuana Protocol(Protocol IV) was limited to inpatients who were experiencedmarijuana smokers and receiving Cisplatin, Dacarbazine and/or5-Azacytadine. In 1981, the Smoked Marijuana Protocol wasmodified to permit outpatients and marijuana naive' patients toparticipate. In addition, patients receiving radiation therapywere then allowed to use smoked marijuana. In 1983, another revision was made to adapt tothe limited number of patients choosing to use smoked marijuana.This protocol allowed all patients, regardless of theiranticancer treatment, to have access to smoked marijuana. Astandardized smoking technique was described and the use of awater pipe was encouraged to modify the harshness of the smokewhich was a deterrent for patients using smoked marijuana in theprevious protocols. Minimal Accrual. The marijuana cigarette protocolattracted only 119 patients, less than five percent of the totalnumber enrolled in the Cannabis Therapeutic Program. Anecdotalreports suggested that reasons for the low accrual included ageneral objection to smoking on the part of some patients, theironcologists, or their hospitals, and some reluctance to use adrug associated with street use. The characteristics of the NIDA cigarettes may have been afactor in discouraging further use by experieced marijuanasmokers. The cigarettes, even after proper storage, were dry andgave an acrid smoke. Their potency was noticeably low at a timewhen street marijuana was increasing greatly in potency andavailability. Data Collection.As each protocol was changed data forms were also revised inan effort to increase enrollment by reducing any burden ofpaperwork for investigators and patients. All data formsassociated with the various protocols are included in theappendices. The report form included with the latestrevision of the protocol (2/11/83) requested onlyinformation which was considered essential and, for thepurpose of this evaluation, data from the previous forms were transcribedto the newer form for consistency in coding. This point iselaborated in a following section on validity of results. Potency Increase.The potency of the marijuana cigarettes being used was changedin April of 1983 from 1.2% to 2.8% THC content.This increase was not considered in our analysis. Patients. ThePanel received 218 treatment episode reports for 119 totalpatients treated with smoked marijuana. Eight reports werereceived for 3 patients treated with both smoked marijuana andTHC capsules. Twenty-one of the 119 patients had been previouslytreated under other Cannabis Therapeutic Program protocols.Reports on 98 patients are therefore available for analysis ofthe 'first treatment episode' on the Cannabis TherapeuticProgram. Table U reflects characteristics of the 98 patientswhose reports are analyzed and Table V summarizes the primarytumor sites. Evaluation of the Antiemetic Properties. As shown in Table W, only 4.1% of the patientsreported mild or no nausea during their first smoked marijuanaprotected treatment episode. And, 46.72 reported vomiting of 3times or less during their first treatment episode. Overall assessment of the effectiveness wasrated very or moderately successful by 58.7%. The relativeeffectiveness of smoked and orally ingested THC are similar.Table X includes the column on THC capsules from Table R forcomparison. Anecdotal reports by a few patients who had used bothmarijuana cigarettes and THC, rated the effectiveness of thesmoked marijuana as comparable to that of the oral THC used inthis study. Side Effects.Side effects are reported in Table Y which also presents the dataon THC alone (from Table S) for comparison. The slightly moreintense side effects after smoked marijuana are not surprising inview of its more rapid onset. Presumably, they persistedfor a shorter time but no such measurements were recorded in thisstudy. Table U Characteristics of Study Population ------------------------------------ n - 98 No. Percent Sex ---- ------- Male 56 57.1 Female 42 42.9 Age Distribution 19 yrs or less 1 1.0 20 - 39 yrs 38 38.8 40 - 59 yrs 32 32.7 60 yrs or more 27 27.6 --------------------------------------------- Table V Distribution of Patient Cancer History by Primary Site -------------------------------------- n 98 Primary Cancer Site Number Percent ------------------- ------ ------- Hodgkin's 5 5.1 Other lymphomas 3 3.1 Myeloid leukemia 2 2.0 Tongue 1 1.0 Esophagus 1 1.0 Liver and intrahepatic ... 3 3.1 Gallbladder and ducts 1 1.0 Pancreas 1 1.0 Retroperitoneal 2 2.0 Other and ill defined 1 1.0 Nasal cavities 1 1.0 Trachea, bronchi 18 18.4 Thymus, heart 3 3.1 Bone and articulations 5 5.1 Connective and .... 2 2.0 Melanoma of skin 4 4.1 Female breast 5 5.1 Ovary and other .... 14 14.3 Prostate 4 4.1 Testis 18 18.4 Bladder 2 2.0 Without specific 2 2.0 Table W Comparative Ratings of Nausea andVomiting ------------------------------------------ Smoked Marijuana THC used alone n 98 n 257 Ratings of No. % No. % Nausea None 9 9.2 38 15.1 Mild 34 34.7 85 33.9 Moderate 36 36.7 73 29.1 Severe 17 17.3 55 21.9 Missing 2 2.0 6 2.3 Vomiting None 19 19.4 89 35.3 1 - 3 times 36 36.7 69 27.4 4 - 6 times 18 18.4 35 13.9 > 6 times 24 24.5 59 23.4 Missing 1 1.0 5 1.9 ------------------------------------------------------- Table X Comparative Ratings of Overall Effectiveness ------------------------------------------- Smoked Marijuana THC used alone n - 98 n - 257 No. % No. % --- ----- --- ----- Not effective 26 26.8 62 24.7 Slightly 14 14.4 45 17.9 Moderately 40 41.2 68 27.1 Very 17 17.5 76 30.3 Missing 1 1.0 6 2.3 ------------------------------------------------------- Table Y Comparative Ratings of Side Effects ---------------------------------- Smoked THC Marijuana used alone n 98 n 257 No. No. --- ----- --- ----- Incidence of Side Effects Dry mouth Severe 4 4.3 4 1.6 Moderate 26 27.7 31 12.4 Mild 23 24.5 77 30.8 None 41 43.6 138 55.2 Missing 4 7 Tachycardia Severe 2 2.1 Moderate 1 1.1 6 2.4 Mild 3 3.2 19 7.6 None 88 93.6 225 90 Missing 4 7 Ataxia Severe 1 1.1 1 0.4 Moderate 9 9.6 4 1.6 Mild 6 6.4 26 10.4 None 78 83.0 219 87.6 Missing 4 7 Dizziness Severe 4 4.3 5 2 Moderate 12 12.8 16 6.4 Mild 15 16.0 46 18.4 None 63 67.0 183 73.2 Missing 4 7 Orthostatic hypotension Severe 2 2.1 1 0.4 Moderate 2 2.1 4 1.6 Mild 3 3.2 27 10.8 None 67 71.3 218 87.2 Missing 4 7 Anxiety Severe 3 3.2 7 2.8 Moderate 8 8.5 8 3.2 Mild 8 8.5 32 12.8 None 75 79.8 203 81.2 Missing 4 7 Table Y (Cont.) Smoked THC Marijuana used alone No. No. --- ----- --- ----- Sedation Severe 2 2.1 13 5.2 Moderate 25 26.6 46 18.4 Mild 22 23.4 101 40.4 None 45 47.9 90 36 Missing 4 7 Elated mood Severe 1 1.1 6 2.4 Moderate 10 10.6 22 8.8 Mild 14 14.9 33 13.2 None 61 64.9 189 75.6 Missing 4 7 Confusion Severe 4 4.3 2 0.8 Moderate 10 10.6 30 12 Mild 9 9.6 47 18.8 None 71 75.5 171 68.4 Missing 4 7 Distortion of perception Severe 3 3.2 2 0.8 Moderate 7 7.4 12 4.8 Mild 5 5.3 43 17.2 None 79 84.0 193 77.2 Missing 4 7 Fantasizing Severe Moderate 4 4.3 7 2.8 Mild 6 6.4 22 8.8 None 84 89.4 221 88.4 Missing 4 4.3 7 Depressed mood Severe 3 3.2 3 1.2 Moderate 4 4.3 11 4.4 Mild 10 10.6 19 7.6 None 77 81.9 217 86.8 Missing 4 7 Panic or fear Severe 3 3.2 3 1.2 Moderate 3 3.2 4 1.6 Mild 1 1.1 12 4.8 None 87 92.6 231 92.4 Missing 4 7 ------------------------------------------------------------------- Patient Drop-out Rates. Thirtyfour patients continued on to two or moretreatment episodes using smoked marijuana. Sixty-four patientsdropped from the study. The reasons for dropping are detailedbelow in Table Z. Reliability Estimate of Results. There were three basic concerns regarding thereliability of the marijuana protocol results: 1) the change inthe data forms, 2) the change in the protocols themselves, and 3)the change in the potency of the marijuana cigarettes. Each ofthese may influence the kind of data reported. Since the potency changed from 1.2% to 2.8%THC, any patients smoking marijuana after April 1983, weresmoking marijuana that was roughly twice as potent. This may ormay not have been considered by the prescribing physician and/orpharmacist in calculating and marking the dosage. There wasgeneral confusion about how to calculate dose. Sometimes thenumber of cigarettes used was listed. Also, patients not smokingthe entire dose may not have had this fact recorded, and therewas variation in smoking technique. In 1983, eligibility requirements were changedto permit outpatients and inexperienced marijuana smokers toparticipate. The smoking method was changed, increasing theamount of time the smoke is held in the lungs. Water pipes werealso permitted. With each protocol change there were changesin the data forms. The original data form had different labels onthe side effect Table Z Reasons for Termination After FirstTreatment Episode -------------------------- n - 64 No. of Patients Percent --------------- ------- Ineffective as an antiemetic 1726.6 Side effects too severe 710.9 Expired or completed treatment 32 50 Other 8 12.5 ------------------------------------------------------- categories (none, tolerable, intolerable).More than one treatment episode could be reported on one form.Also, the patient reports had categories dealing with mood. Thenext data form revision changed the category labels of sideeffects to none, moderate and severe. One treatment episode wasreported per form. Mood was deleted from the patient reports. Thefinal revision is the one sheet form. The protocol directed that four doses ofmarijuana should be administered prior to chemotherapy, but thedata form also provided a place to enter the actual number of'doses prior' as 'other.' The patient evaluation form wasdiscontinued and the investigator (or his/her staff) evaluatedthe nausea, vomiting and overall effectiveness. In tabulating thedata the physician's assessment was used. The number of sideeffect categories was increased to four: none, mild, moderate,and severe. The mean value of patient reports was used. If itfell between categories, it was rounded up when converted to thenew form. The dosage level was a fixed choice. The coding process attempted to take intoconsideration these changes and standardized the data onto theone page data collection form (Treatment Report Form A). Protocol Exceptions (Pilot Protocols) Protocols initially available under theCannabis Therapeutic Program were limited to antinauseant use ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) to patients undergoingchemotherapy for cancer. In 1983, the Panel began to receiverequests for THC from physicians with patients who sufferedintractable nausea and vomiting from conditions other thanchemotherapy. These patients did not meet the strict criteriaof the Panel's other protocols, but needed an alternative to thestandard treatments available for nausea and vomiting. THC wasconsidered to be their antiemetic of last resort. The "pilotprotocols' provided a treatment option for desperate patientsunresponsive to standard treatments. By the end of the study, 29 patients, allseriously ill, had been approved to receive THC as an antiemetictreatment of last resort. Two patients did not receive drugtreatment.. A total of 28 reports of treatment episodes werereceived; one patient received two THC treatments. Conditions forwhich THC was tried as an antiemetic included acute leukemia,acute myelocytic leukemia, bone marrow transplant, terminalmelanoma, terminal breast cancer, AIDS, multiple sclerosis, etc. In summary, physicians rated the overallantiemetic effectiveness of THC as very effective for fourteentreatments, moderately effective for five treatments, slightlyeffective for two treatments and not effective for seventreatments. Other notable THC benefits reported included improvedappetites, an increased ability to participate in familyfunctions and an overall improvement in spirits. No serious sideeffects were reported. Results of the Controlled Study Protocols THC plus Transdermal Scopolamine. A two arm placebo controlled study was intended totest the hypothesis that antiemetic therapy with THC would beoptimized by combining its use with transdermal scopolamine,(Transderm V). The purpose of the study was to determineantiemetic efficacy, side effects and drop out rate of thecombination regimen versu's THC alone using the cumulative, lowdose regimen. The investigation was limited to 5 investigators atselected clinical sites. The Panel hoped to establish statisticalsignificance early by means of sequential analysis, anticipating30 to 50 patients. The Transderm V Protocol began in late 1983,and continued into 1986. Sixty-five patients were enrolled inthis study. However, no conclusion about efficacy was possible bythe end of the Cannabis Therapeutic Program, since only ten ofthe 65 patients who enrolled met the stringent study criteria andcompleted both arms of the study. THC in Combination with Dexamethasone. The Dexamethasone Protocol like the Transderm Protocolabove was also a two arm placebo controlled study. It wasintended to test the hypothesis that antiemetic therapy with THCwould be optimized by combining its use with dexamethasone. The Dexamethasone Protocol also was initiatedin late 1983, and continued into 1984; however, of the fourpatients who entered the study only one patient completed thenecessary two trials. Delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-8-THC), a synthetic cannabinoid, is not presentin natural marijuana. It is similar in action to delta-9-THC, theoral THC administered in the Cannabis Therapeutic Program, butsome reports in the medical literature suggested that it causedfewer central nervous system side effects than delta-9-THC.Because side effects may limit the maximum tolerated dose and maydeter some patients from continuing THC therapy even though itmay be relieving nausea and vomiting, such properties ofdelta-8-THC could offer a major advantage. The Panel wasencouraged in the effort by Dr. Perez-Reyes, author of some ofthe studies referred to above. The Panel engaged Dr. Perez Reyes to consultin developing a pilot research project on the effects ofdelta-8-THC as an., antiemetic. 'In October 1983, the Panelsubmitted an investigational New Drug Application (IND 124,094)to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Patients were firstenrolled in October 1983. Only ten patients were enrolled in this study.Results on this small number cannot be interpreted exceptanecdotally. The drug was used on two patients over a longtermperiod resulting in the following comments: Patient D received 26 treatment episodes overa 10 month period. After her initial three treatments, duringwhich the patient rated delta-8-THC moderately or very effective,the drug dosing schedule was modified to a single 20mg. dose. Thepatient continued to benefit. For the next 20 treatment episodeswith this modified dose, she rated the drug very effective for 17treatments, had no or only mild nausea and vomiting, and sufferedonly dry mouth and sedation as side effects. (Overalleffectiveness ratings were missing from three treatmentepisodes.) However, during treatment episode number 23, thepatient experienced anxiety and said she felt 'funny or crazy.'To minimize these effects, the dose was lowered to 10mg. fortreatments 24 to 26. The-drug was rated very effective fortreatment 24 but not effective for treatments 25 and 26. Theprotocol nurse had not indicated any change in the patient'schemotherapy regimen or concurrent medications during thosetreatment episodes. The patient elected not to take furtherdelta-8-THC. Patient Z received twelve treatments over atotal of 5 months (2 months with delta-8-THC, 2 months off thedrug while undergoing radiation therapy, then a return to 3months with delta-8-THC). Delta8-THC was rated as beneficial witha variety of combinations of chemotherapy agents (BCKU + CYC +VCR; ADR; CYC + VCR). The patient rated the drug very effectivefor 5 treatment episodes and moderately effective for 6. Severalside effects were experienced during all treatment episodes, butall were reported as mild. However, on the patient's lasttreatment, he began a new chemotherapy regimen (ARA-C + MTX) andfound delta-8-THC not effective. Glaucoma Protocol In 1983, the Legislature considered anecdotalreports from a few patients with glaucoma, and other individuals,and noted the evidence that oral THC and smoked marijuana loweredintra-ocular pressure. In response, the legislation that extendedthe Cannabis Therapeutic Program also mandated exploration of thetherapeutic potential of cannabinoids in glaucoma, an assignmentwith complexities beyond those encountered in the cancerchemotherapy program. Prior to designing a clinical trial, the Panelco-opted the services of an ophthalmologist and distributed aquestionnaire that queried every ophthalmologist in the Stateabout the probable availability of patients and for theirsuggestions. The Panel then prepared-and submitted an applicationfor an Investigational New Drug Exemption (IND), accepted by theFood and Drug Administration as 123,373, that included a protocol(Appendix XIII) for the evaluation of oral-THC and smokedmarijuana in the treatment of open-angle glaucoma. In preparing this protocol, the Panelconsidered the nature of the disease and the availability ofother treatment in establishing criteria for the acceptance ofpatients into the program. There are several variants of glaucoma. Allare characterized by an elevation of the pressure within theeyeball, where pressure is transmitted to the optic nerve with,consequently, a possible loss of vision. However, the rate ofprogression, threat to vision and modes of treatment differ fordifferent types of glaucoma. Moreover, effective treatment withdrugs or, in a few situations, surgery, is available for mostpatients, a contrast with the nausea and vomiting of cancerchemotherapy. To be certain that no patient was deprived oftreatment of established efficacy by the research needs of thePanel, patients were accepted only if they had open-angleglaucoma inadequately controlled by conventional,non-investigational treatment. To be certain that the desire ofthe patient to use THC was not generated by emotion or byproselytizing efforts directed toward 'legalized' marijuana, a"Patient Qualification Review Board' was established toscrutinize the medical history of each prospective patient toensure that their enrollment was appropriate. In 1984, the Panel conducted a vigorousprogram to publicize the Panel's investigational glaucomatreatment to ophthalmologists and prospective patients. Inaddition to the usual press releases, every ophthalmologistreceived a mailing. The Panel arranged a program at Grand Roundsat the University of California Medical School in San Franciscofor 200 ophthalmologists in Northern California and contactedindividual doctors known for their special interest or influence. Nevertheless, by the end of the program, onlytwenty ophthalmologists were approved as investigators and, ofthe twelve patients who expressed interest, only nine receivedtreatment. All nine were Mend-stage glaucoma' for whom it wasfelt that no other treatment alternatives could be offered. Allnine chose oral THC rather than smoked marijuana. Results. Theresults of treatment can be quickly summarized because all ninepatients withdrew from treatment. Four withdrew because of sideeffects at 3 weeks, 2 months, and five months (2); one for lackof efficacy (4 months); two progressed to cataract extraction anddid not resume treatment (5 months, 9 months); one changeddoctors (15 months) and one concluded after 7 months that thedrug was no longer needed, a conclusion not shared by the doctor. These patients did, however, contributeinformation in two areas. Side Effects.These patients provided reassurance about chronicallyadministered THC in that they took doses ranging from 2.5 to17.5mg four tim es each day for 1-9 months. The patient who tookTHC for 9 months used gradually increasing amounts until she wastaking 17.5mg four times each day. The most frequent side effectswere dry mouth, sedation, ataxia and dizziness. The impressionwas that the side effects lessened with continued treatment. Noserious or unexpected reactions were seen... Effect on Intra-ocular Pressure. Thedoctor's judgement of the patient's clinical status did notprovide any evidence of effectiveness although some initial, butnot lasting, improvement was claimed. The measurement of intra-ocular pressure (IOP)should provide an objective measure of drug effect, butvariability was somewhat greater than expected, possibly becausethe measurement was made at varying times after the applicationof the standard treatment, which was continued when the THC wasstarted. Some of the patients showed an initial decrease in IOPfrom base line levels, but this lowering was sustained in onlytwo patients. Even in these two patients, the possibility is thatTHC, an anxiety relieving drug, or the increased attention of thedrug trial increased patient compliance with their standardtreatment. Post Marketing Survey of Investigators Eighteen months after dronabinol reached themarket, the Panel decided to audit its function and survey theuse of THC as a marketed drug. To accomplish these goals, asurvey was mailed to 237 oncologists-investigators. A reminderpostcard was mailed one week later and a 622 (n-148) responserate was achieved. Prescribing of Dronabinol. The survey asked to what extent dronabinol had beenprescribed over the 18 months since it became available. Of therespondents, 103 (70%) indicated that they had continued toprescribe tetrahydrocannabinol as dronabinol. The other 45 (302)indicated they had not ordered THC since they prescribed it underthe Cannabis Therapeutic Program. Those investigators who reported that they hadnot used commercial dronabinol were also the investigators whohad treated fewer patients with investigational THC during theprogram. The 45 investigators who are not using THC had treatedonly 304 patients during the Cannabis Therapeutic Program(average of 6.8 patients each). The 103 who now use dronabinolhad treated 1163 patients during the Cannabis Therapeutic Program(average of 11.3 patients each). The survey shows a tendency forthose oncologists who used experimental THC more extensivelyduring the Panel's compassionate access program to continue toprescribe dronabinol. The survey instrument was intended toestablish the factors responsible for restricted use: efficacy,undesirable side effects, price, the triplicate prescription formrequirement, and the strict limitations of the FDA approvedpackage insert. Table A& summarizes therespondents' responses to this question. Physicians who did notorder THC cited side effects, ineffectiveness and availability ofother effective antiemetics (reported most often as a comment) asreasons for not prescribing dronabinol. Those using THC for theirpatients included cost and triplicate form requirement as theprimary concerns and causes of limited use. The influence of patient demand on prescribersis reported in Table AB. Those who do not order THC are notinfluenced by patient demand. Impressions of Efficacy. There was no significant difference between those whoorder and those who do not in reports of the number ofantiemetics that would be tried first before prescribingdronabinol. See Table AC. Polypharmacy is still popular. Of those usingdronabinol 58.3% (n - 60) used it in combination with otherantiemetics. (Note that in our analysis of the combination study,little or no advantage in combination antiemetic therapy wasactually found. See page 36. The dronabinol prescribers have somewhat morefavorable opinion of dronabinol's efficacy for nausea than havethe non-prescribers in this survey. See figures I and 2. The difference in opinion between the twogroups of dronabinol's efficacy for vomiting is somewhat less.See figures 3 and 4. Reasons to Hesitate to Prescribe Dronabinol ------------------------------------------- Non-prescribers Prescribers Total n - 45 n - 103 n - 148 No. % No. % No. % ---- ----- ---- ----- ---- ----- Side effects too severe 17 37.8 38 36.9 5537.2 Not effective 14 31.1 26 25.2 40 27.0 Indications too limited 1 2.2 8 7.8 9 6.1 Requires Triplicate 3 6.7 22 21.4 25 16.9 Cost too high 6 13.3 27 26.2 33 22.3 Other 15 33.3 16 15.5 31 20.9 No response 5 11.1 15 14.6 20 13.5 --------------------------------------------------------------------- Table AB Main Reason for Participation in Cannabis-Therapeutic-program Prescribers Non-prescribers Total n - 103 n - 45 n - 148 No. % No. % No. % ---- ----- ---- ----- ---- ----- Contribute to research 27 26.2 12 26.7 39 26.4 Patient demand 23 22.3 4 8.9 27 18.2 Provide compassionate access 44 42.7 23 51.1 67 45.3 Other 1 1.0 2 4.4 3 2.0 No response 6 5.8 4 8.9 10 6.8 ------------------------------------------------------------------- Table AC Number of Antiemetics Prescribed Before Prescribing Dronabinol --------------------------- Prescribers Non-prescribers Total n - 103 n - 45 n - 148 No. % No. % No. % ---- ----- ---- ----- ---- ----- None 0 0 0 1 7 6.8 0 7 4.7 2 31 30.1 7 15.6 38 25.7 3 47 45.6 15 33.3 62 41.9 4 or more 17 16.5 14 31.1 31 20.9 No response 1 1.0 9 20.0 10 6.8 Evaluation of the Cannabis Therapeutic Program. In general, our investigators were favorably disposed towardthe Panel's efforts to carry out the objectives of the CannabisTherapeutic Program. See figure 5. Discussion of Results of Cannabis TherapeuticProgram A general consistency was noted in results ofimpression of effectiveness of THC and smoked marijuana as anantiemetic throughout the various protocols. Side effects are significant, but were neverobserved to be life threatening. Clinically serious adversereactions, defined as reactions while taking THC or marijuanathat required the use of drugs or hospitalization of the patient,were observed primarily at the beginning of the study. Nine caseswere reported during the first 1569 patients and only onethroughout the balance of the study. This great reduction insevere side effects may be due to several factors: 1) Therecommended initial dosage was first lowered from 7.5 to 5mg/m2.2) Then, cumulative dosing technique was recommended. 3) Patientswith metastes to the brain were excluded from the study. 4)Perhaps as the hospital staff became more familiar with theclinical use of this disinhibiting drug, they were better able toallay a feeling of panic in the inexperienced subjects. The Panel noted a number of problems in theconduct of such a large multi-investigator study. It is difficult to determine the degree ofuniformity among investigators in their interpretation of 'Mild,''Moderate,& or 'Severe.In some cases the reports receivedfrom investigators were incomplete. In a few cases it wasapparent that second and subsequent treatment reports were merelycopies of prior reports. Treatment reports beyond the first werenot extensively utilized in the Panel's analysis of data. The requirements for compassionate access toTHC and smoked marijuana made the use of a true control groupimpossible. The publicity given compassionate access somewhatreduced investigator compliance and reduced the strictness ofPanel requirements. Nevertheless, a few investigators weredropped from the study due to lack of cooperation. The attempt by the Panel to conduct smallercontrolled studies within the overall Cannabis TherapeuticProgram was inhibited by the lack of funds to provide physicianinvestigators the financial incentive usually offered byindustrial sponsors of new drug investigations. In spite of the problems, the Panel has beenable to gather valuable information on side effects of THCtherapy and dosing approaches which will minimize these sideeffects. Also, even though this was not a formal, blinded,efficacy study the tabulation of reports of impression ofeffectiveness is a valuable predictor of the clinical future forthis drug. APPROVAL BY FDA FOR MARKETING OF THC AND CONCLUSION OF THE CANNABIS THERAPEUTIC PROGRAM Approval and Rescheduling The Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA)required the same sequence of pre-marketing human trial a todemonstrate safety and effectiveness for THC as for any new drug.The Phase II, or controlled, double-blind studies, werepreviously reported in the literature. The Phase III studies thatare represented by the Cannabis Therapeutic Program's trials are uncontrolled,but involve a large number of patients. In this phase, the Panelprovided the largest experience simulating conditions of actualpractice, that is, the California Program was a successful PhaseIII study useful to the FDA. The Research Advisory Panel, itscooperative investigators and NCI's supply of investigationaldrug subsidized the marketing of dronabinol. Under the usualcircumstances the cost for the data provided in such a studywould have exceeded $1.5 million. In 1985, the FDA concluded that the efficacyand safety of THC were well enough established to justifyapproval of dronabinol for marketing under highly restrictedconditions. This action by the FDA did not immediately terminatethe need for the compassionate access protocol. Approval jointlyby the FDA and DEA of the use of THC for a single application andin a single dose form, i.e.. the oral capsule, did not overrideexisting California laws and regulations. In October 1986, both Federal and State laws and regulations werechanged and THC, now classed as a Schedule II controlledsubstance and requiring the use of the California TriplicatePrescription Form, became available as a prescription drugmarketed as dronabinol (Marinol). Thus, much of the need for theCannabis Therapeutic Program ended. During the transition period between FDAapproval and the ultimate rescheduling of dronabinol (Marinol,THC) in California, the Panel minimized confusion by publishingpertinent information in the newsletters of various Californialicensing authorities and professional societies. Investigational THC No Longer Supplied by NCI The National Cancer Institute stoppedsupplying investigational THC after September 30, 1986; however,any investigational THC remaining in California pharmacies wasavailable to approved investigators. The Panel monitored the usethrough August 1987, and audited the return to the DEA of unusedsupplies. At no time during the program were there anydiscrepancies in inventory or suspicion of diversion. It wasoccasionally necessary to require some investigators to filemissing treatment reports (discovered by review of pharmacyrecords) by considering denial of investigational privileges. Dronabinol finally became available as aSchedule II drug in California on October 1, 1986. It isimportant to note that only synthetic THC in sesame oil andencapsulated in a soft gelatin capsule has been rescheduled.Other forms of marijuana and THC remain Schedule I under bothCalifornia and federal Controlled Substances laws. The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration hasstressed that dronabinol should be prescribed only for itsFDA-approved use: the treatment of nausea and vomitingassociated with cancer chemotherapy in patients who havefailed to respond adequately to conventional antiemetics. FDAlabeling states that this restriction is required because asubstantial proportion of patients treated with dronabinol can beexpected to experience disturbing psychotomimetic reactions notobserved with other antiemetic agents. The FDA-approved labelingalso declares that dronabinol is contraindicated inpatients whose nausea and vomiting arises from any cause otherthan cancer chemotherapy. DEA warned in its regulation whichrescheduled dronabinol, that it may revoke a registrant'sSchedule II license and pursue any criminal sanctions warrantedunder the Controlled Substances Act if a practitioner distributesor dispenses dronabinol in a manner that constitutes a threat tothe public safety. Investigators and pharmacies had been advisedthat marijuana cigarettes would continue to be available throughthe Panel's Smoked Marijuana Protocol at least through the end of1988. In spite of this continued availability, there has beenlittle or no interest in continued study of marijuana cigarettesby the Panel's investigators. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-6IA087-000627-B015-282http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051514 text/html 91696HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:14:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:06:41 GMTContent-length: 91478 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use:chapter 1 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information The health and psychological consequences of cannabis usechapter 1 National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 Summary of report Introduction This review of the literature on the health and psychological effects of cannabis was undertaken at the initiative of the former Federal Justice Minister, Senator Michael Tate, who requested a review of knowledge relating to cannabis, to inform policy decisions. At Senator Tate's urging, a National Task Force on Cannabis was established on 25 May 1992. The Task Force commissioned this review of the evidence on the health and psychological effects of cannabis use. A new and independent review was thought necessary because there has not been any major international review of the literature on the health and psychological effects of cannabis since 1981, when the Addiction Research Foundation and World Health Organization jointly reviewed the literature. The purpose of this review was to update the conclusions of earlier reviews in the light of research undertaken during the past decade. Our approach to the literature Our review of the literature was not intended to be as comprehensive as the major review undertaken by the Addiction Research Foundation and the World Health Organization. The literature is too large, and the diversity of relevant disciplines represented in it beyond the expertise we had available for the task. Unavoidably, we have relied upon expert opinion in the areas that lie outside the authors' collective expertise which is primarily in areas of epidemiology, psychiatry, psychopharmacology, neurophysiology and neuropsychology. In order to minimise the effects of our lack of expertise in certain areas we have relied upon the consensus views expressed in the literature by experts in the relevant fields. When there has been controversy between the experts we have explicitly acknowledged areas of disagreement. We have checked our understanding and representation of these expert views by asking Australian and overseas researchers with expertise in the relevant fields to critically review what we have written. Our approach to assessing the health effects of cannabis The evaluation of the health hazards of any drug is difficult for a number of reasons. First, causal inferences about the effects of drugs on human health are difficult to make, especially when the interval between use and alleged ill effects is a long one. It takes time for adverse effects to develop and for research to identify such effects. Second, in making causal inferences there is a tension between the rigour and relevance of the evidence. The most rigorous evidence is provided by laboratory investigations using animals or in vitro preparations (e.g. cell preparations in a test tube) in which well controlled drug doses are related to precisely specified biological outcomes. The relevance of this evidence to human disease is uncertain, however, because many inferences have to be made in linking the occurrence of specific biological effects in laboratory animals to the likely effects of human use. Epidemiological studies of relationships between drug use and human disease are of greater relevance to the appraisal of the health risks of human drug use, but their relevance is purchased at the price of reduced rigour. Doses of illicit drugs over periods of years are difficult to quantify because of the varied dosages of blackmarket drugs and the stigma in admitting to illicit drug use. Interpretation is further complicated by correlations between cannabis use and alcohol, tobacco and other illicit drug use. Third, appraisals of the hazards of drug use are affected by the social approval of the drugs in question. The countercultural symbolism of cannabis use in the late 1960s has introduced an unavoidable sociopolitical dimension to the debate about the severity of its adverse health effects. Politically conservative opponents of cannabis use justify continued prohibition by citing evidence of the personal and social harms of cannabis use. When the evidence is uncertain they resolve uncertainty by assuming that the drug is unsafe until proven safe. Complementary behaviour is exhibited by proponents of cannabis use. Evidence of harm is discounted and uncertainties about the ill-effects of chronic cannabis use resolved by demanding better evidence, arguing that until such evidence is available individuals should be allowed to choose whether or not they use the drug. Such evidential standards are rarely applied consistently. The politically conservative would reject a similar approach to the appraisal of the health hazards of industrial processes. Similarly, proponents of cannabis liberalisation rarely apply the principles used in their risk assessment of cannabis to the appraisal of the health effects of pharmaceutical drugs, industrial processes, and pesticides. To guard against such double evidential standards we will be as explicit as possible about the evidential standards we have used, and attempt to be as even-handed as we can in their application. Evidential desiderata The burden of proof concerns who bears the responsibility for making a case: those who make a claim of adverse health effects of cannabis, or those who doubt it. If the burden falls on those who claim that it is safe, uncertainty will be resolved by assuming that it is unsafe until proved otherwise; conversely, if the burden falls on those who claim that the drug is unsafe, then it will be assumed to be safe until proven otherwise. It is by no means agreed who bears the burden of proof in the debate about the health effects of cannabis use. Proponents of continued prohibition appeal to established practice, arguing that since the drug is illegal the burden of proof falls upon those who want to legalise it; opponents of existing policies argue that the burden of proof falls upon those who wish to use the criminal law to prevent adults from freely choosing to use a drug. We will vary the burden of proof depending upon the state of the evidence and argument. Once a prima facie case of harm has been made, positive evidence of safety is required rather than the simple absence of any evidence of ill effect. We will assume that a prima facie case has been made when there is either direct evidence that the drug has ill effects in humans or animals (e.g. from a case-control study), or there is a compelling argument that it could, e.g. since tobacco smoking causes lung cancer, and since cannabis and tobacco smoke are similar in their constituents, it is probable that heavy cannabis smoking also causes lung cancer. Standard of proof reflects the degree of confidence required in an inference that there is a causal connection between drug use and harm. In courts of law, the standard of proof demanded depends upon the seriousness of the offence at issue and the consequences of a verdict, with a higher standard of proof, "beyond reasonable doubt", being demanded in criminal cases, and the "balance of probabilities" being acceptable in civil cases. Scientists generally require something closer to the standard of "beyond reasonable doubt" than the balance of probabilities before they draw confident conclusions of harm. However, since there are few adverse health effects of cannabis use which meet this standard, we will indicate when the evidence permits an inference to be made on the balance of probabilities. The criteria for causal inference that we will use are standard ones. These are: (1) evidence that there is a relationship between cannabis use and a health outcome provided by one of the accepted types of research design (namely, case-control, cross-sectional, cohort, or experiment); (2) evidence provided by a statistical test or confidence interval that the relationship is unlikely to be due to chance; (3) good evidence that drug use precedes the adverse effect (e.g. from a cohort study); and (4) evidence either from experiment, or observational studies with statistical or other form of control, which makes it unlikely that the relationship is due to some other variable which is related to both cannabis use and the adverse health effect. In the trade-off between relevance and rigour, our preference will be for human evidence, both experimental and epidemiological, over animal and in vitro studies. In the absence of human evidence, in vitro and animal experiments will be regarded as raising a suspicion that drug use has an adverse effects on human health, with the degree of suspicion being in proportion to the number of such studies, the consistency of their results across different species and experimental preparations, and the degree of expert consensus on the trustworthiness of the inferences from effects in vitro and in vivo to adverse effects on human health under existing patterns of usage. Ideally, it would be desirable to quantify the magnitude of risk posed by cannabis use by estimating both the relative and attributable risks of specific health effects. However, since there is generally insufficient evidence to estimate these risks for many putative adverse effects of cannabis, the magnitude of a health risk posed by cannabis use will be qualitatively assessed by a comparison of its probable health effects with those of two other widely used recreational drugs, alcohol and tobacco. The motive for such a comparison is to minimise double standards in the appraisal of the health effects of cannabis use by providing some kind of common standard, however approximate, for making societal decisions about cannabis use. Cannabis the drug Cannabis is a generic name for a variety of preparations derived from the plant Cannabis sativa. A sticky resin which covers the flowering tops and upper leaves, most abundantly in the female plant, contains more than 60 cannabinoid substances. Laboratory research on animals and humans has demonstrated that the primary psychoactive constituent in cannabis is the cannabinoid, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol or THC. The cannabinoid receptor Cannabis resembles the opioid drugs in acting upon specific receptors in the brain. In this respect it differs from alcohol, cocaine and other illicit drugs which act by disrupting brain processes. The determination and characterisation of a specific cannabinoid receptor has made it possible to map its distribution in the brain, and to demonstrate that its well-known psychoactive effects are receptor mediated. Very recently an endogenous brain molecule has been discovered which binds to the cannabinoid receptor and mimics the action of cannabinoids. It has been called "anandamide", from the Sanskrit word for bliss. Its discovery promises to stimulate a great deal of research which will improve our understanding of the role played by a cannabinoid-like system of the brain, and elucidate the mechanism of action of cannabis. Forms of cannabis The concentration of THC varies between the three most common forms of cannabis: marijuana, hashish and hash oil. Marijuana is prepared from the dried flowering tops and leaves of the harvested plant. The potency of the marijuana depends upon the growing conditions, the genetic characteristics of the plant and the proportions of plant matter. The flowering tops and bracts are highest in THC concentration, with potency descending through the upper leaves, lower leaves, stems and seeds. The concentration of THC in a batch of marijuana containing mostly leaves and stems may range from 0.5-5 per cent, while the "sinsemilla" variety with "heads" may have THC concentrations of 7-14 per cent. Hashish or hash consists of dried cannabis resin and compressed flowers. The concentration of THC in hashish generally ranges from 2-8 per cent, although it can be as high as 10-20 per cent. Hash oil is a highly potent and viscous substance obtained by extracting THC from hashish (or marijuana) with an organic solvent, concentrating the filtered extract, and in some cases subjecting it to further purification. The concentration of the THC in hash oil is generally between 15 per cent and 50 per cent. Routes of administration Almost all possible routes of administration have been used, but by far the most common method is smoking (inhaling). Marijuana is most often smoked as a hand-rolled "joint", the size of a cigarette or larger. Tobacco is often added to assist burning, and a filter is sometimes inserted. Hashish may also be mixed with tobacco and smoked as a joint, but it is probably more frequently smoked through a pipe, with or without tobacco. A water pipe known as a "bong" is a popular implement for all cannabis preparations because the water cools the hot smoke before it is inhaled and there is little loss of the drug through sidestream smoke. Hash oil is used sparingly because of its extremely high psychoactive potency; a few drops may be applied to a cigarette or a joint, to the mixture in the pipe, or the oil may be heated and the vapours inhaled. Whatever method is used, smokers inhale deeply and hold their breath for several seconds in order to ensure maximum absorption of THC by the lungs. Hashish may also be cooked or baked in foods and eaten. When ingested orally the onset of the psychoactive effects is delayed by about an hour. The "high" may be of lesser intensity but the duration of intoxication is longer by several hours. It is easier to titrate the dose and achieve the desired level of intoxication by smoking than by ingestion, since the effects from smoking are more immediate. Crude aqueous extracts of cannabis have been very rarely injected intravenously, but this route is unpopular since THC is insoluble in water, and hence, little or no drug is actually present in these extracts. Moreover, the injection of tiny undissolved particles may cause severe pain and inflammation at the site of injection, and a variety of toxic systemic effects. Dosage A typical joint contains between 0.5g and 1.0g of cannabis plant matter, which may vary in THC content between 5mg and 150mg (i.e. typically between 1 per cent and 15 per cent). The actual amount of THC delivered in the smoke has been estimated at 20-70 per cent, the rest being lost through combustion or sidestream smoke. The bioavailability of THC (the fraction of THC in the cigarette which reaches the bloodstream) from marijuana cigarettes in human subjects has been reported to range from 5-24 per cent. Given all of these variables, the actual dose of THC absorbed when cannabis is smoked is not easily quantified. In general, only a small amount of cannabis (e.g. 2-3mg of available THC) is required to produce a brief pleasurable high for the occasional user, and a single joint may be sufficient for two or three individuals. A heavy smoker may consume five or more joints per day, while heavy users in Jamaica, for example, may consume up to 420mg THC per day. In clinical trials designed to assess the therapeutic potential of THC, single doses have ranged up to 20mg in capsule form. In human experimental research, THC doses of 10mg, 20mg and 25mg have been administered as low, medium and high doses. Patterns of use Cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug in Australia, having been tried by a third of the adult population, and by the majority of young adults between the ages of 18 and 25. The most common route of administration is by smoking, and the most widely used form of the drug is marijuana. In the majority of cases cannabis use is "experimental", that is, most users use the drug on a small number of occasions, and either discontinue their use, or use intermittently and episodically after first trying it. Even among those who continue to use the drug over longer periods, the majority discontinue their use in their mid to late 20s. Only a small proportion of those who ever use cannabis use it on a daily basis over an extended period such as several years. Because of uncertainties about the dose received, there is no good information on the amount of THC ingested by such regular users. "Heavy" use is consequently defined approximately in terms of frequency of use rather than the estimated average dose of THC received. The daily or near daily use pattern over a period of years is the pattern that probably places cannabis users at greatest risk of experiencing long-term health and psychological consequences of use. Daily cannabis users are more likely to be male and less well educated; they are also more likely to regularly use alcohol and to have experimented with a variety of other illicit drugs, such as, amphetamines, hallucinogens, psychostimulants, sedatives and opioids. Metabolism of cannabinoids Different methods of ingesting cannabis give rise to differing pharmacokinetics, i.e. patterns of absorption, metabolism and excretion of the active agent. Upon inhalation, THC is absorbed from the lungs into the bloodstream within minutes. After oral administration absorption is much slower, taking one to three hours for THC to enter the bloodstream, and delaying the onset of psychoactive effects. When cannabis is smoked, the initial metabolism of THC takes place in the lungs, followed by more extensive metabolism by liver enzymes, with the transformation of THC to a number of metabolites. The most rapidly produced metabolite is 9-carboxy-THC, which is detectable in blood within minutes of smoking. Another major metabolite produced is 11-hydroxy-THC, which is approximately 20 per cent more potent than THC, and penetrates the blood-brain barrier more rapidly. It is present at very low concentrations in the blood after smoking, but at high concentrations after the oral route. THC and its hydroxylated metabolites account for most of the observed effects of the cannabinoids. Peak blood levels of THC are usually reached within 10 minutes of smoking, and decline rapidly thereafter to about 5-10 per cent of their initial level within the first hour. This initial rapid decline reflects both rapid conversion to its metabolites, as well as the distribution of unchanged THC to lipid-rich tissues, including perhaps the brain. THC and its metabolites are highly fat soluble and may remain for long periods in the fatty tissues of the body, from which they are slowly released back into the bloodstream. The terminal half-life of THC (the time required to clear half of the administered dose from the body) is significantly shorter for experienced or daily users (19-27 hours) than for inexperienced users (50-57 hours). Since tissue distribution is similar for both users and non-users, it is the immediate and subsequent metabolism that occurs more rapidly in experienced users. Given the slow clearance of THC, repeated administration results in the accumulation of THC and its metabolites in the body. Because of its slow release from fatty tissues back into the bloodstream, THC and its metabolites may be detectable in blood for several days, and traces may persist for several weeks. Several studies have examined measures of cannabinoids in fat, confirming that THC may be stored for at least 28 days. Detection of cannabinoids in body fluids Cannabinoid levels in the body depend on both the dose given and the smoking history of the individual, but are subject to a vast degree of individual variability. Plasma levels of THC in man may range between 0-500ng/ml, depending on the potency of the cannabis ingested and the time since smoking. The detection of THC in blood above 10-15ng/ml provides evidence of recent consumption of the drug, although how recent is not possible to determine. A more precise estimate of time of consumption may be obtained from the ratio of THC to 9-carboxy-THC: similar concentrations of both in blood indicate very recent use (in the vicinity of 20-40 minutes) and a high probability of intoxication. When the levels of 9-carboxy-THC are substantially higher than those of THC itself, ingestion could be estimated to have occurred more than half an hour ago. It is very difficult to determine the time of administration from blood concentrations even if the smoking habits of the individual and the exact dose consumed were known. Therefore, the results of blood analyses are not easily interpreted and, at best, only confirm the "recent" use of cannabis. Intoxication and levels of cannabinoids Since there is evidence that cannabis intoxication adversely affects skills required to drive a motor vehicle (see below), it would be desirable to have a reliable measure of impairment due to cannabis intoxication that was comparable to the breath test of alcohol intoxication. However, there is no clear relationship between blood levels of THC or its metabolites and degree of either impairment or subjective intoxication. A general consensus of forensic toxicologists is that blood concentrations associated with impairment after smoking cannabis have not been sufficiently established to provide a basis for legal testimony in cases concerning driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of cannabis. Acute psychological and health effects The major reason for the widespread recreational use of cannabis is that it produces a "high", an altered state of consciousness which is characterised by mild euphoria, relaxation, and perceptual alterations, including time distortion and the intensification of ordinary sensory experiences, such as eating, watching films, and listening to music. When used in a social setting the high is often accompanied by infectious laughter, and talkativeness. Cognitive effects are also marked. They include impaired short-term memory, and a loosening of associations, which make it possible for the user to become lost in pleasant reverie and fantasy. Motor skills and reaction time are also impaired, so skilled activity of various kinds is frequently disrupted. Not all the acute psychological effects of cannabis are welcomed by users. The most common unpleasant psychological effects are anxiety, sometimes producing frank panic reactions, or a fear of going mad, and dysphoric or unpleasant depressive feelings. Psychotic symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations may be more rarely experienced at very high doses. These effects are most often reported by naive users who are unfamiliar with the drug's effects, and by patients who have been given oral THC for therapeutic purposes. More experienced users may occasionally report these effects after oral ingestion of cannabis, when the effects may be more pronounced and of longer duration than those usually experienced after smoking cannabis. These effects can usually be prevented by adequately informing users about the type of effects they may experience, and once developed can be readily managed by reassurance and support. The inhalation of marijuana smoke, or the ingestion of THC has a number of bodily effects. Among these the most dependable is an increase in heart rate of 20-50 per cent over baseline, which occurs within a few minutes to a quarter of an hour, and lasts for up to three hours. Changes in blood pressure also occur, which depend upon posture: blood pressure is increased while the person is sitting, and decreases while standing. In healthy young users these cardiovascular effects are unlikely to be of any clinical significance because tolerance develops to the effects of THC, and young, healthy hearts will only be mildly stressed. The acute toxicity of cannabis, and cannabinoids more generally, is very low. There are no confirmed cases of human deaths from cannabis poisoning in the world medical literature. This is unlikely to be due to a failure to detect such deaths, because animal studies indicate that the dose of THC required to produce 50 per cent mortality in rodents is extremely high by comparison with other commonly used pharmaceutical and recreational drugs. The lethal dose also increases as one moves up the phylogenetic tree, suggesting by extrapolation that the lethal dose in humans could not be achieved by either smoking or ingesting the drug. Psychomotor effects and driving The major potential health risk from the acute use of cannabis arises from its effects on psychomotor performance. Intoxication produces dose-related impairments in a wide range of cognitive and behavioural functions that are involved in skilled performances like driving an automobile or operating machinery. The negative effects of cannabis on the performance of psychomotor tasks is almost always related to dose. The effects are generally larger, more consistent and of increased persistence in difficult tasks which involve sustained attention. The acute effects of doses of cannabis which are subjectively equivalent to or higher than usual recreational doses on driving performance in laboratory simulators and over standardised driving courses, are similar to those of doses of alcohol that achieve blood alchol concentrations between 0.07 per cent and 0.10 per cent. While cannabis impairs performance in laboratory and simulated driving settings, it is difficult to relate the magnitude of these impairments to the risk of being involved in motor vehicle accidents. Studies of the effects of cannabis on on-road driving performance have found at most modest impairments. Cannabis intoxicated persons drive more slowly, and generally take fewer risks, than alcohol intoxicated drinkers, probably because they are more aware of their level of psychomotor impairment. There is no controlled epidemiological evidence that cannabis users are at increased risk of being involved in motor vehicle or other accidents. This is in contrast to the case of alcohol use and accidents, where case-control studies have shown that persons with blood alcohol levels indicative of intoxication are over-represented among accident victims. All that is available are studies of the prevalence of cannabinoids in the blood of motor vehicle and other accident victims, which have found that between 4 per cent and 37 per cent of such blood samples have contained cannabinoids, typically in association with blood alcohol levels indicative of intoxication. These studies are difficult to evaluate for a number of reasons. First, in the absence of information on the prevalence of cannabinoids in the blood of non-accident victims, we do not know whether persons with cannabinoids are over-represented among accident victims. Second, the presence of cannabinoids in blood indicates only recent use, not necessarily intoxication at the time of the accident. Third, there are also serious problems of causal attribution, since more than 75 per cent of drivers with cannabinoids in their blood also have blood levels indicative of alcohol intoxication. Attempts have been made to circumvent the first difficulty by using NIDA Household survey data (from the United States) to estimate what proportion of drivers might be expected to have cannabinoids in their blood and urine. These suggest that cannabis users are two to four times more likely to be represented among accident victims than non-cannabis users; cannabis users who also use alcohol, rather than cannabis only users, are even more likely to be over-represented among accident victims. Other indirect support for an increased risk of accidental death associated with cannabis use comes from surveys of self-reported accidents among adolescent drug users, and from epidemiological studies of the relationships between cannabis use and mortality, and health service utilisation. The known effects of interactions between cannabis and other drugs on psychomotor performance are what would be predicted from their separate effects. The drug most often used in combination with cannabis is alcohol. The separate effects of alcohol and cannabis on psychomotor impairment and driving performance are approximately additive. The effects of chronic cannabis use Cellular effects and the immune system There is reasonably consistent evidence that some cannabinoids, most especially THC, can produce a variety of cellular changes, such as alterations to cell metabolism, and DNA synthesis, in vitro (i.e. in the test tube). There is stronger and more consistent evidence that cannabis smoke is mutagenic in vitro, and in vivo (i.e. in live animals), and hence, that it is potentially carcinogenic. If cannabis smoke is carcinogenic then it is probably for the same reasons that cigarette smoke is, rather than because it contains cannabinoids. Hence, if chronic cannabis smoking causes cancer, it is most likely to develop after long-term exposure at those sites which receive maximum exposure, namely, the lung and upper aerodigestive tract (see below). There is reasonably consistent evidence that cannabinoids impair both the cell-mediated and humoral immune systems in rodents. Humoral immune suppression is seen in decreased antibody formation responses to antigens, and decreased lymphocyte response to B-cell mitogens. Cell-mediated immune suppression is revealed by a reduction in lymphocyte response to T-cell mitogens. These changes have produced decreased resistance to infection by a bacteria and a virus. There is also evidence that the non-cannabinoid components of cannabis smoke impair the functioning of alveolar macrophages, the first line of the body's defence system in the lungs. The clinical relevance of these findings is uncertain, however. The doses required to produce these effects have generally been very high, and the problem of extrapolating to the effects of doses used by humans is complicated by the possibility that tolerance may also develop to such effects. The limited experimental and clinical evidence in humans is mixed, with a small number of studies suggesting adverse effects that have not been replicated by others. At present, there is no conclusive evidence that consumption of cannabinoids predisposes man to immune dysfunction, as measured by reduced numbers or impaired functioning of T-lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes or macrophages, or reduced immunoglobulin levels. There is suggestive evidence that THC impairs T-lymphocyte responses to mitogens and allogenic lymphocytes. The clinical and biological significance of these possible immunological impairments in chronic cannabis users is uncertain. To date there has been no epidemiological, or even anecdotal, evidence of increased rates of disease among chronic heavy cannabis users, such as was seen among young homosexual men in the early 1980s when the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome was first recognised. There is one large prospective study of HIV-positive homosexual men which indicates that continued cannabis use did not increase the risk of progression to AIDS. Given the duration of large-scale cannabis use by young adults in Western societies, the absence of any epidemics of infectious disease makes it unlikely that cannabis smoking produces major impairments in the immune system. It is more difficult to exclude the possibility that chronic heavy cannabis use produces a minor impairment in immunity. Such an effect would be manifest in small increases in the rate of occurrence of common bacterial and viral illnesses among chronic users which could have escaped detection in the few studies that have attempted to address the issue. Such an increase could nonetheless be of public health significance because of the increased expenditure on health services, and the loss of productivity that it would cause among the young adults who are the heaviest users of cannabis. The possibility that cannabinoids may produce minor impairments in the immune system would also raise doubts about the therapeutic usefulness of cannabinoids in immunologically compromised patients, such as those undergoing cancer chemotherapy, or those with AIDS. AIDS patients may provide one of the best populations in which to detect any such effects. If it was ethical to conduct clinical trials of cannabinoids to improve appetite and well-being in AIDS patients, then studies of the impact of cannabis use on their compromised immune systems would provide one way of evaluating the seriousness of this concern. The cardiovascular system There is insufficient new evidence to change the conclusions reached by the Institute of Medicine in 1982, namely, that although the smoking of marijuana "causes changes to the heart and circulation that are characteristic of stress ... there is no evidence ... that it exerts a permanently deleterious effect on the normal cardiovascular system..." (p72). The situation may be less benign for patients with hypertension, cerebrovascular disease and coronary atherosclerosis, in which case there is evidence that marijuana poses a threat because it increases the work of the heart. The "magnitude and incidence" of the threat remains to be determined as the cohort of chronic cannabis users of the late 1960s enters the age of maximum risk for complications of atherosclerosis in the heart, brain and peripheral blood vessels. In the interim, because any such effects could be life threatening in patients with significant occlusion of the coronary arteries or other cerebrovascular disease, patients with cardiovascular disease should be advised not to consume cannabis, and perhaps not to use THC therapeutically. The respiratory system Chronic heavy cannabis smoking impairs the functioning of the large airways, and probably causes symptoms of chronic bronchitis such as coughing, sputum production, and wheezing. Given the adverse effects of tobacco smoke, which is qualitatively very similar in composition to cannabis smoke, it is likely that chronic cannabis use predisposes individuals to develop chronic bronchitis and respiratory cancer. There is reasonable evidence for an increased risk of chronic bronchitis, and evidence that chronic cannabis smoking may produce histopathological changes in lung tissues of the kind that precede the development of lung cancer. More recently, concern about the possibility of cancers being induced by chronic cannabis smoking has been heightened by case reports of cancers of the aerodigestive tract in young adults with a history of heavy cannabis use. Although these reports fall short of providing convincing evidence because many of the cases concurrently used alcohol and tobacco, they are clearly a major cause for concern, since such cancers are usually rare in adults under the age of 60, even among those who smoke tobacco and drink alcohol. The conduct of case-control studies of these cancers should be a high priority for research which aims to identify the possible adverse health effects of chronic cannabis use. Reproductive effects Chronic cannabis use probably disrupts the male and female reproductive systems in animals, reducing testosterone secretion, and sperm production, motility, and viability in males, and disrupting the ovulatory cycle in females. It is uncertain whether it is likely to have these effects in humans, given the inconsistency in the limited literature on human males, and the lack of research in the case of human females. There is also uncertainty about the clinical significance of these effects in normal healthy young adults. They may be of greater concern among young adolescents, and among males with fertility impaired for other reasons. Cannabis use during pregnancy probably impairs foetal development, leading to smaller birthweight, perhaps as a consequence of shorter gestation, and probably by the same mechanism as cigarette smoking, namely, foetal hypoxia. There is uncertainty about whether cannabis use during pregnancy produces a small increase in the risk of birth defects as a result of exposure of the foetus in utero. Prudence demands that until this issue is resolved, women should be advised not to use cannabis during pregnancy, or when attempting to conceive. There is not a great deal of evidence that cannabis use can produce chromosomal or genetic abnormalities in either parent which could be transmitted to offspring. Such animal and in vitro evidence as exists suggests that the mutagenic capacities of cannabis smoke are greater than those of THC, and are probably of greater relevance to the risk of users developing cancer than to the transmission of genetic defects to children. There is suggestive evidence that infants exposed in utero to cannabis may experience transient behavioural and developmental effects during the first few months after birth. There is a single study which suggests an increased risk of childhood leukemia occurring among the children born to women who used cannabis during their pregnancies. Its replication is of some urgency. Psychological effects of chronic cannabis use Adolescent development There is strong continuity of development from adolescence into early adult life in which many indicators of adverse development which have been attributed to cannabis use precede its use, and increase the likelihood of using cannabis. These include minor delinquency, poor educational performance, nonconformity, and poor adjustment. A predictable sequence of initiation into the use of illicit drugs was identified among American adolescents in the 1970s, in which the use of licit drugs preceded experimentation with cannabis, which preceded the use of hallucinogens and "pills", which in turn preceded the use of heroin and cocaine. Generally, the earlier the age of initiation into drug use, and the greater the involvement with any drug in the sequence, the greater the likelihood of progression to the next drug in the sequence. The causal significance of these findings, and especially the role of cannabis in the sequence of illicit drug use, remains controversial. The hypothesis that the sequence of use represents a direct pharmacological effect of cannabis use upon the use of later drugs in the sequence is the least compelling. A more plausible and better supported explanation is that it reflects a combination of two processes: the selective recruitment into cannabis use of nonconforming and deviant adolescents who have a propensity to use illicit drugs; and the socialisation of cannabis users within an illicit drug using subculture which increases the exposure, opportunity, and encouragement to use other illicit drugs. Although strong conclusions cannot be drawn, on the evidence from cross-sectional and longitudinal studies of cohorts of American adolescents in the 1970s and 1980s, there are suggestions that chronic heavy cannabis use can adversely affect adolescent development in a number of ways. There has been suggestive support for the hypothesis that heavy adolescent use of cannabis impairs educational performance. In cross-sectional surveys, cannabis use is related to an increased risk of failing to complete a high school education, and of job instability in young adulthood. These relationships in cross-sectional studies are exaggerated because those who are most likely to use cannabis have lower pre-existing academic aspirations and high school performance than those who do not use it. When pre-existing academic aptitude and interest are taken into account, the relationship between cannabis use and educational and occupational performance is much more modest. Even though modest, the suggestive adverse effects of cannabis and other drug use upon educational performance are important because they may cascade throughout young adult life, affecting choice of occupation, level of income, choice of mate, and quality of life of the user and his or her children. There is weaker but suggestive evidence that heavy cannabis use has adverse effects upon family formation, mental health, and involvement in drug-related (but not other types of) crime. In the case of each of these outcomes, the apparently strong associations revealed in cross-sectional data are much more modest in longitudinal studies, after statistically controlling for associations between cannabis use and other variables which predict these adverse outcomes. On balance, there are sufficient indications that cannabis use in adolescence probably adversely affects adolescent development to conclude that it is desirable to discourage adolescent cannabis use, and especially regular cannabis use. Adult adjustment The evidence that chronic heavy cannabis use produces an amotivational syndrome among adults is equivocal. The positive evidence largely consists of case histories, and observational reports. The small number of controlled field and laboratory studies have not found compelling evidence for such a syndrome, although their evidential value is limited by the small sample sizes and limited sociodemographic characteristics of the field studies, and by the short periods of drug use, and the youthful good health and minimal demands made of the volunteers observed in the laboratory studies. If there is such a syndrome, it is a relatively rare occurrence, even among heavy, chronic cannabis users. A dependence syndrome A cannabis dependence syndrome like that defined in DSM-III-R probably occurs in heavy, chronic users of cannabis. There is good experimental evidence that chronic heavy cannabis users can develop tolerance to its subjective and cardiovascular effects, and there is suggestive evidence that some users may experience a withdrawal syndrome on the abrupt cessation of cannabis use. There is clinical and epidemiological evidence that some heavy cannabis users experience problems in controlling their cannabis use, and continue to use the drug despite experiencing adverse personal consequences of use. There is limited evidence in favour of a cannabis dependence syndrome analogous to the alcohol dependence syndrome. If the estimates of the community prevalence of drug dependence provided by the Epidemiologic Catchment Area study are correct, then cannabis dependence is the most common form of dependence on illicit drugs. Recognition of the cannabis dependence syndrome has been delayed by a number of factors. First, heavy daily cannabis use has been relatively uncommon, and there have been few individuals who have requested assistance in stopping their cannabis use. Second, an overemphasis on evidence of tolerance and a withdrawal syndrome has hindered the recognition of the syndrome among individuals who have presented for treatment. Third, the occurrence of cannabis dependence has probably been overshadowed because it is most common among persons who are dependent on alcohol and opioids, forms of drug dependence which have understandably been given higher treatment priority. Given the widespread use of cannabis, and its continued reputation as a drug free of the risk of dependence, the clinical features of cannabis dependence deserve to be better defined. This would enable the prevalence of a dependence syndrome to be better estimated and individuals who are dependent on cannabis to be better recognised and treated. Treatment should probably be on the same principles as other forms of dependence, although this issue is also in need of research. Although cannabis dependence is likely to be a larger problem than previously thought, we should be wary of over-estimating its social and public health importance. Estimates of the risk of users becoming dependent suggest that it may be similar to that of alcohol, that it will be highest among the minority of daily cannabis users, and that even in this group the prevalence of drug-related problems may be relatively low by comparison with those of alcohol dependence. There is likely to be a high rate of remission of cannabis dependence without formal treatment. While acknowledging the existence of the syndrome, we should avoid exaggerating its prevalence and the severity of its adverse effects on individuals. Better research on the experiences of long-term cannabis users should provide more precise estimates of the risk. Cognitive effects The weight of the available evidence suggests that the long-term heavy use of cannabis does not produce any severe impairment of cognitive function. There is reasonable clinical and experimental evidence, however, that the long-term use of cannabis may produce more subtle cognitive impairment in the higher cognitive functions of memory, attention and organisation and integration of complex information. While subtle, these impairments may affect everyday functioning, particularly in adolescents with marginal educational aptitude, and among adults in occupations that require high levels of cognitive capacity. The evidence suggests that the longer the period that cannabis has been used, the more pronounced is the cognitive impairment. It remains to be seen whether the impairment can be reversed by an extended period of abstinence from cannabis. There is a need for research to identify the specific cognitive functions affected by long-term cannabis use, to identify the precise mechanisms that produce impairment and to relate them to biological mechanisms, including the cannabinoid receptors and the endogenous cannabinoid, anandamide. Such research also needs to investigate individual differences in susceptibility to such effects, and the impact of long-term cannabis use on adolescents and young adults. Appropriate treatment programs for long-term dependent cannabis users will also need to address the subtle cognitive impairments likely to be found in this population. Brain damage A suspicion that chronic heavy cannabis use may cause gross structural brain damage was provoked by a single poorly controlled study using an outmoded method of investigation, which reported that cannabis users had enlarged cerebral ventricles. This finding was widely and uncritically publicised. Since then a number of better controlled studies using more sophisticated methods of investigation have consistently failed to demonstrate evidence of structural change in the brains of heavy, long-term cannabis users. These negative results are consistent with the evidence that any cognitive effects of chronic cannabis use are subtle, and hence unlikely to be manifest as gross structural changes in the brain. They do not exclude the possibility that chronic, heavy cannabis use may cause ultrastructural changes at the receptor level. Psychotic disorders There is suggestive evidence that heavy cannabis use can produce an acute toxic psychosis in which confusion, amnesia, delusions, hallucinations, anxiety, agitation and hypomanic symptoms predominate. The evidence for an acute toxic cannabis psychosis comes from laboratory studies of the effects of THC on normal volunteers and clinical observations of psychotic symptoms in heavy cannabis users which seem to resemble those of other toxic psychoses, and which remit rapidly following abstinence. There is less support for the hypothesis that cannabis use can cause either an acute or a chronic functional psychosis which persists beyond the period of intoxication. Such a possibility is difficult to study because of the rarity of such psychoses, and the near impossibility of distinguishing them from schizophrenia and manic depressive psychoses occurring in individuals who also abuse cannabis. There is strongly suggestive evidence that chronic cannabis use may precipitate a latent psychosis in vulnerable individuals. This is only strongly suggestive because in the best study conducted to date, the use of cannabis was not documented at the time of diagnosis, there was a possibility that cannabis use was confounded by amphetamine use, and there are doubts about whether the study could reliably distinguish between schizophrenia and acute cannabis-induced, or other drug-induced, psychoses. Even if this relationship is causal, its public health significance should not be overstated: the estimated attributable risk of cannabis use is small (less than 10 per cent), and even this seems an overestimate, since the incidence of schizophrenia declined over the period when cannabis use increased among young adults. Therapeutic effects of cannabinoids There is reasonable evidence that THC is an effective anti-emetic agent for patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy, especially those whose nausea has proven resistant to the anti-emetic drugs that were widely used in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when most of the research was conducted. It is uncertain whether THC is as effective as newer anti-emetic drugs. Uncertainty also exists about the most optimal method of dosing and the advantages and disadvantages of different routes of administration. Nonetheless, there is probably sufficient evidence to justify THC being made available in synthetic form to cancer patients whose nausea has proven resistant to conventional treatment. There is also reasonable evidence for the potential efficacy of THC and marijuana in the treatment of glaucoma, especially in cases which have proved resistant to existing anti-glaucoma agents. Further research is required to establish the effectiveness and safety of long-term use, but this should not prevent its use under medical supervision in individuals with poorly controlled glaucoma. There is sufficient suggestive evidence of the potential usefulness of various cannabinoids as anti-spasmodic, and anti-convulsant agents to warrant further clinical research into their effectiveness. There are other potential therapeutic uses which require more basic pharmacological and experimental investigation, e.g. cannabinoids as possible analgesic and anti-asthma agents. There is a need for further research into the effectiveness of cannabis and its derivatives in assisting patients with HIV/AIDS-related conditions, and in particular, their value in counteracting weight loss associated with these conditions, improving mood and easing pain. Case reports have suggested that synthetic THC may be effective in reducing nausea and stimulating appetite in symptomatic AIDS patients. While there is a potential concern that possible effects of cannabinoids on the immune system may have more serious consequences for HIV positive individuals and AIDS patients, a recent study has failed to find a relationship between the use of cannabis, or any other psychoactive drugs, and the rate at which HIV positive people progress to clinical AIDS. Despite the basic and clinical research work which was undertaken in late 1970s and early 1980s, the cannabinoids have not been widely used therapeutically, nor has further investigation been conducted along the lines suggested by the Institute of Medicine in 1982. This seems attributable to the fact that, in the United States, where most cannabis research has been conducted, clinical research on cannabinoids has been discouraged by regulation and a lack of funding. The discouragement of clinical cannabis research, in turn, derives from the fact that THC, the most therapeutically effective cannabinoid, is the one that produces the psychoactive effects sought by recreational users. An unreasonable fear that the therapeutic use of THC would send "mixed messages" to youth has motivated the discouragement of research into the therapeutic effects of cannabinoids. The recent discovery of a specific cannabinoid receptor and the endogenous cannabinoid-like substance anandamide may change this situation by encouraging more basic research on the biology of cannabinoids which may have therapeutic consequences. It may prove possible to separate the psychoactive and therapeutic effects of cannabis, fulfilling the ancient promise of "marijuana as medicine". Overall appraisal of the health and psychological risks of cannabis use The following is a summary of the major adverse health and psychological effects of acute and chronic cannabis use, classified by the degree of confidence about the relationship between cannabis use and the adverse effect. Acute effects The major acute adverse psychological and health effects of cannabis intoxication are: anxiety, dysphoria, panic and paranoia, especially in naive users; cognitive impairment, especially of attention and memory; psychomotor impairment, and possibly an increased risk of accident if an intoxicated person attempts to drive a motor vehicle; an increased risk of experiencing psychotic symptoms among those who are vulnerable because of personal or family history of psychosis; and an increased risk of low birth weight babies if cannabis is used during pregnancy. Chronic effects The major health and psychological effects of chronic heavy cannabis use, especially daily use, over many years, remain uncertain. On the available evidence, the major probable adverse effects appear to be: respiratory diseases associated with smoking as the method of administration, such as chronic bronchitis, and the occurrence of histopathological changes that may be precursors to the development of malignancy; development of a cannabis dependence syndrome, characterised by an inability to abstain from or to control cannabis use; and subtle forms of cognitive impairment, most particularly of attention and memory, which persist while the user remains chronically intoxicated, and may or may not be reversible after prolonged abstinence from cannabis. The following are the major possible adverse effects of chronic, heavy cannabis use which remain to be confirmed by further research: an increased risk of developing cancers of the aerodigestive tract, i.e. oral cavity, pharynx, and oesophagus; an increased risk of leukemia among offspring exposed in utero; a decline in occupational performance marked by underachievement in adults in occupations requiring high level cognitive skills, and impaired educational attainment in adolescents; and birth defects occurring among children of women who used cannabis during their pregnancies. High risk groups A number of groups can be identified as being at increased risk of experiencing some of these adverse effects. Adolescents Adolescents with a history of poor school performance may have their educational achievement further limited by the cognitive impairments produced by chronic intoxication with cannabis. Adolescents who initiate cannabis use in the early teens are at higher risk of progressing to heavy cannabis use and other illicit drug use, and to the development of dependence on cannabis. Women of childbearing age Pregnant women who continue to smoke cannabis are probably at increased risk of giving birth to low birth weight babies, and perhaps of shortening their period of gestation. Women of childbearing age who smoke cannabis at the time of conception or while pregnant possibly increase the risk of their children being born with birth defects. Persons with pre-existing diseases Persons with a number of pre-existing diseases who smoke cannabis are probably at an increased risk of precipitating or exacerbating symptoms of their diseases. These include: individuals with cardiovascular diseases, such as coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease and hypertension; individuals with respiratory diseases, such as asthma, bronchitis and emphysema; individuals with schizophrenia who are at increased risk of precipitating or of exacerbating schizophrenic symptoms; and individuals who are dependent on alcohol and other drugs, who are probably at an increased risk of developing dependence on cannabis. Two special concerns Storage of THC There is good evidence that with repeated dosing of cannabis at frequent intervals, THC can accumulate in fatty tissues in the human body where it may remain for considerable periods of time. The health significance of this fact is unclear. The storage of cannabinoids would be serious cause for concern if THC were a highly toxic substance which remained physiologically active while stored in body fat. The evidence that THC is a highly toxic substance is weak and its degree of activity while stored has not been investigated. One potential health implication of THC storage is that stored cannabinoids could be released into blood, producing a "flashback", although this is likely to be a very rare event, if it occurs at all. Whatever the uncertainties about health implications of THC storage, all potential users of cannabis should be aware that it occurs. Increases in the potency of cannabis? It has been claimed that the existing medical literature on the health effects of cannabis underestimates its adverse effects, because it was based upon research conducted on less potent forms of marijuana than became available in the USA in the past decade. This claim has been repeated and interpreted in an alarmist fashion in the popular media on the assumption that an increase in the THC potency of cannabis necessarily means a substantial increase in the health risks of cannabis use. It is far from established that the average THC potency of cannabis products has substantially increased over recent decades. If potency has increased, it is even less certain that the average health risks of cannabis use have materially changed as a consequence, since users may titrate their dose to achieve the desired effects. Even if the users are inefficient in titrating their dose of THC, it is not clear that the probability of all adverse health effects will be thereby increased. Given the existence of these concerns about THC potency, it would be preferable to conduct some research on the issue rather than to rely upon inferences about the likely effects of increased cannabis potency. Studies of the ability of experienced users to titrate their dose of THC would contribute to an evaluation of this issue. A comparative appraisal of health risks: alcohol, tobacco and cannabis use The probable and possible adverse health and psychological effects of cannabis need to be placed in comparative perspective to be fully appreciated. A useful standard for such a comparison is what is known about the health effects of alcohol and tobacco, two other widely used psychoactive drugs. Cannabis shares with tobacco, smoking as the usual route of administration, and resembles alcohol in being used for its intoxicating and euphoriant effects. Although allowance has to be made for the very different prevalence of use of the two drugs, and for the fact that we know a great deal more about the adverse effects of alcohol and tobacco use, the comparison serves the useful purpose of reminding us of the risks we currently tolerate with our favourite psychoactive drugs. Acute effects Alcohol. The major risks of acute cannabis use are similar to the acute risks of alcohol intoxication in a number of respects. First, both drugs produce psychomotor and cognitive impairment, especially of memory and planning. The impairment produced by alcohol increases risks of various kinds of accident, and the likelihood of engaging in risky behaviour, such as dangerous driving, and unsafe sexual practices. It remains to be determined whether cannabis intoxication produces similar increases in accidental injury and death, although on the balance of probability it does. Second, there is good evidence that substantial doses of alcohol taken during the first trimester of pregnancy can produce a foetal alcohol syndrome. There is suggestive but far from conclusive evidence that cannabis used during pregnancy may have similar adverse effects. Third, there is a major health risk of acute alcohol use that is not shared with cannabis. In large doses alcohol can cause death by asphyxiation, alcohol poisoning, cardiomyopathy and cardiac infarct, whereas there are no recorded cases of fatalities attributable to cannabis. Tobacco. The major acute health risks that cannabis share with tobacco are the irritant effects of smoke upon the respiratory system, and the stimulating effects of both THC and nicotine on the cardiovascular system, both of which can be detrimental to persons with cardiovascular disease. Chronic effects Alcohol. There are a number of risks of heavy chronic alcohol use, some of which may be shared by chronic cannabis use. First, heavy use of either drug increases the risk of developing a dependence syndrome in which users experience difficulty in stopping or controlling their use. There is strong evidence for such a syndrome in the case of alcohol and reasonable evidence in the case of cannabis. A major difference between the two is that it is uncertain whether a withdrawal syndrome reliably occurs after dependent cannabis users abruptly stop their cannabis use, whereas the abrupt cessation of alcohol use in severely dependent drinkers produces a well defined withdrawal syndrome which can be potentially fatal. Second, there is reasonable clinical evidence that the chronic heavy use of alcohol can produce psychotic symptoms and psychoses in some individuals. There is suggestive evidence that chronic heavy cannabis use may produce a toxic psychosis, precipitate psychotic illnesses in predisposed individuals, and exacerbate psychotic symptoms in individuals with schizophrenia. Third, there is good evidence that chronic heavy alcohol use can indirectly cause brain injury - the Wernicke-Korsakov syndrome - with symptoms of severe memory defect and an impaired ability to plan and organise. With continued heavy drinking, and in the absence of vitamin supplementation, this injury may produce severe irreversible cognitive impairment. There is good reason for concluding that chronic cannabis use does not produce cognitive impairment of comparable severity. There is suggestive evidence that chronic cannabis use may produce subtle defects in cognitive functioning, that may or may not be reversible after abstinence. Fourth, there is reasonable evidence that chronic heavy alcohol use produces impaired occupational performance in adults, and lowered educational achievements in adolescents. There is at most suggestive evidence that chronic heavy cannabis use produces similar, albeit more subtle impairments in occupational and educational performance of adults. Fifth, there is good evidence that chronic, heavy alcohol use increases the risk of premature mortality from accidents, suicide and violence. There is no comparable evidence for chronic cannabis use, although it is likely that dependent cannabis users who frequently drive while intoxicated with cannabis increase their risk of accidental injury or death. Sixth, alcohol use has been accepted as a contributory cause of cancer of the oropharangeal organs in men and women. There is suggestive evidence that chronic cannabis smoking may also be a contributory cause of cancers of the aerodigestive tract (i.e. the mouth, tongue, throat, oesophagus, lungs). Tobacco. The major adverse health effects shared by chronic cannabis and tobacco smokers are chronic respiratory diseases, such as chronic bronchitis, and probably, cancers of the aerodigestive tract. The increased risk of cancer in the respiratory tract is a consequence of the shared route of administration by smoking. It is possible that chronic cannabis smoking also shares the cardiotoxic properties of tobacco smoking, although this possibility remains to be investigated. Implications for harm reduction Anyone who wishes to avoid the probable acute and chronic adverse health effects of cannabis should abstain from using the drug. This advice is especially pertinent for persons with any of the diseases (e.g. cardiovascular) or conditions (e.g. pregnancy) which would make them more vulnerable to the adverse effects of cannabis. Current cannabis users should be aware of the following risks of using the drug. First, the risk of being involved in a motor vehicle accident is likely to be increased when cannabis users drive while intoxicated by cannabis. The combination of alcohol and cannabis intoxication will substantially increase this risk. Second, the chronic smoking of cannabis poses significant risks to the respiratory system, apart from any specific effects of THC. Third, the respiratory risks of cannabis smoking are amplified if deep inhalation and breath-holding are used to maximise the absorption of THC in the lungs. This technique greatly increases the delive 1. Summary of repo particulate matter and tar. Fourth, daily or near daily use of cannabis is to be avoided, as it has a high risk of producing dependence. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B23-7IA087-000627-B016-1http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051547 text/html 4663HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:15:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:04:27 GMTContent-length: 4448 The health and psychological consequences of cannabisuse:chapter 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information The health and psychological consequences of cannabis usechapter 2 National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 2. Introduction This review of the literature on the health and psychologicaleffects of cannabis was undertaken at the initiative of theformer Federal Justice Minister, Senator Michael Tate, whorequested a review of knowledge relating to cannabis, to informpolicy decisions. At Senator Tate's urging, a National Task Forceon Cannabis was established on 25 May 1992. The Task Forcecommissioned this review of the evidence on the health andpsychological effects of cannabis use. A new and independentreview was thought necessary because there has not been any majorinternational review of the literature on the health andpsychological effects of cannabis since 1981, when the AddictionResearch Foundation and World Health Organization jointlyreviewed the literature. The purpose of this review was to updatethe conclusions of earlier reviews in the light of researchundertaken during the past decade (ARF/WHO, 1981; Fehr andKalant, 1983). 2.1 Our approach to the literature Our review of the literature was not intended to be, and couldnot hope to be, as comprehensive as the major review undertakenby the Addiction Research Foundation and the World HealthOrganization. The literature is too large, and the diversity ofrelevant disciplines represented in it beyond the expertise wehad available for the task. Unavoidably, we have relied uponpublished expert opinion in the very many areas which lie outsidethe authors' collective expertise, which is primarily inepidemiology, psychopharmacology, neurophysiology andneuropsychology. This fact is inevitably reflected in therelative attention given to the literatures that lie within andbeyond our expertise. The literatures on the psychologicalconsequences of acute and chronic cannabis use, for example, aremuch more comprehensively and critically reviewed than thosepertaining to effects on the reproductive and immune systems. Inreviewing the literature that lies outside our expertise, we haverelied upon the consensus views expressed in the literature byexperts in the relevant fields. When there has been controversybetween the experts we have explicitly acknowledged it. We havechecked our understanding and representation of these expertviews by asking Australian and international researchers withexpertise in the relevant fields to critically review what wehave written. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | Medical Information WT01-B23-8IA087-000627-B016-31http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051558 text/html 17729HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:15:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:35 GMTContent-length: 17511 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use:chapter 3 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis usechapter 3 National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 3. Evidential principles 3.1 Issues in appraising health hazardsThe evaluation of the health hazards of any drug is difficult for avariety of scientific and sociopolitical reasons. First, causalinferences about the effects of drugs on human health are not easy tomake (ARF/WHO, 1981). Even inferences about the relatively direct andtransient effects of acute drug use may be complicated by individualvariability in response to a standard dose of a drug, and by the factthat serious adverse effects are relatively rare. Inference becomesmore difficult the longer the interval between use and alleged illeffects: it takes time for such effects to develop, and it may takeconsiderably longer for the research technology to be developed thatenables these effects to be identified and confidently attributed tothe drug use rather than some other factor (Institute of Medicine,1982). In the case of chronic tobacco use, for example, it has takenover three hundred years to discover that it increases prematuremortality from cancer, and heart disease. Moreover, new health hazardsof tobacco use, such as passive smoking, continue to be discovered. Second, in making causal inferences about drug use and itsconsequences there is a tension between the rigour and relevance ofthe evidence. The most rigorous evidence is provided by laboratoryinvestigations using experimental animals, or in vitro preparations ofanimal cells and micro-organisms in which well controlled drug dosesare related to precisely measured biological outcomes. The relevanceof such research to human disease, however, is often problematic. Agreat many inferences have to be made in linking the occurrence ofspecific biological effects in laboratory animals or cell cultures tothe likely effects of the drug under existing patterns of human use. Epidemiological studies of relationships between drug use and humandisease have manifestly greater relevance to the appraisal of thehealth risks of human drug use, but this is purchased at the price ofreduced rigour. Doses of drugs over periods of years are difficult toquantify in the best of circumstances. The vagaries of human memorywhich make quantification of consumption difficult in the case oftobacco and alcohol are magnified in the case of illicit drugs by thenon-standard doses and contaminants in blackmarket drugs, and thereluctance of users to report illicit drug use. The fact thatdifferent patterns of drug use and other life-style factors are oftencorrelated (e.g. alcohol and tobacco), makes attribution ofill-effects to particular drugs even more difficult (Task Force onHealth Risk Assessment, 1986).Third, appraisals of the hazards of recreational drug use areunavoidably affected by the societal approval or disapproval of thedrug in question. As Room (1984) has observed, when evaluating theimpact of alcohol on non-industrialised societies, anthropologistshave often engaged in problem deflation in response to the probleminflation of missionaries and colonial authorities. In our ownculture, the economic interests of tobacco and alcohol industriesprovide a potent reason for problem deflation with these drugs. Suchproblem deflationists often discount the adverse effects of alcoholuse, either by contesting the evidence for adverse effects, or bydenying that there is a causal connection between alcohol use andparticular adverse health effects.Similar processes have been at work in the appraisal of the healtheffects of recreational cannabis use. The countercultural symbolism ofcannabis use in the late 1960s has introduced a strong sociopoliticaldimension to the debate about the adverse health effects of cannabis.Politically conservative opponents of cannabis use, for example,justify its continued prohibition by citing evidence of the personaland social harms of its use. When the evidence is uncertain, as it iswith many of the alleged effects of chronic use, they resolve theuncertainty by assuming that the cannabis is unsafe until proven safe.Complementary behaviour is exhibited by some proponents ofdecriminalisation. Evidence of harm is discounted or discredited, anduncertainties about the ill-effects of chronic cannabis use areresolved by demanding more and better evidence, arguing that untilthis uncertainty is resolved individuals should be allowed to exercisetheir free choice about whether or not they use the drug. Such approaches to the appraisal of evidence have not always beenconsistently applied. Both sides of the debate would reject theapplication of their own approaches to the appraisal of cannabis tothe appraisal of the health hazards of alcohol, pesticides,herbicides, or chemical residues in food. While we do not claim to beunaffected by these processes, we will be as explicit as possibleabout the evidential standards that we have used, and as even-handedas we can in their application.3.2 Evidential desiderataThe following issues must be addressed in specifying what we havetaken to be the evidential desiderata in our appraisal of the healthrisk of cannabis use: the burden of proof; standard of proof; criteriafor causal inference; preference for relevance or rigour; approachesto estimating the magnitude of risk; and the desirability of acomparative appraisal of the risks.The burden of proof concerns who bears the responsibility for making acase; those who make a claim of adverse health effects, or those whodoubt it (see Rescher, 1977, chapter XII). Who bears the burden ofproof determines the way in which an issue is decided in the face ofuncertainty: if the burden falls on those who claim that the drug issafe, uncertainty will be resolved by assuming that it is unsafe untilproved otherwise; conversely, if the burden falls on those who claimthat the drug is unsafe, then it will be assumed to be safe untilproven otherwise.It is by no means agreed who bears the burden of proof in the debateabout the health effects of cannabis use. Proponents of continuedprohibition appeal to established practice (Whately, 1846), arguingthat since the drug is illegal, the burden of proof falls upon thosewho want to legalise it. Some proponents of its legalisation counterthat this begs the question, since there was no evidence, they argue,that cannabis was harmful when its use was first made a criminaloffence. Others argue that the burden of proof falls upon those whowish to use the criminal law to prevent adults from freely choosing touse a drug (e.g. Husak, 1992).We will vary the burden of proof on the basis of the state of theevidence and argument. Once a prima facie case of harm has been made,positive evidence of safety will be required rather than the simpleabsence of any evidence of ill effect. We will assume that a primafacie case has been made either when there is direct evidence that thedrug has ill effects in animals or humans (e.g. from a case-controlstudy), or when there is some compelling argument that it could, e.g.the inference that since tobacco smoking causes lung cancer andcannabis and tobacco smoke are similar in their constituents, it isprobable that heavy cannabis smoking also causes lung cancer. The standard of proof reflects the degree of confidence required in aninference that there is a causal connection between drug use and harm.In courts of law, the standard of proof demanded depends upon theseriousness of the offence at issue and the consequences of a verdict,with a higher standard of proof, "beyond reasonable doubt", beingdemanded in criminal cases, while the "balance of probabilities" isacceptable in civil cases. Although these legal standards are notdirectly translatable into scientific practice, scientists generallyrequire something closer to the standard of "beyond reasonable doubt"than the balance of probabilities before drawing confident conclusionsthat a drug causes harm. If we were to demand that such a standard be met for the healtheffects of cannabis, this review would be exceedingly brief.Consequently, we will relax the criteria and indicate when theevidence permits a causal inference to be made on the balance ofprobabilities. We will take this standard to be exemplified in theconsensus of informed scientific opinion that sufficient evidence hasbeen provided to infer a probable causal connection between drug useand a harm (e.g. Fehr and Kalant, 1983; Institute of Medicine, 1982). In the trade-off between relevance and rigour, our preference will befor human evidence, both experimental and epidemiological, rather thananimal and in vitro studies. In the absence of human evidence, invitro and animal experiments will be taken as raising a suspicion thatdrug use has an adverse effects on human health. The degree ofsuspicion raised will be in proportion to the number of such animalstudies, the consistency of their results across different species andexperimental preparations (Task Force on Health Risk Assessment,1986), and the degree of expert consensus that the inferences fromeffects in vitro and in vivo to adverse effects under existingpatterns of human use are valid. The degree of consensus on the latterpoint will be indicated by the views expressed in authoritativereviews in peer reviewed journals or contributions to internationalconsensus conferences (e.g. Fehr and Kalant, 1983; Institute ofMedicine, 1982).The criteria for causal inference that we will use are standard ones(see Hall, 1987), namely:1.      Evidence that there is a relationship between drug use and a        health outcome provided by one of the accepted types of        epidemiological research design (namely, case-control,        cross-sectional, cohort, or experiment).2.      Evidence (usually provided by a statistical significance test or        the construction of a confidence interval) that the relationship is        unlikely to be due to chance.3.      Good evidence that drug use precedes the adverse effect (e.g. a        cohort study).4.      Evidence either from experiment, or statistical or other form of        control, which makes it unlikely that the relationship is due to some        other variable which is related to both drug use and the adverse        effect. In appraising a body of literature as a whole we determine the extentto which the evidence meets the criteria outlined by Hill (1977). Ideally, once a strong case has been made for a causal connectionbetween drug use and an adverse health effect, the magnitude of riskneeds to be estimated so the seriousness of the risk can bequantified. For example, the consumption of large amounts of waterover a short period of time can kill human beings, but this is not agood reason for counselling people against drinking water. Thequantities required to produce intoxication and death are so large(e.g. 30 or more litres) that only diseased or psychotic individualsconsume them.The standard epidemiological measures of risk magnitude are relativerisk and population attributable risk. The relative risk is theincrease in the odds of experiencing an adverse health outcome amongthose who use the drug compared to those who do not (that is, thenumber of times greater the risk of experiencing an effect is amongthose who use the drug compared with those who do not). The populationattributable risk represents that proportion of cases with an adverseoutcome which is attributable to drug use. The two measures of riskmagnitude have different uses and implications. Relative risk is ofgreatest relevance to individuals attempting to estimate the increasein their risk of experiencing an adverse outcome if they use a drug.Attributable risk is of most relevance to a societal appraisal of theharms of drug use. The importance of the two measures of risk magnitude depends upon theprevalence of drug use and the base rate of the adverse outcome. Anexposure with a low relative risk may have a large public healthimpact if a large proportion of the population is exposed (e.g.cigarette smoking and heart disease). Conversely, an exposure with ahigh relative risk may have little public health importance becausevery few people are exposed to it. Accordingly, an appraisal of thepublic health importance of illicit drug use must take some accountnot only of the relative risk of harm, but also the prevalence of useand the base rate of the adverse effect. As will become apparent inthe course of this review, it is very difficult to estimate eitherrelative or attributable risk of any probable adverse health effectsof cannabis use because few epidemiological studies have beenconducted.A different way of assessing the health risk posed by cannabis use hashad to be used: a comparative qualitative appraisal of its risks withthose of other widely used recreational drugs such as alcohol andtobacco (ARF/WHO, 1981). The motive for such comparisons is that theyreduce the operation of double-standards in the health appraisal ofdrug use by reminding us that the drugs we currently tolerate posemajor health risks. They also help to put the risk of newer drugs intoperspective, so that we can use a common standard when making societaldecisions about whether or not to tolerate such drug use. The task ofcomparison, however, is more difficult than it seems at first. First, we know much more about the quantitative risks of acute andchronic tobacco and alcohol use than we know about the health risks ofcurrently illicit drugs. This is largely because the legal drugs havebeen consumed by substantial proportions of the population, overcenturies in the case of tobacco, and millennia in the case ofalcohol, and there have been more than 40 years of scientific studiesof the health consequences of their use. The contemporary illicitdrugs, by contrast, have been much less widely used in Westernsociety, and for a shorter period, primarily by healthy young adults;there have also been few studies of their adverse health effects, andthere have been even fewer attempts to quantify the risks of theiruse.Second, the prevalence of use of currently legal and illegal drugs isso different that any comparison based upon existing patterns of usewill disadvantage the legal drugs (Peterson, 1980). In principle, thisproblem could be addressed by estimating what the health risks ofcannabis use might be if its prevalence was to approach that ofalcohol and tobacco. This approach has not been adopted here becausein the absence of good data on the quantitative risks of cannabis use,a large number of contestable assumptions would have to be made topermit such estimates to be made. These obstacles provide strong reasons for cautiously interpretingcomparisons of the health hazards of cannabis with those of alcoholand tobacco. They do not, however, provide insurmountable objectionsto such comparisons. We will accordingly make some qualitativecomparisons with the health risks of alcohol and tobacco after we haveconsidered the evidence on the adverse health effects of cannabis. ReferencesAddiction Research Foundation/World Health Organization (1981) Reportof an ARF/WHO Scientific Meeting on the Adverse Health and BehavioralConsequences of Cannabis Use. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation,.Fehr, K.O. and Kalant, H. (1983) (eds) Cannabis and Health Hazards.Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.Hall, W. (1987) A simplified logic of causal inference. Australian andNew Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 1987, 21, 507-513.Hill, A.B. (1977). A Short Textbook of Statistics. London: Hodder andStoughton.Husak, D.N. (1992) Drugs and Rights. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress.Institute of Medicine. (1982) Marijuana and Health. Washington DC:National Academy Press.Peterson, R (1980) (ed) Marijuana Research Findings: 1980 NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph Number 31. Rockville, MD:U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Rescher, N. (1977) Methodological Pragmatism. Oxford, Blackwell.Room, R. (1984) Alcohol and ethnography: A case of problem deflation?Current Anthropology, 25, 169- 191.Task Force on Health Risk Assessment, United States Department ofHealth and Human Services (1986) Determining Risks to Health: FederalPolicy and Practice. Dover, MA: Auburn House Publishing Company.Whately, R. (1846) Elements of Rhetoric. Originally published 1846.(ed) D. Ehninger. Carnondale, Illinois: Illinois University Press,1963. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-9IA087-000627-B016-62http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051616 text/html 42264HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:16:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:29 GMTContent-length: 42046 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use:chapter 4 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis usechapter 4 National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 4. Cannabis the drug 4.1 Cannabis the drugCannabis is the material derived from the herbaceous plant Cannabissativa, which grows vigorously throughout many regions of the world.It occurs in male and female forms, with both sexes having largeleaves which consist of five to 11 leaflets with serrated margins. Asticky resin which covers the flowering tops and upper leaves issecreted most abundantly by the female plant and this resin containsthe active agents of the plant. While the cannabis plant contains morethan 60 cannabinoid compounds, such as cannabidiol and cannabinol, theprimary psychoactive constituent is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol orTHC (Gaoni and Mechoulam, 1964), the concentration of which largelydetermines the potency of the cannabis preparation. Most of the othercannabinoids are either inactive or only weakly active, although theymay increase or decrease potency by interacting with THC (Abood andMartin, 1992).Cannabis has been erroneously classified as a narcotic, as a sedativeand most recently as an hallucinogen. While the cannabinoids dopossess hallucinogenic properties, together with stimulant andsedative effects, they in fact represent a unique pharmacologicalclass of compounds. Unlike many other drugs of abuse, cannabis actsupon specific receptors in the brain and periphery. The discovery ofthe receptors and the naturally occurring substances in the brain thatbind to these receptors is of great importance, in that it signifiesan entirely new pathway system in the brain.4.2 The cannabinoid receptorThe desire to identify a specific biochemical pathway responsible forthe expression of the psychoactive effects of cannabis has prompted aprodigious amount of cannabinoid research (Martin, 1986). Earlystudies found that radioactively labelled THC would non-specificallyattach to all neural surfaces, suggesting that it produced its effectsby perturbing cell membranes (Martin, 1986). However, the work ofHowlett and colleagues (Howlett et al 1986; 1987; 1988) showed thatcannabinoids inhibit the enzyme that synthesizes cyclic AMP incultured nerve cells, and that the degree of inhibition was correlatedwith the potency of the cannabinoid. Since many receptors relay theirsignals to the cell interior by changing cellular cyclic AMP, thisfinding strongly suggested that cannabinoids were not just dissolvingnon-specifically in membranes. After eliminating all the knownreceptors that act by inhibiting adenylate cyclase, it was concludedthat cannabinoids acted through their own receptor. The determinationand characterisation of a specific cannabinoid receptor in brainfollowed soon after (Devane et al, 1988), paving the way for itsdistribution in brain to be mapped (Bidaut-Russell et al, 1990;Herkenham et al, 1990). It is now accepted that cannabis acts on specific cannabinoidreceptors in the brain, conclusive evidence for which was provided bythe cloning of the gene for the cannabinoid receptor in rat brain(Matsuda et al, 1990). A cDNA which encodes the human cannabinoidreceptor was also cloned (Gerard et al, 1991) and the human receptorwas found to exhibit more than 97 per cent identity with the ratreceptor. Cannabinoid receptors have also been found in the nervoussystem of lower vertebrates, including chickens, turtles and trout(Howlett et al, 1990) and there is preliminary evidence that theyexist in low concentration in fruit flies (Bonner quoted in Abbott,1990; Howlett, Evans and Houston, 1992). This phylogeneticdistribution suggests that the gene must have been present early inevolution, and its conservation implies that the receptor serves animportant biological function. The localisation of cannabinoid receptors in the brain has elucidatedthe pharmacology of the cannabinoids. Herkenham and colleagues(Herkenham, et al 1990; 1991a; 1991b; 1992) used autoradiography tolocalise receptors in fresh cut brain sections of a number of species,including humans. Dense binding was detected in the cerebral cortex,hippocampus, cerebellum and in outflow nuclei of the basal ganglia,particularly the substantia nigra pars reticulata and globus pallidus.Few receptors were present in the brainstem and spinal cord.Bidaut-Russell and colleagues (Bidaut-Russell et al, 1990) locatedcannabinoid receptors in greatest abundance in the rat cortex,cerebellum, hippocampus and striatum, with smaller but significantbinding in the hypothalamus, brainstem and spinal cord. High densities of receptors in the hippocampus and cortex suggestroles for the cannabinoid receptor in cognitive functions. This isconsistent with evidence in humans that the dominant effects ofcannabis are cognitive: loosening of associations, fragmentation ofthought, and confusion on attempting to remember recent occurrences(Hollister, 1986; Miller and Branconnier, 1983). High densities ofreceptors in the basal ganglia and cerebellum suggested a role for thecannabinoid receptor in movement control, a finding which is alsoconsistent with the ability of cannabinoids to interfere withcoordinated movements. Cannabis has a mild effect on cardiovascular and respiratory functionin humans (Hollister, 1986) which is consistent with the observationthat the lower brainstem area has few cannabinoid receptors. Theabsence of sites in the lower brainstem may in fact explain why highdoses of THC are not lethal. Cannabinoid receptors do not appear toreside in the dopaminergic neurons or the mesolimbic dopamine cellsthat have been suggested as a possible "reward" system in the brain. These mappings of receptors have been broadly confirmed in recent workby Matsuda and colleagues (1992, 1993) using a histochemistrytechnique to neuroanatomically localise cannabinoid receptor mRNA.Labelling intensities were highest in forebrain regions (olfactoryareas, caudate nucleus, hippocampus) and in the cerebellar cortex.Clear labelling observed in the rat forebrain suggests severalpotential sites in the human brain that could mediate an impairment ofmemory function (Miller and Branconnier, 1983), such as thehippocampus, medial septal complex, lateral nucleus of the mamillarybody, and the amygdaloid complex. Similarly, labelling was detectedclearly in rat forebrain regions that correspond to those that couldmediate cannabis-induced effects on human appetite and mood (namely,the hypothalamus, amygdaloid complex, and anterior cingulate cortex).It should be borne in mind that the regions where cannabinoidreceptors occur may have long projections to other areas, contributingto the multiplicity of effects of the cannabinoids.Since THC is not a naturally occurring substance within the brain, theexistence of a cannabinoid receptor implied the existence of anaturally occurring or "endogenous" cannabinoid-like substance. Devaneand colleagues (1992) recently identified a brain molecule which bindsto the receptor and mimics the action of cannabinoids. The molecule,arachidonylethanolamide, which is fat soluble like THC, has been named"anandamide" from a Sanskrit word meaning "bliss". Anandamide has beenfound to act on cells that express the cannabinoid receptor, but ithas no effect on identical cells which lack the receptor. Furtherresearch is necessary to determine which neurons are responsible forproducing anandamide molecules and to determine what their role is.  The unique psychoactivity of cannabinoids may be described as acomposite of numerous effects which would not arise from a singlebiochemical alteration, but rather from multiple actions (Martin,1986). Thus, the diverse pharmacological actions of the variouscannabinoids implies the existence of receptor subtypes. Cannabinoidreceptor cDNA can be used to search for other members of thehypothesised receptor family (Snyder, 1990). If the receptors with thepotential for mediating the therapeutic uses of cannabis are differentfrom those responsible for their psychoactive effects, cannabinoidreceptor cDNA cloning and new synthetic cannabinoids modelled onanandamide may help to uncover the receptor subtypes and develop drugsto target them, thus fulfilling the ancient promise of "marijuana asmedicine". If, however, it were the case that there was only one typeof cannabinoid receptor, then the psychoactive and therapeutic effectswould be inseparable. The evidence against this proposition mountswith the recent cloning of a cannabinoid receptor in spleen that doesnot exist in brain (Munro et al, 1993).4.3 Forms of cannabisThe concentration of THC varies with the forms in which cannabis isprepared for ingestion, the most common of which are marijuana,hashish and hash oil. Marijuana is prepared from the dried floweringtops and leaves of the harvested plant. Its potency depends upon thegrowing conditions, the genetic characteristics of the plant and theproportions of plant matter. The flowering tops and bracts (known as"heads") are highest in THC concentration, with potency descendingthrough the upper leaves, lower leaves, stems and seeds. Somevarieties of the cannabis plant contain little or no THC, such as thehemp varieties used for making rope, while others have beenspecifically cultivated for their high THC content, such as"sinsemilla". Marijuana may range in colour from green to grey or brown, dependingon the variety and where it was grown, and in texture from a drypowder or finely divided tea-like substance to a dry leafy material.The concentration of THC in a batch of marijuana containing mostlyleaves and stems may range from 0.5-5 per cent, while the "sinsemilla"variety with "heads" may result in concentrations from 7-14 per cent.The potency of marijuana preparations being sold has probablyincreased in the past decade (Jones, 1987), although the evidence forthis has been contested (Mikuriya and Aldrich, 1988).Hashish or hash consists of dried cannabis resin and compressedflowers. It ranges in colour from light blonde/brown to almost black,and is usually sold in the form of hard chunks or cubes. Theconcentration of THC in hashish generally ranges from 2-8 per cent,although it can be as high as 10-20 per cent. Hash oil is a highlypotent and viscous substance obtained by using an organic solvent toextract THC from hashish (or marijuana), concentrating the filteredextract, and, in some cases, subjecting it to further purification.The colour may range from clear to pale yellow/green, through brown toblack. The concentration of the THC in hash oil is generally between15 per cent and 50 per cent, although samples as high as 70 per centhave been detected.4.4 Routes of administrationAlmost all possible routes of administration have been used, but byfar the most common method is smoking (inhaling). Marijuana is mostoften smoked as a hand-rolled "joint" the size of a cigarette orlarger, and usually thicker. Tobacco is often added to marijuana toassist burning and "make it go further", and a filter may be inserted.Hashish may be mixed with tobacco and smoked as a joint, but is moreoften smoked through a pipe, either with or without tobacco. A waterpipe known as "bong" is a popular implement for all cannabispreparations, because the water cools the hot smoke before it isinhaled and there is little loss of the drug through sidestream smoke.Hash oil is used sparingly because of its extremely high psychoactivepotency; a few drops may be applied to a cigarette or a joint, to themixture in the pipe, or the oil may be heated and the vapours inhaled.Whatever method is used, smokers usually inhale deeply and hold theirbreath for several seconds in order to ensure maximum absorption ofTHC by the lungs. Hashish may also be cooked or baked in foods and eaten. When ingestedorally the onset of the psychoactive effects is delayed by about anhour. In clinical and experimental research, THC has often beenprepared in gelatine capsules and administered orally. In India, apopular method of ingestion is in the form of a tea-like brew of theleaves and stems, known as "bhang". The "high" is of lesser intensitybut the duration of intoxication is longer by several hours. It iseasier to titrate the dose and achieve the desired level ofintoxication by smoking than by oral ingestion since the effects aremore immediate. Crude aqueous extracts of cannabis have on very rare occasions beeninjected intravenously. THC is insoluble in water, so little or nodrug is actually present in these extracts, and the injection of tinyundissolved particles may cause severe pain and inflammation at thesite of injection and a variety of toxic systemic effects. Injectionshould not be considered as a route of cannabis administration, buthas been used in research to investigate pharmacokinetics.Since different routes of administration give rise to differingpharmacokinetics (see below), the reader should assume for theremainder of this document that the method of ingestion is smokingunless stated otherwise.4.5 DosageA typical joint contains between 0.5g and 1.0g of cannabis plantmatter, which varies in THC content between 5mg and 150mg (i.e.typically between 1 per cent and 15 per cent THC). Not all of theavailable THC is ingested; the actual amount of THC delivered in thesmoke has been estimated at 20 per cent to 70 per cent of that in thecigarette (Hawks, 1982), with the rest being lost through combustionor escaping in sidestream smoke. The bioavailability of THC frommarijuana cigarettes (the fraction of THC in the cigarette whichreaches the bloodstream) has been reported to range between 5 per centand 24 per cent (mean 18.6 per cent) (Ohlsson et al, 1980). For allthese reasons, the actual dose of THC that is absorbed when cannabisis smoked is not easily estimated. In general, only a small amount of smoked cannabis (e.g. 2mg to 3mg ofavailable THC) is required to produce a brief pleasurable high for theoccasional user, and a single joint may be sufficient for two or threeindividuals. A heavy smoker may consume five or more joints per day,while heavy users in Jamaica, for example, may consume up to 420mg THCper day (Ghodse, 1986). In clinical trials designed to assess thetherapeutic potential of THC, single doses have ranged up to 20mg incapsule form. In human experimental research, THC doses of 10mg, 20mgand 25mg have been administered as low, medium and high doses (Barnettet al 1985; Perez-Reyes et al 1982).Perez-Reyes et al (1974) determined the amount of THC required toproduce the desired effects by slow intravenous administration. Theyestimated that the threshold for perception of an effect was 1.5mgwhile a peak social "high" required 2-3mg THC. These levels did notdiffer between frequent and infrequent users, so Perez-Reyes et alconcluded that tolerance or sensitivity to the perceived high does notdevelop. 4.6 Patterns of useCannabis is the most widely used illicit drug in Australia, havingbeen tried by a third of the adult population, and by the majority ofyoung adults between the ages of 18 and 25 (see Donnelly and Hall,1994). The most common route of administration is by smoking, and themost widely used form of the drug is marijuana. The majority of cannabis use in Australia and elsewhere is"recreational". That is, most users use the drug to experience itseuphoric and relaxing effects rather than for its recognisedtherapeutic effects. Unless explicitly stated to the contrary (as inchapter 8) it should be assumed that the phrase "cannabis use" is ashort-hand term for the recreational use of cannabis products.The majority of cannabis use is also "experimental" in that most ofthose who have ever used cannabis either discontinue their use after anumber of uses, or if they continue to use, do so intermittently andepisodically whenever the drug is available. Only a small proportionof those who ever use cannabis become regular cannabis users. The bestestimate from the available survey data is that about 10 per cent ofthose who ever use cannabis become daily users, and a further 20-30per cent use on a weekly basis (see Queensland Criminal JusticeCommission, 1993; Donnelly and Hall, 1994). Among those who continueto use cannabis, the majority discontinue their use in their mid tolate 20s. Because of uncertainties about the dose of THC contained in illicitmarijuana, there is no information on the amount of THC ingested byregular Australian cannabis users. "Heavy" cannabis use is typicallydefined in terms of the frequency of use rather than average dose ofTHC received. Although it is possible that daily users could use smallquantities per day, this is unlikely to be true of the majority ofregular users because of the tolerance to drug effects which developswith regular use. Evidence collected on chronic long-term users at theNational Drug and Alcohol Research Centre (Solowij, 1994), indicatedthat they typically used more potent forms of cannabis (namely,"heads" and hashish). The daily or near daily use pattern is the pattern that probablyplaces users at greatest risk of experiencing long-term health andpsychological consequences of use. Such users are more likely to bemale and less well educated, and are more likely to regularly usealcohol, and to have experimented with a variety of other illicitdrugs, such as amphetamines, hallucinogens, psychostimulants,sedatives and opioids.4.7 Metabolism of cannabinoids"Cannabinoids" is the collective term for a variety of compounds whichcan be extracted from the cannabis plant or are produced within thebody after ingestion and metabolism of cannabis. Some of thesecompounds are psychoactive, that is, they have an effect upon the mindof the users; others are pharmacologically or biologically active,that is, have an effect upon cells or the function of other bodilytissues and organs, but are not psychoactive. Animal and humanexperimentation indicates that delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) isthe major psychoactive constituent of cannabis.THC is rapidly and extensively metabolised in humans. Differentmethods of ingesting cannabis give rise to different patterns ofabsorption, metabolism and excretion of THC. Upon inhalation, THC isabsorbed within minutes from the lungs into the bloodstream.Absorption of THC is much slower after oral administration, enteringthe bloodstream within one to three hours, and delaying the onset ofpsychoactive effects. After smoking, the initial metabolism of THC takes place in the lungs,followed by more extensive metabolism by liver enzymes which transformTHC to a number of metabolites. The most rapidly produced metaboliteis 9-carboxy-THC (or THC-COOH) which is detectable in blood withinminutes of smoking cannabis. It is not psychoactive. Another majormetabolite of THC is 11-hydroxy-THC, which is approximately 20 percent more potent than THC, and which penetrates the blood-brainbarrier more rapidly than THC. 11-hydroxy-THC is only present at verylow concentrations in the blood after smoking, but at highconcentrations after the oral route (Hawks, 1982). THC and itshydroxylated metabolites account for most of the psychoactive effectsof the cannabinoids.Peak blood levels of THC are reached very rapidly, usually within 10minutes of smoking and before a joint is fully smoked, and declinerapidly to about 5-10 per cent of their initial level within the firsthour. This initial rapid decline reflects the rapid conversion of THCto its metabolites, as well as the distribution of THC to lipid-richtissues, including the brain (Fehr and Kalant, 1983; Jones, 1980;1987). THC and its metabolites are highly fat soluble and may remainfor long periods of time in the fatty tissues of the body, from whichthey are slowly released back into the bloodstream. This phenomenonslows the elimination of cannabinoids from the body. The time required to clear half of the administered dose of THC fromthe body has been found to be shorter for experienced or daily users(19-27 hours) than for inexperienced users (50-57 hours) (Agurell, etal 1986; Hunt and Jones, 1980; Lemberger et al, 1970; 1978; Ohlsson,et al, 1980). Recent research using more sensitive detectiontechniques suggests that the half-life in chronic users may be closerto three to five days (Johansson et al, 1988). It is the immediate andsubsequent metabolism of THC that occurs more rapidly in experiencedusers (Blum, 1984). Given the slow clearance, repeated administrationof cannabis results in the accumulation of THC and its metabolites inthe body. Because of its slow release from fatty tissues into thebloodstream, THC and its metabolites may be detectable in blood forseveral days, and traces may persist for several weeks. While blood levels of THC peak within a few minutes, 9-carboxy-THClevels peak approximately 20 minutes after commencing smoking and thendecline slowly. The elimination curve for THC crosses the9-carboxy-THC curve around the time of the peak of the latter andsubjective intoxication also peaks around this time (i.e., 20-30minutes later than peak THC blood levels), with acute effectspersisting for approximately two to three hours. 4.8 Detection of cannabinoids in body fluidsCannabinoid levels in the body, which depend on both the dose givenand the smoking history of the individual, are subject to substantialindividual variability. Plasma levels of THC in man may range between0-500ng/ml, depending on the potency of the cannabis ingested and thetime since smoking. For example, blood levels of THC may decline to2ng/ml one hour after smoking a low potency cannabis cigarette, alevel that may be achieved only nine hours after smoking a highpotency cannabis cigarette. In habitual and chronic users such levelsmay persist for several days after use because of the slow release ofaccumulated THC. The detection of THC in blood above 10-15ng/ml provides presumptiveevidence of "recent" consumption of cannabis, but it is not possibleto determine how recently it was consumed. A somewhat more preciseestimate of the time of consumption may be obtained from the ratio ofTHC to 9-carboxy-THC: similar concentrations of each in blood could bean indication of use within the last 20-40 minutes, and would predicta high probability of the user being intoxicated. When the levels of9-carboxy-THC are substantially higher than those of THC, ingestioncan be estimated to have occurred more than half an hour ago (Hawks,1982; Perez-Reyes et al, 1982). However, such an interpretationprobably applies only to the naive users who have resting levels ofzero. Background levels of cannabinoids (particularly 9-carboxy-THC)in habitual users make the estimation of time of ingestion almostimpossible. It is very difficult to determine the time ofadministration from blood concentrations of THC and its metabolites,even if the smoking habits of the individual and the exact doseconsumed are known. The results of blood analyses indicate, at best,the "recent" use of cannabis.Urinary cannabinoid levels provide an even weaker indicator of currentcannabis intake. In general, the greater the level of cannabinoidmetabolites in urine, the greater the possibility of recent use, butit is impossible to be precise about how "recent" use has been (Hawks,1982). Only minute traces of THC itself appear in the urine due to itsextensive metabolism, and most of the administered dose is excreted inthe form of metabolites in faeces and urine (Hunt and Jones, 1980).9-carboxy-THC is detectable in urine within 30 minutes of smoking.This and other metabolites may be present for several days in firsttime or irregular cannabis users, while frequent users may continue toexcrete metabolites for weeks or months after last use because of theaccumulation and slow elimination of these compounds (Dackis et al,1982; Ellis et al, 1985). As with blood levels, there is substantialhuman variability in the metabolism of THC, and no simple relationshipbetween urinary levels of THC metabolites and time of consumption.Hence, urinalyses results cannot be used to distinguish between usewithin the last 24 hours and use more than a month ago. Several studies have examined measures of cannabinoids in fat andsaliva. Analyses of human fat biopsies confirm storage of the drug forat least 28 days (Johansson, et al, 1987). Detection of cannabinoidsin saliva holds more promise for forensic purposes, since it has thecapacity to reduce the time frame of "recent" use from days and weeksto hours (Hawks, 1982; Gross et al 1985; Thompson and Cone, 1987).Salivary THC levels have also been shown to correlate with subjectiveintoxication and heart rate changes (Menkes et al, 1991). 4.9 Intoxication and levels of cannabinoidsIngestion of cannabis produces a dose related impairment of a widerange of cognitive and behavioural functions. Since there is evidencethat cannabis intoxication adversely affects skills required to drivea motor vehicle (see below), it would be desirable to have a reliablemeasure of impairment due to cannabis intoxication that was comparableto the breath test of alcohol intoxication. For this reason, areliable measure for determining the degree of impairment due tocannabis has been particularly sought after.While the degree of impairment from alcohol can be determined from asingle blood alcohol estimate, a clear relationship between bloodlevels of THC or its metabolites and degree of either impairment orsubjective intoxication has not been demonstrated (Agurell et al,1986). The estimation of the degree of intoxication from a singlevalue of blood THC level is difficult, not only because of the timedelay between subjective high and blood THC, but also because of largeindividual variations in the effects experienced at the same bloodlevels. The difficulty is compounded by the distribution of THC tobody tissues, and its metabolism to other psychoactive compounds. Blood levels of THC metabolites, such as 11-hydroxy-THC, correlatetemporally with subjective effects but are not readily detectable inblood after smoking cannabis, while blood levels of THC correlate onlymodestly with cannabis intoxication, in part because of its lipidsolubility (Barnett et al, 1985; McBay 1988; Ohlsson et al 1980). Thelevel of intoxication could only realistically be related to the totalsum of all the psychoactive cannabinoids present in body fluids and inthe brain and various tissues. Due to large human variability, no realistic limit of cannabinoidlevels in blood has been set which can be related to an undesirablelevel of intoxication. Tolerance also develops to many of the effectsof cannabis. Hence, a given dose consumed by a naive individual mayproduce greater impairment on a task than the same dose consumed by achronic heavy user. THC may also be active in the nervous system longafter it is no longer detectable in the blood, so there may belong-term subtle effects of cannabis on the cognitive functioning ofchronic users even in the unintoxicated state. To date, there is noconsistently demonstrated correlation between blood levels of THC andits effect on human mind and performance. Thus, no practical methodhas been developed as a forensic tool for determining levels ofintoxication based on detectable cannabinoids. A consensus conferenceof forensic toxicologists has concluded that blood concentrations ofTHC which cause impairment have not been sufficiently established toprovide a basis for legal testimony in cases concerning driving amotor vehicle while under the influence of cannabis (Consensus Report,1985). 4.10 Passive inhalationIn the United States, urine testing for drug traces and metabolites isincreasingly used to identify illicit drug users in the workplace(Hayden, 1991). A technical concern raised by the opponents of thispractice has been the possibility of a person having a urine positivefor cannabinoids as the result of the passive inhalation of marijuanasmoke at a social event immediately prior to the provision of theurine sample. A number of research studies have attempted to determinethe relationship between passive inhalation of marijuana smoke andconsequent production of urinary cannabinoids (Hayden, 1991).In one of the first studies on passive inhalation, Perez-Reyes andcolleagues (1983) found that non-smokers who had been confined forover an hour in a very small unventilated space containing the smokeof at least eight cannabis cigarettes over three consecutive days hadinsignificant amounts of urinary cannabinoids. Law and colleagues(1984) and Mule et al (1988) also showed that passive inhalationproduced urinary cannabinoid concentrations well below the detectionlimit of 20ng/ml 9-carboxy-THC used in workplace drug screens. Morland et al (1985) produced urinary cannabinoid levels above 20ng/mlin non-smokers but the conditions were extreme, namely, confinement ina space the size of a packing box with exposure to the smoke of sixcannabis cigarettes. The studies of Cone and colleagues (1986; 1987a,1987b) confirmed the necessity to apply extreme experimentalconditions, which they claimed non-smokers were unlikely to submitthemselves to for the long periods of time required to produce urinarymetabolites above 20ng/ml. They also showed that non-smokers withsignificant amounts of cannabinoids in their urine experienced thesubjective effects of intoxication. ReferencesAbbott, A. (1990) The switch that turns the brain on to cannabis. NewScientist, 11 Aug, 19.Abood, M.E. and Martin, B.R. (1992) Neurobiology of marijuana abuse.Trends in Pharmacological Science, 13(5), 201-206.Agurell, S., Halldin, M., Lindgren, J., Ohlsson, A., Widman, M.,Gillespie, H. and Hollister, L. (1986) Pharmacokinetics and metabolismof 1-Tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids with emphasis onman. Pharmacological Reviews, 38(1), 21-43.Barnett, G., Licko,V. and Thompson, T. (1985) Behavioralpharmacokinetics of marijuana. Psychopharmacology, 85, 51-56.Bidaut-Russell, M., Devane, W.A. and Howlett, A (1990) Cannabinoidreceptors and modulation of cyclic AMP accumulation in the rat brain.Journal of Neurochemistry, 55, 21-55.Blum, K. (1984) Handbook of Abusable Drugs. New York: Gardner Press.Cone, E.J. and Johnson, R.E. (1986) Contact highs and urinarycannabinoid excretion after passive exposure to marijuana smoke.Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 40(3), 247-256.Cone, E.J., Roache, J.D. and Johnson, R.E. (1987a) Effects of passiveexposure to marijuana smoke. National Institute on Drug Abuse ResearchMonograph Series, 76, 150-156. Cone, E.J., Johnson, R.E., Darwin, W.D., Yousefnajed, D., Mell, L.D.,Paul, B.D. and Mitchell, J. (1987b) Passive inhalation of marijuanasmoke: Urinalysis and room air levels of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol.Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 11, 89-96.Consensus Report, C.D.P. Research Technology Branch, NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse. (1985) Drug concentrations and drivingimpairment. Journal of the American Medical Association, 254(18),2618-2621.Dackis, C.A., Pottash, A.L.C., Annitto, W. and Gold, M.S. (1982)Persistence of urinary marijuana levels after supervised abstinence.American Journal of Psychiatry, 139(9), 1196-1198.Devane, W.A., Dysarz, F.A., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S. and Howlett, A(1988) Determination and characterization of a cannabinoid receptor inrat brain. Molecular Pharmacology, 34, 605-613.Devane, W.A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., Pertwee, R.G., Stevenson, L.A.,Griffin, G., Gibson, D., Mandelbaum, A., Etinger, A. and Mechoulam, R.(1992) Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds tothe cannabinoid receptor. Science, 258, 1946-1949.Donnelly, N. and Hall, W. (1994) Patterns of Cannabis Use inAustralia. Paper prepared for the National Task Force onCannabis.National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 27. Canberra:Australian Government Publishing Service.Ellis, G.M., Mann, M.A., Judson, B.A., Schramm, N.T. and Tashchian, A.(1985) Excretion patterns of cannabinoid metabolites after last use ina group of chronic users. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 38,572-578.Fehr, K.O. and Kalant, H. (Eds) (1983) Cannabis and Health Hazards.Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964) Isolation, structure and partialsynthesis of an active constituent of hashish. Journal of the AmericanChemistry Society, 86, 1646-1647.Gerard, C.M., Mollereau, C., Vassart, G. and Parmentier, M. (1991)Molecular cloning of a human cannabinoid receptor which is alsoexpressed in testis. Biochemistry Journal, 279, 129-134.Ghodse, A.H. (1986) Cannabis psychosis. British Journal of Addiction,81, 473-478.Gross, S.J., Worthy, T.E., Nerder, L., Zimmermann, E.G., Soares, J.R.and Lomax, P. (1985) The detection of recent cannabis use by salivadelta-9 THC radioimmune quantitation. Journal of AnalyticalToxicology, 2, 98-100.Hawks, R.L. (1982) The constituents of cannabis and the dispositionand metabolism of cannabinoids. In Hawks, R.L. (Ed) The Analysis ofCannabinoids in Biological Fluids, National Institute on Drug AbuseResearch Monograph No. 42 (pp125-137). Rockville, MD: U.S. Departmentof Health and Human Services.Hayden, J.W. (1991) Passive inhalation of marijuana smoke: a criticalreview. Journal of Substance Abuse, 3(1), 85-90.Herkenham, M. (1992) Cannabinoid receptor localization in brain:relationship to motor and reward systems. Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Sciences. [Kalivas, P.W. and Samson, H.H. (Eds) TheNeurobiology of Drug and Alcohol Addiction], 19-32.Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., de Costa, B.R. and Richfield, E.K. (1991a)Neuronal localization of cannabinoid receptors in the basal ganglia ofthe rat. Brain Research, 547, 267-274.Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S., de Costa, B.R.and Rice, K (1991b) Characterization and localization of cannabinoidreceptors in rat brain: A quantitative in vitro autoradiographicstudy. Journal of Neuroscience, 11(2), 563-583.Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., Little, M.D., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S.,De Costa, B.R. and Rice, K (1990) Cannabinoid receptor localization inbrain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 87,1932-1936.Hollister, L.E. (1986) Health Aspects of Cannabis. PharmacologicalReviews, 38(1), 1-20.Howlett, A (1987) Cannabinoid inhibition of adenylate cyclase:relative activity of constituents and metabolites of marihuana.Neuropharmacology, 26(5), 507-512.Howlett, A.C., Qualy, J.M. and Khatchatrian, L.L. (1986) Involvementof Gi in the inhibition of adenylate cyclase by cannabimimetic drugs.Molecular Pharmacology, 29, 307-313.Howlett, A.C., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S. and Milne, G.M. (1988)Nonclassical cannabinoid analgetics inhibit adenylate cyclase:development of a cannabinoid receptor model. Molecular Pharmacology,33, 297-302.Howlett, A.C., Bidaut-Russell, M., Devane, W.A., Melvin, L.S.,Johnson, M.R. and Herkenham, M. (1990) The cannabinoid receptor:biochemical, anatomical and behavioral characterization. Trends inNeuroscience, 13(10), 420-423.Howlett, A.C., Evans, D.M. and Houston, D.B. (1992) The cannabinoidreceptor. In Murphy, L. and Bartke, A. (Eds) Marijuana/Cannabinoids:Neurobiology and Neurophysiology (pp. 35-72). Boca Raton, FL: CRCPress.Hunt, C.A. and Jones, R.T. (1980) Tolerance and disposition oftetrahydrocannabinol in man. The Journal of Pharmacology andExperimental Therapeutics, 215(1), 35-44.Johansson, E., Sjovall, J., Noren, K., Agurell, S., Hollister. L.E.and Halldin, M.M. (1987) Analysis of 1-Tetrahydrocannabinol (1-THC)in human plasma and fat after smoking. In Chesher, G., Consroe, P. andMusty, R. (Eds) Marijuana: An International Research Report (pp.291-296). Johansson, E., Agurell, S., Hollister, L.E. and Halldin, M.M. (1988)Prolonged apparent half-life of 1-tetrahydrocannabinol in plasma ofchronic marijuana users. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 40,374-375.Jones, R.T. (1980) Human effects: An overview. In Petersen, R (Ed),Marijuana Research Findings: 1980, National Institute on Drug AbuseResearch Monograph No. 31 (pp. 54-80). Rockville, MD: U.S. Departmentof Health and Human Services.Jones, R.T. (1987) Drug of abuse profile: cannabis. ClinicalChemistry, 33(11(B)), 72B-81B.Law, B., Mason, P.A., Moffat, A.C., King. L.J. and Marks, V. (1984)Passive inhalation of cannabis smoke. Journal of Pharmacy andPharmacology, 36, 578-581.Lemberger, L. and Rubin, A. (1978) Cannabis: the role of metabolism inthe development of tolerance. Drug Metabolism Reviews, 8, 59-68.Lemberger, L., Silberstein, S.D., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, I.J. (1970)Marihuana: Studies on the disposition and metabolism ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. Science, 170, 1320-1321.Martin, B.R. (1986) Cellular effects of cannabinoids. PharmacologicalReviews, 38(1), 45-74.Matsuda, L.A., Lolait, S.J., Brownstein, M., Young, A. and Bonner,T.I. (1990) Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functionalexpression of the cloned cDNA. Nature, 346, 561-564.Matsuda, L.A., Bonner, T.I. and Lolait, S.J. (1992) Cannabinoidreceptors: which cells, where, how, and why? In T. N. H. Lee (Ed.),Molecular Approaches to Drug Abuse Research Volume II: Structure,Function, and Expression. (pp. 48-56). Rockville: US Department ofHealth and Human Services.Matsuda, L.A., Bonner, T.I. and Lolait, S.J. (1993) Localization ofcannabinoid receptor mRNA in rat brain. The Journal of ComparativeNeurology, 327, 535-550.McBay, A.J. (1988) Interpretation of blood and urine cannabinoidconcentrations. Journal of Forensic Science, 33, 875-883.Menkes, D.B., Howard, R.C., Spears, G.F.S. and Cairns, E.R. (1991)Salivary THC following cannabis smoking correlates with subjectiveintoxication and heart rate. Psychopharmacology, 103, 277-279.Mikuriya, T.H. and Aldrich, M.R. (1988) Cannabis 1988: old drug, newdangers - the potency question. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 20(1),47-55. Miller, L.L. and Branconnier, R.J. (1983) Cannabis: effects on memoryand the cholinergic limbic system. Psychological Bulletin, 93(3),441-456.Morland, J., Bugge, A., Skuterud, B., Steen, A., Wethe, G.H. andKjeldsen, T. (1985) Cannabinoids in blood and urine after passiveinhalation of cannabis smoke. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 30,997-1002.Mule, S.J., Lomax, P. and Gross, S.J. (1988) Active and realisticpassive marijuana exposure tested by three immunoassays and GC/MS inurine. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 12, 113-116.Munro, S., Thomas, K.L. and Abu-Shaar, M. (1993) Molecularcharacterization of a peripheral receptor for cannabinoids. Nature,365, 61-65.Ohlsson, A., Lindgren, J-E., Wahlen, A., Agurell, S., Hollister, L.E.and Gillespie, H.K. (1980) Plasma delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinolconcentrations and clinical effects after oral and intravenousadministration and smoking. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,28(3), 409-416.Perez-Reyes, M., Timmons, M and Wall, M.E. (1974) Long-term use ofmarijuana and the development of tolerance or sensitivity to9Tetrahydrocannabinol. Archives of General Psychiatry, 31, 89-91.Perez-Reyes, M., Di Guiseppi, S., Davis, K.H., Schindler, V.H. andCook, C.E. (1982) Comparison of effects of marihuana cigarettes ofthree different potencies. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,31(5), 617-624.Perez-Reyes, M., Di Guiseppi, S., Mason, A.M. and Davis, K.H. (1983)Passive inhalation of marihuana smoke and urinary excretion ofcannabinoids. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 34(1), 36-41.Queensland Criminal Justice Commission (1993) Cannabis and the Law inQueensland. Queensland Criminal Justice Commission, Brisbane.Snyder, S. (1990) Planning for serendipity. Nature, 346, 508.Solowij, N. (1994) Event-related potential indices of cognitivefunctioning in long term cannabis users. Ph.D. Department of CommunityMedicine, University of New South Wales.Thompson, L.K. and Cone, E.J. (1987) Determination ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in human blood and saliva byhigh-performance liquid chromatography with amperometric detection.Journal of Chromatography, 421, 91-97. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-10IA087-000627-B016-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051627 text/html 69209HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:16:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:19 GMTContent-length: 68991 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use:chapter 5 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis usechapter 5 National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 5. The acute effects of cannabis intoxication 5.1  Psychological and physical effectsAny attempt to summarise the acute effects of cannabis, or of anypsychoactive drug, is necessarily an oversimplification. The effectsexperienced by the user will depend upon: the dose, the mode ofadministration, the user's prior experience with the drug, anyconcurrent drug use, and the "set" - the user's expectations, moodstate and attitudes towards drug effects - and "setting" - the socialenvironment in which the drug is used (Jaffe, 1985). The followingdescriptions of the typical effects of cannabis are made with thisqualification in mind.The major motive for the widespread recreational use of cannabis isthe experience of a subjective "high", an altered state ofconsciousness which is characterised by: emotional changes, such asmild euphoria and relaxation; perceptual alterations, such as timedistortion, and; intensification of ordinary sensory experiences, suchas eating, watching films, listening to music, and engaging in sex(Jaffe, 1985; Tart, 1970). When used in a social setting, the "high"is often accompanied by infectious laughter, talkativeness, andincreased sociability. Cognitive changes are usually marked during a "high". These include animpaired short-term memory, and a loosening of associations, whichmake it possible for the user to become lost in pleasant reverie andfantasy, while making it difficult for the user to sustaingoal-directed mental activity. Motor skills, reaction time and motorcoordination are also affected, so many forms of skilled psychomotoractivity are impaired while the user is intoxicated (Jaffe, 1985).Not all the effects of cannabis intoxication are welcomed by users.Some users report unpleasant psychological reactions, ranging from afeeling of anxiety to frank panic reactions, and a fear of going madto depressed mood (Smith, 1968; Weil, 1970; Thomas, 1993). Theseeffects are most often reported by naive users who are unfamiliar withthe effects of cannabis, and by some patients given THC fortherapeutic purposes. More experienced users may also report theseeffects on occasion, especially after the oral ingestion of cannabiswhen the effects may be more pronounced and of longer duration thanthose usually experienced after smoking cannabis. These effects canusually be successfully prevented by adequate preparation of usersabout the type of effects they may experience. If these effectsdevelop they can be managed by reassurance and support (Smith, 1968;Weil, 1970). Psychotic symptoms, such as delusions and hallucinations,are very rare experiences that occur at very high doses of THC, andperhaps in susceptible individuals at lower doses (Smith, 1968;Thomas, 1993; Weil, 1970). The inhalation of marijuana smoke, or the ingestion of THC, thepsychoactive derivative of cannabis, has a number of bodily effects.Among these the most dependable are the effects on the heart andvascular system. The most immediate effect of cannabis use by allroutes of administration is an increase in heart rate of 20-50 percent over baseline which occurs within a few minutes to a quarter ofan hour and lasts for up to three hours (Huber et al, 1988; Jones,1984). Changes in blood pressure also occur which depend upon posture:blood pressure is increased while the person is sitting, and decreaseswhile standing. A sudden change from a recumbent posture may producepostural hypotension and fainting, an effect which may explain thefeeling of "light-headedness" and faintness that is often the earliestindication of intoxication in naive users (Maykut, 1984). Increasesare also observed in the production of the catecholaminenorepinephrine, although these lag behind the cardiovascular changes,and their mechanisms are not well understood (Hardman and Hosko,1976).In healthy young users these cardiovascular effects are unlikely to beof any clinical significance. They may, however, magnify anxiety innaive users. The cannabis-induced tachycardia and postural hypotensionmay contribute to the panic attacks sometimes experienced by naiveusers (Weil, 1970) who may mistakenly interpret the palpitations, andthe feeling of faintness, as symptoms of serious misadventure,magnifying pre-existing anxiety in a positive feedback cycle thatleads to a panic attack. 5.2  Toxic dose levelsTHC appears to be the component of cannabis which has the highestdirect toxicity in all animals so far tested. The toxic effects ofcannabis are mediated through its effects on neural systems. The causeof death in experimental animals is almost invariably apnoea orcardiac arrest, if apnoea is prevented (Rosencrantz, 1983). Due to thedevelopment of tolerance, toxic doses depend upon the amount by whichthey exceed the customary dose. In contrast to the increase in toxicdose typical of many drugs when moving from primates to lower animals,it appears that phylogenetically higher animals are less susceptibleto the acute toxicity of THC. Thus, the dose of THC which kills 50 percent of animals (LD50) when administered intravenously is 40mg/kg inthe rat but 130mg/kg in the dog and monkey (Rosencrantz, 1983). For obvious ethical reasons there is no experimental evidence todetermine a lethal dose in humans. Nor is there any clinical evidence,since there have been no reported cases of death attributable tocannabis in the world medical literature (Blum, 1984; Nahas, 1984).Extrapolation from the animal evidence suggests that the lethal humandose of THC is at least as high as, and probably higher than, thatobserved in the monkey. If this is so, then the toxic dose of THC in a65kg adult would be 8.45kg.A number of non-fatal toxic reactions occur in humans with higher thannormal doses. The tachycardia almost invariably produced in acuteintoxication, combined with the sensory alterations and increasedtremor commonly reported, probably contribute to the affectivecomponents of these reactions. CNS and respiratory depression arenoted with high doses, which in severe overdose may belife-threatening (Rosencrantz, 1983). These effects are, of course,more dangerous to those with pre-existing cardiac irregularities.Because of the large effective to lethal dose ratio in humans(probably in excess of 1:1000 in non-tolerant users) the risk ofexperiencing severe toxic effects of cannabis is limited by theaversive psychotropic effects of high doses, which usually lead tocessation of use before the onset of dangerous physical consequences.5.3 Tolerance to acute effectsIn animals, tolerance develops to the lethal, hypothermic and some ofthe behavioural effects of cannabinoids. This has been attributed tofunctional or pharmacodynamic adaptations of the CNS rather than to amore rapid metabolic disposition (Jaffe, 1985). Laboratory studies inhumans involving daily dosing at high levels over periods of weekshave demonstrated tolerance to mood effects, tachycardia, decrease inskin temperature, increased body temperature, and impaired performanceon psychomotor tests. Abrupt discontinuation in these studies usuallyproduces a mild withdrawal syndrome (see below pp111-113). 5.4 Psychomotor effectsA major societal concern about cannabis intoxication is its potentialto impair psychomotor performance in ways which may directly affectthe well-being of non-users of cannabis. The prototype outcome is anautomobile accident caused by a cannabis user driving whileintoxicated. It is well known that individuals who drive whileintoxicated with alcohol are dangerous to others in proportion totheir level of intoxication. Is there evidence that intoxication withcannabis produces impaired psychomotor performance of a nature anddegree sufficient to warrant restrictions upon its use by automobiledrivers? To what extent has cannabis intoxication contributed to roadaccidents?Psychoactive substances typically have both acute and chronic effectson performance of a variety of tasks. Given the fact that most tasksof interest to researchers require effort and concentration, onlythose substances which enhance these very general abilities typicallyimprove performance. Recreational drugs are usually valued for effectswhich remove the user from mundane concerns, produce relaxation, andenhance experiences which would normally interfere with concentrationon a skilled task. Consequently, many societies enact restrictions onthe use of such drugs, either during specific tasks such as motorvehicle driving, or at any time, as is the case with cannabis in mostWestern societies, and with alcohol in many Islamic societies.The subjective effects of cannabis include feelings of well-being andrelaxation, and sensory and temporal distortions which might beexpected to decrease performance in situations where perceptualaccuracy and attention are important. In deciding whether therecreational use of cannabis presents a danger to the user and otherswe need to consider two things: (1) the extent to which its usedisrupts the performance of potentially dangerous tasks such as motorvehicle driving or the operation of machinery, and (2) the effect thatthe drug has on the user's compliance with restrictions upon its use.The second point refers to any disinhibitory effects of the drug whichmight predispose users to ignore prohibitions on driving, or mayincrease their willingness to take risks while intoxicated. The risks of cannabis intoxication and driving will be assessed in thefollowing way. First, laboratory evidence on the effects of cannabison various psychomotor tasks will be reviewed. In the following reviewof this evidence, when a number of studies have produced similarresults, only the most typical studies will be cited. (For a morecomplete review of such studies see Chait and Pierri, 1992). Second,the possible mechanisms of the psychomotor effects of cannabis will bebriefly discussed. Third, the literature on the effects of cannabis onperformance in driving and flying simulators will be briefly reviewed.Fourth, the experimental literature on the effects of cannabisintoxication on on-road driving will be reviewed. Finally, the limitedepidemiological evidence on the contribution of cannabis to motorvehicle accidents will be considered.5.4.1 Effects of cannabis on psychomotor tasksMuscle control. Standing steadiness (Kiplinger et al, 1971) and handsteadiness (Klonoff et al, 1973) are both adversely affected bycannabis. Finger or toe tapping speed does not appear to be reliablyaffected (Weckowicz et al, 1975; Evans et al, 1976; Milstein et al,1975; Dalton et al, 1975), as only one study (Klonoff et al, 1973)found a decrement in finger tapping.Reaction time. Simple reaction time does not appear to be reliablyaffected by cannabis. Some studies have reported decrements in meanreaction time (Borg et al, 1975; Dornbush et al, 1971), or thevariability of reaction time (Braden et al, 1974), while others havefound no difference (Evans et al, 1973). Choice reaction time tasks,in which the response is conditional not only upon the occurrence of astimulus, but also the presence of some other discriminant (such asthe pitch of a tone or the colour of a visual stimulus), have beenadministered to determine the effect of cannabis. In a number of thesestudies, reaction time was indeed slower after cannabis use (Borg etal, 1975; Block & Wittenborn, 1984; 1986), although there were somestudies which found no change (Peeke et al, 1976; Block & Wittenborn,1984). With only one exception (Low et al, 1973), errors in choicereaction time were not increased by cannabis.Single tasks of manual dexterity. Pursuit rotor tasks, in which thesubject attempts to follow a rotating target with a pointer, aregenerally performed worse after cannabis use (Manno et al, 1971; Mannoet al, 1970), although studies employing regular users (Salvendy &McCabe, 1975; Carlin et al, 1972) have found no effect, suggestingthat the regular users developed tolerance to the effects of cannabis.Other tracking tasks are generally not affected (Zacny & Chait, 1991;Heishman et al, 1989). Tests in which the subject must manipulate andaccurately place small items (Dalton et al, 1975; 1976; Evans et al,1973) are usually affected, while sorting tasks may (Chait et al,1985) or may not (Kelly et al, 1990) be performed less well. Concurrent tasks. Most concurrent task studies use one task whichrequires almost continuous attention, typically tracking, and one inwhich significant stimuli occur sporadically, often within a largernumber of non-significant stimuli. The tasks are often referred to asthe central and peripheral tasks respectively. The performance ofconcurrent tasks is almost always affected negatively by cannabis,although the effects on the component tasks are not consistent. Numberor proportion of peripheral targets missed (MacAvoy & Marks, 1975;Marks & MacAvoy, 1989; Casswell & Marks, 1973; Moskowitz et al, 1972),proportion of hits (Moskowitz, Sharma & McGlothlin, 1972), falsealarms (Chait et al, 1988, MacAvoy & Marks, 1975; Moskowitz &McGlothlin, 1974) or reaction time to peripheral targets (Perez-Reyeset al, 1988; Evans et al, 1976; Moskowitz et al, 1976) may suffer, butno interpretable pattern of decrements has emerged. It may be the casethat while overall performance on concurrent tasks is decreased duringcannabis intoxication, differences in the tasks used produce variouspatterns of effect. While there has been some speculation as towhether the effects of cannabis in concurrent tasks might beconcentrated on the central or peripheral tasks (Moskowitz, 1985), noobserved pattern has emerged to clearly support these conjectures.5.4.2 Possible mechanisms of psychomotor effectsSensory disturbances. Reports of the subjective experience of cannabisintoxication include altered experience in all sensory modalities, aswell as in the perception of space and time (Tart, 1970). Since almostall tasks of psychomotor performance include important visual andauditory components, sensory disturbances might well affect theability to perform such tasks. Studies of the ability to discoverembedded figures within complex designs have shown that this isimpaired by cannabis (Carlin et al, 1972; Carlin et al, 1974; Pearl etal, 1973). Performance decrements due to cannabis in the Stroop colournaming test have been reported (Carlin et al, 1972; 1974), although itis not clear whether disturbed perception has any significant effectupon this task.Central Nervous System depression. Both the toxic and behaviouraleffects of cannabis indicate that it acts as a CNS depressant, atleast in moderate to high doses. It might seem reasonable tohypothesise that this general effect might contribute to slowedreaction times, inability to maintain concentration, and lapses inattention. This is certainly the case with alcohol and other CNSdepressants. When compared to the relatively large and reliabledepressant effects of moderate doses of alcohol, it is clear that thiseffect of cannabis is not the primary mediator of performance changes.It must be stressed, however, that high doses of cannabis would makethis aspect of its action on psychomotor skills more important.Motivational changes. A great deal has been written about the supposedeffects of cannabis on human motivation. Hypotheses concerning themotivational effects of chronic cannabis use have been reviewedseparately (see chapter 7.2). Cannabis users routinely report reduceddesire for physical activity and increased difficulty of concentratingon intellectually demanding tasks such as reading for study (Tart,1970). Studies designed to test the effect of cannabis on thewillingness to perform laboratory "work" have found no strikingdecrements (Mendelson, 1983). This is consistent with comparisons ofmanual workers who used cannabis with those who did not (Rubin &Comitas, 1975; Stefanis et al, 1977). Indeed, the counter-argumentthat cannabis users can voluntarily compensate for some of theimpairing effects of the drug has received experimental support(Cappell & Pliner, 1973; Robbe & O'Hanlon, 1993). As discussed below,motivational changes are surely important in decisions made outsidethe laboratory, but there appears to be no reliable evidence thatmotivational changes are responsible for any major proportion of thepsychomotor effects of cannabis.5.4.3 Effects of cannabis on simulated driving and flyingSimulated driving tasks. As the previous sections have shown, there isconsiderable evidence that cannabis intoxication has some negativeeffects upon performance which become more pronounced with increasingtask difficulty. Motor vehicle driving is a complex task, especiallyin conditions of heavy traffic or poor road or weather conditions, andas such, it might be expected to be adversely affected by cannabis.Simulated driving tasks require skills which are similar to thoseinvolved in driving, which can be performed under controlledlaboratory conditions. When special efforts are made to simulate theperformance characteristics of a car, simulations have two majoradvantages (Smiley, 1986). First, cannabis users an be tested aftertaking doses of cannabis which it would be unethical to use on theroad. Second, they can be placed in simulated emergency situationswhich test their level of impairment in ways that would beimpermissible on the road. The disadvantage of simulator studiesderives from the difficulty of achieving sufficient fidelity toon-road driving tasks.One of the earliest studies by Crancer et al, (1969) found only that"speedometer errors" increased in simulated driving after cannabisuse. In one of the more influential studies, Dott (1972) reported anapparent decrease in the willingness to take risks in simulatedpassing of another vehicle after cannabis use, while alcohol had theopposite effect. Alcohol also tended to hamper the subjects' responseto stimuli signalling an emergency condition, while cannabis hadlittle effect on this response. Both, however, increased reaction timeto a more routine signal. A similar dissociation of the effects ofalcohol and cannabis was reported by Ellingstad, et al, (1973) whofound that cannabis did not appear to increase risk-taking, whereasalcohol did. Cannabis affected the ability to judge the time taken topass another vehicle, while alcohol did not. Moskowitz et al (1976)found that alcohol altered the visual search patterns of subjectsperforming a simulated driving task, while cannabis did not. Thealterations found with alcohol were, in theory, consistent with areduced ability to scan for hazardous events, but no reliabledifference in task performance was found with either drug.Smiley (1986) critically reviewed the research on the effects ofcannabis intoxication on simulated driving. She argued that theearlier studies which showed fewer effects on car control than laterstudies suffered because of their unrealistic car dynamics. Laterstudies which used driving simulators with more realistic car dynamicshave shown impairments of lane control after cannabis use. Some of thestudies have also shown reductions in risk-taking as manifested inslower speeds, and maintenance of a larger distance from the car infront in following tasks (Smiley, 1986).Simulated flying. Janowsky et al (1976) found substantial increases inthe number and magnitude of errors during a simulated flight aftertaking cannabis. These were principally in keeping the plane at theproper altitude and heading. Yesavage et al (1985) originally reportednegative effects of cannabis on some components of a simulated flyingtask up to 24 hours after smoking, but this study did not include acontrol group. A later study (Leirer et al, 1989) which attempted toreplicate this result with a control group found only an effect one tofour hours after smoking. A third study which also included a controlgroup (Leirer et al, 1991) again demonstrated decrements in thecomposite performance score up to 24 hours after smoking cannabis.Much has been made of these findings by critics of cannabis use, butthe effects are very small and of uncertain significance for flyingsafety. Jones (1987) has argued that the use of cannabis by pilots inthe 24 hours preceding flying may be more an indicator of poorjudgment, rather than a cause for concern about the residualpsychomotor effects of cannabis.5.4.4 Effects of cannabis on on-road drivingIt is often remarked that the activity most often cited as dangerouswhen performed under the influence of recreational drugs - motorvehicle driving - is one of the least studied. Given the concern aboutthe safety of the experimental subject in drug and drivingexperimentation, it is understandable that such studies have beenrelatively uncommon. A review by Nichols (1971) found that there wereno well controlled observations of the effects of cannabis on drivingperformance. This situation changed with research commissioned by theCanadian Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical use of Drugs. Acomprehensive report published by Hansteen et al (1976) showed that amoderate dose of alcohol (approximately 0.07 BAC) or THC (5.9mg)impaired driving on a traffic-free course (as measured by the numberof times the lane-defining cones ("witch's hats") were struck).Driving speed was decreased after cannabis but not after alcohol use. Smiley et al (1975), using a different type of course, found thatreaction time to signal stimuli was increased with the combination ofcannabis and alcohol. Klonoff (1974) studied driving on a closedcourse, and in city traffic, after a placebo and two doses of smokedcannabis (4.9mg and 8.4mg THC). Closed course driving was scored bythe number of cones hit on a precisely laid out path. Driving intraffic was scored by observation of eleven categories of drivingskill, similar to those used in some driving tests. Driving on theclosed course was impaired by both doses, as indicated by a higherproportion of subjects whose performance declined after cannabis use.Driving in traffic, however, while showing a trend toward poorerperformance, was not significantly affected, and the effects ofcannabis were much more variable. Sutton (1983) also found thatcannabis had little effect on actual driving performance. Peck et al(1986) recorded performance on a range of driving tasks on a closedcircuit on four occasions after the administration of placebo, up to19mg of smoked THC, 0.84g/kg of alcohol, and the combination of bothdrugs. On most individual and derived composite measures, cannabisimpaired performance. This study is important in that there was a highdegree of concordance between objective performance measures (e.g.number of traffic markers hit during manoeuvres), subjective estimatesof performance by the drivers, and ratings by police observers.However, the conclusion reached was that the effects of cannabis ondriving performance were somewhat less than those of alcohol. Robbeand O'Hanlon (1993), have reported the methodology, but not thedetailed results, of a study of driving in traffic. Their brief reportsuggests that their results also indicated little impairment of actualdriving skills after cannabis. They speculated that since drivers wereaware of their intoxication, they had successfully attempted tocounter the impairment. Overall, the effects of cannabis use on on-road driving have beensmaller than the comparable effects of intoxicating doses of alcoholin the same settings (Smiley, 1986). The most consistent cannabiseffect has been that drivers reduce their risk by slowing down; afinding that contrasts with the consistent finding that subjectstypically increase their speed when intoxicated with alcohol. It isprobably this compensatory behaviour by cannabis users that explainsthe comparatively small effects of cannabis intoxication in on roadstudies. For ethical reasons such studies have not been able toadequately test the response of cannabis intoxicated drivers tosituations that require emergency decision, in which there is lessopportunity to compensate for impairment. The few studies which haveattempted to simulate this situation (e.g. by using subsidiaryreaction tasks in addition to driving) have shown that cannabisintoxication impairs emergency decision-making (Smiley, 1986).The small effects of cannabis on driving performance seem at odds withits effects on laboratory tasks requiring divided attention. Peck etal (1986) have pointed out, however, that the subtle performanceeffects of drugs in laboratory divided attention tasks may be poorpredictors of driving performance. While the combination ofperformance abilities which is tapped by the typical divided attentiontask, such as concurrent pursuit tracking and visual discrimination,is plausibly related to driving, the tracking task is usually a muchmore difficult task than driving under normal conditions. Much moreattention must be allocated to the central task in most dividedattention tests, for example, leading to a substantial decrease inperformance when drugs such as cannabis are taken. In addition, in thelaboratory the subject is unable to vary a key task parameter, such asdriving speed, in order to compensate for any perceived impairment.Hence, while laboratory divided attention tasks may be ideal fordetecting small drug effects, they may over-estimate the effects ofdrugs on actual driving. It is not surprising then that many studieswhich have used both types of test have reported less effect on actualdriving than on laboratory tasks or simulated driving.5.4.5 Studies of cannabis use and accident risk While cannabis produces decrements in psychomotor performance inlaboratory and controlled settings, it does not necessarily followthat these decrements will increase the risk of being involved inaccidents. It may be, for example, that cannabis users are less likelyto drive than drinkers because they are more aware of theirintoxication. The survey evidence suggests that this is not the case.Several surveys (e.g. Dalton et al, 1975; Thompson, 1975; Klonoff,1974; Robbe & O'Hanlon, 1993) have found that cannabis users aregenerally aware that their driving is impaired after using cannabisbut the majority had driven, or would drive, after using cannabis,despite this recognition of impairment (Klonoff, 1974). This findingis consistent with observations on the recreational use of alcoholwhen driving (Smart, 1974).Even if cannabis users drive when intoxicated it does not necessarilyfollow that they will be over-represented among drivers involved inaccidents. It could be, for example, that cannabis users take specialcare and avoid risk-taking when driving while intoxicated. Thispossibility is difficult to investigate because there have been nocontrolled epidemiological studies conducted to establish whethercannabis users are at increased risk of being involved in motorvehicle or other accidents. This is in contrast to the instance ofalcohol use and accidents, where case-control studies have shown thatpersons with blood alcohol levels indicative of intoxication areover-represented among accident victims (Holman et al, 1988). In the case of cannabis, all that is available are studies of theprevalence of cannabinoids in the blood of motor vehicle and otheraccident victims (see McBay, 1986 for a review). Most often these havebeen retrospective studies of the prevalence of cannabinoids in bloodtested post-mortem, which have found that between 4 per cent and 37per cent of blood samples have contained cannabinoids, typically inassociation with blood alcohol levels indicative of intoxication (e.g.Cimbura et al, 1982; Mason and McBay, 1984; Williams et al, 1985).Zimmerman et al (1983) have reported similar prevalence data on bloodcannabinoid levels among Californian motorists tested because ofsuspicion of impairment by the Highway patrol. Soderstrom et al (1988)have conducted one of the few prospective studies among traumapatients rather than accident fatalities, which showed a highprevalence of bloods positive for cannabinoids (35 per cent). These studies are difficult to evaluate for a number of reasons.First, in the absence of information on the prevalence of cannabinoidsin the blood of non-accident victims, we do not know whether personswith cannabinoids are over-represented among accident victims(Terhune, 1986). Although a prevalence of 35 per cent may seem high,this is of the order of the prevalence of cannabis use among youngmales who are at highest risk of involvement in motor vehicle andother accidents (Soderstrom et al, 1988). Second, there are majorproblems in using cannabinoid blood levels to determine whether adriver or pedestrian was intoxicated with cannabis at the time of anaccident (Consensus Development Panel, 1985). The simple presence ofcannabinoids indicates only recent use, not necessarily intoxicationat the time of the accident (see above pp35-36). Third, there are alsoserious problems of causal attribution, since more than 75 per cent ofdrivers with cannabinoids in their blood also have blood levelsindicative of alcohol intoxication (McBay, 1986). On the basis of theavailable evidence, it is accordingly difficult to draw anyconclusions about the contribution that cannabis intoxication may maketo the occurrence of motor vehicle accidents (Terhune, 1986).One approach that has been used in an attempt to get around theabsence of data on the prevalence of cannabis use among drivers notinvolved in accidents has been to perform "culpability analyses"(Terhune, 1986). In such analyses, decisions are made as to whichdrivers killed in fatal accidents are culpable (i.e. responsible forthe accident). Drivers with no alcohol or other drugs in their bloodare then used as the control group in analyses of the relationshipbetween the presence of drugs in blood and degree of culpability.These studies have their problems: the culpability of the drug-freedrivers is usually high thereby reducing the ability to detect anincrease in culpability among drivers with alcohol and cannabis;different studies use different criteria for deciding that when adriver was intoxicated with cannabis; and as a consequence, differentstudies have produced very different estimates of the relationshipbetween cannabinoids in blood and driver culpability (although mosthave shown an increased culpability for drivers with intoxicatinglevels of alcohol in their blood). As Simpson (1986) concluded afterreviewing the culpability literature: "the results are mixed andinconclusive" (p28).Gieringer (1988) used a different approach to circumvent the absenceof data on the prevalence of cannabinoids in drivers not involved inaccidents. He used data from a National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA)household survey of drug abuse in the United States to estimate theproportion of all drivers who might be expected to have blood andurine samples positive for cannabinoids. On the basis of these data,he estimated that cannabis users are two to four times more likely tobe represented among accident victims than non-cannabis users, andthat cannabis users who also used alcohol were even more likely to beover-represented among the victims of motor vehicle accidents. Gieringer's inference about the risks of combining alcohol andcannabis when driving receive some support from the studies of Masonand McBay (1984) and Williams et al (1985). Mason and McBay estimatedthat at most one driver in their series of 600 drivers killed insingle-vehicle accidents was significantly impaired by cannabis usealone, compared with between nine and 28 drivers who were impaired bymarijuana and alcohol, and 476 drivers who had blood alcoholcontentrations (BACs) greater than 0.10. Williams et al (1985)investigated the relationship between alcohol and cannabis use anddriver responsibility for fatal accidents (as judged from policeinvestigations of each accident) involving young men in California.Using the small drug-free group as the comparison, they found thatboth alcohol (OR=4.7 [95 per cent CI: 2.1, 10.3]) and alcohol andmarijuana in combination (OR=8.6 [95 per cent CI: 3.3, 22.2])significantly increased the odds of the driver being adjudged to beresponsible for the accident. Marijuana-only drivers, however, wereless likely to be adjudged responsible for their accident (OR=0.5 [95per cent CI: 0.2, 1.3]), although numbers were small (N=19).There is also indirect evidence that cannabis use produces an increasein the risk of accidents, from surveys of self-reported accidentsamong adolescent drug users. Two such surveys have found astatistically significant relationship between marijuana use andself-reported involvement in accidents, with marijuana smokers havingapproximately twice the risk of being involved in accidents ofnon-marijuana smokers (Hingson et al, 1982; Smart and Fejer, 1976). More direct evidence of an association between cannabis use andaccidents is provided by two epidemiological studies, one of cannabisuse and mortality (Andreasson and Allebeck, 1990), and the other ofcannabis use and health service utilisation (Polen et al, 1993).Andreasson and Allebeck reported a prospective study of mortality over15 years among 50,465 Swedish military conscripts. They found anincreased risk of premature mortality among men who had smokedcannabis 50 or more times by age 18 (RR=4.6, 95 per cent CI: 2.4,8.5). Violent deaths were the major cause of death contributing tothis excess mortality, with 26 per cent of deaths being motor vehicleand 7 per cent other accidents (e.g. drownings and falls). Theincreased risk was no longer statistically significant (RR=1.2 [95 percent CI: 0.7, 1.9]) after multivariate statistical adjustment forconfounding variables such as anti-social behaviour, and alcohol andother drug use in adolescence (Andreasson and Allebeck, 1990),reinforcing Gieringer's suggestion that the combination of cannabisand alcohol may be the important risk factor for accidents. Polen et al (1993) compared health service utilisation by non-smokers(N=450) and daily cannabis-only smokers (N=450) screened at KaiserPermanente Medical centres between July, 1979 and December, 1985. Theyreported an increased rate of medical care utilisation bycannabis-only smokers for respiratory conditions and accidental injuryover a one to two-year follow-up. There was also an interactionbetween cannabis and alcohol use, in which cannabis users who were theheaviest alcohol users showed the highest rates of utilisation. Thisresult is suggestive but minimally informative about the risks ofmotor vehicle accidents, because all forms of accidental injury wereaggregated. 5.4.6 Conclusions on cannabis and drivingThere is no doubt that cannabis adversely affects the performance of anumber of psychomotor tasks, an effect which is related to dose, andwhich is larger, more consistent and persistent in difficult tasksinvolving sustained attention. The acute effects on performance oftypical recreational doses of cannabis are similar to, if smallerthan, those of intoxicating doses of alcohol. Alcohol and cannabisdiffer in their effects on the apparent willingness of intoxicatedusers to take risks when driving, with persons intoxicated by cannabisengaging in less risky behaviour than persons intoxicated by alcohol. While cannabis produces decrements in performance under laboratory andcontrolled on-road conditions, it has been difficult, for technicaland ethical reasons, to establish conclusively whether cannabisintoxication increases the risk of involvement in motor vehicleaccidents. There is sufficient consistency and coherence in theevidence from studies of cannabinoid levels among accident victims,and a small number of epidemiological studies, to infer that thereprobably is an increased risk of motor vehicle accidents among personswho drive when intoxicated with cannabis. A crude estimate of the riskis of the order of two to four times for persons driving under theinfluence of cannabis. This increased risk may be largely explained bythe combined use of cannabis with intoxicating doses of alcohol.Further research is required to elucidate this issue, although it willnot be easily resolved because of the technical obstacles to suchresearch. In the meantime, cannabis users should be urged not to drivewhile intoxicated by cannabis, and they should be particularly warnedof the dangers of driving after combining alcohol and cannabis use. 5.5 Interactions between cannabis and other drugs Cannabis is often taken in combination with other drugs. This is mostlikely among those who use it frequently and in large quantities (Tec,1973). The predominant drug of choice for use with cannabis is alcohol(e.g. Carlin & Post, 1971; Hochhauser, 1977; McGlothlin et al, 1970;Norton and Colliver, 1988) which supports the popular notion that thiscombination enhances the degree of intoxication. Barbiturates, incontrast, appear to produce an aversive intoxication when combinedwith cannabis (Johnstone et al, 1975). The interactions of cannabiswith each type of drug will be considered in three ways; interactionsof toxicity, psychotropic effects and psychomotor impairment.5.5.1 Other cannabinoidsThere are slight interactions of THC with other cannabinoids found incannabis preparations. The two major cannabinoids other than THC whichhave been extensively tested for interactions with THC and other drugsare cannabidiol and cannabinol. Both of these compounds have beenfound to have little psychoactivity when administered alone(Hollister, 1986). In rather high doses (15-60mg), cannabidiol hasbeen reported to abolish the effects of 30mg of oral THC (Karniol etal, 1975), whereas cannabinol had no apparent effect (Hollister &Gillespie, 1975). Comparisons of smoked THC and smoked cannabis, thelatter containing the usual small amounts of cannabinol andcannabidiol, indicate that there is, if anything, a slightly greaterpsychoactive effect from the cannabis than from THC (Galanter et al,1973; Lemberger et al, 1976). The psychotropic effects of THC alsoappear to be slightly enhanced by the minor constituent cannabinoidsfound in natural products when smoked (Galanter et al, 1973). No suchdifferences have been reported in the behavioural effects of smokedcannabis.5.5.2 Alcohol Alcohol and cannabis have a number of effects in common, although themechanisms of these actions appear to be different. The recentidentification of the cannabinoid receptor (Howlett et al, 1990), andan endogenous ligand for that receptor, have confirmed the hypothesisthat the central activity of cannabis is receptor-mediated (see pp29-31 above). While the mechanism of action of alcohol is still inquestion, most explanations are concerned with the effects of alcoholupon the structure and chemistry of the cell membrane. Both drugs areconsidered to be CNS depressants, especially in high doses, and bothhave substantial analgesic properties. Since these effects of the twodrugs appear to be approximately additive (Siemens, 1980) it ispossible that the toxicity of high doses of 9-tetrahydrocannabinol(THC) (Rosencrantz, 1983) may be potentiated by alcohol, althoughthere is very little evidence to support this conjecture. Neither themetabolism of alcohol nor that of THC appears to be altered by thepresence of the other drug (Siemens & Khanna, 1977).Alcohol and THC also appear to have similar psychotropic effects. Theperceived stimulation and euphoria at low doses are common effects, aswell as a tendency toward behavioural disinhibition over a range ofdoses (Hollister & Gillespie, 1970). This interaction is generallyperceived by users as enhancing the intoxication produced by eitherdrug alone (Chesher et al, 1976), although contrary results have beenreported (Manno et al, 1971). However, larger doses in combination areoften reported to be aversive (Sulkowski & Vachon, 1977; Chesher etal, 1986).The effects of alcohol and cannabis combinations on psychomotorperformance are more complex. The majority of studies have reportedthat both drugs produce impairment on a variety of psychomotor tasks,and that the interaction is approximately additive. However, a numberof studies have reported that at low doses there is less than anadditive effect. Chesher et al (1976, 1977) found a reduction inimpairment late in intoxication after a combination of oral THC(0.14-0.21mg/kg) and alcohol (0.5-0.6g/kg). A further study in whichthe THC (0.32mg/kg) was administered one hour before the alcohol(0.54g/kg) found no apparent antagonism (Belgrave et al, 1979).Another study using three doses of smoked marijuana in combinationwith alcohol showed a lower-than-expected impairment in the groupwhich received the lowest dose of THC (5mg) and the lowest dose ofalcohol (0.54g.kg) (Chesher et al, 1986). Peck et al (1986) alsoreported an apparent antagonism, but only on a composite "stopping"variable derived from driving performance. In most of their measures,the combination of alcohol and cannabis produced additive impairments.Siemens (1980) has proposed that alcohol may reduce the availabilityof THC through a pharmacokinetic interaction demonstrated in animals(Siemens & Khanna, 1977). Given that there is substantial evidence forcross-tolerance between alcohol and THC (Newman et al, 1972), it ispossible that low doses of THC and alcohol in combination may enhancethe acute tolerance to alcohol (Hurst & Bagley, 1972) late inintoxication.5.5.3 PsychostimulantsThe most characteristic effect of psychostimulants such as amphetamineand cocaine is their activation of the sympathetic branch of theautonomic nervous system, as indicated by increases in arousal, bloodpressure and respiratory rate. There are few actions which appear tobe common between cannabis and stimulants. The few effects on thecardiovascular system, such as amphetamine-induced hypertension, andTHC-induced tachycardia, seem to occur independently (Zalcman et al,1973). It is in the combined effect upon cardiac action that toxicinteractions of THC and stimulants could be dangerous, but there areno clear indications in the literature for humans, and the evidencefrom animal studies is mixed (Siemens, 1980).The psychotropic effects of the combination of 0.14mg/kg amphetamineand 0.05mg/kg THC have been reported as a longer and more intense"high" (Evans et al, 1976), although a similar study using only0.025mg/kg THC found no effect of the combination (Forney et al 1976).While the concurrent use of cannabis and cocaine is often reported(Miller et al, 1990), systematic study of their interaction islacking. There is some evidence that amphetamine may antagonise the behaviouralimpairments produced by cannabis (Zalcman et al, 1973), as a number ofstimulants appear to do in some animals (Consroe et al, 1976). Theinfrequency of stimulant/cannabis combinations in recreational use(Hollister, 1986) may be due to as yet unspecified negativeinteractions experienced by users. It may be, for example, thatstimulants increase the probability of occurrence, or severity of theacute panic reaction which sometimes occurs after cannabis use.5.5.4 DepressantsA great deal of experimentation in animals has shown that cannabis ingeneral increases the depressant action of drugs such as thebarbiturates over a range of doses (Siemens, 1980). This is also thecase with oxymorphone (Johnstone et al, 1975) and diazepam (Smith &Kulp, 1976). As with alcohol, it is likely that interactions betweenthese acute effects of depressant drugs would lead to the greatestdanger of acute toxicity. There is little human evidence at present,however, to support this speculation. The psychotropic effects produced by combinations of barbiturates withcannabis appear to be additive (Dalton et al, 1975). As mentionedpreviously, this intoxication is more likely to be aversive to theuser (Johnstone et al, 1975). The behavioural effects of theinteraction of depressant drugs with cannabis are, in almost allreports, also additive.5.5.5 Miscellaneous drugsA number of other substances have been reported to antagonise variouseffects of cannabis in animals, including phenitrone (Kudrin &Davydova, 1968), pemoline (Howes, 1973) and even tamarind (Hollister,1986). Only pemoline is acknowledged to counter the reduced motoractivity and hypoalgesia due to THC. Physostigmine has shown a complexinteraction which includes increasing the motor depression produced byTHC and antagonising the tachycardia (Freemon et al, 1975).Propanolol, which would be expected to antagonise the tachycardiacharacteristic of cannabis intoxication, also appears to abolish thereduction in learning capacity produced by cannabis (Sulkowski et al,1977), although an earlier study using smaller, spaced doses found noeffect (Drew et al, 1972). Recently, it has been reported thatindomethacin, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory, reduced or eliminateda number of physiological effects of THC, and attenuated the "high",but did not affect the acute memory impairment (Perez-Reyes et al,1991).5.5.6 Conclusions on drug interactionsAt present, the interactions between the effects of cannabis and otherdrugs are what would be predicted from their separate actions, and aregenerally relatively innocuous in recreational doses. There have beena number of reports in which cannabis use has accompanied seriousconsequences, typically when used in combination with one or moreother drugs in high doses, or over extended periods of intoxication.However, there appears to be no evidence that cannabis is particularlyimplicated in cases of heavy intoxication with other drugs. Theconcurrent intoxication with alcohol and cannabis, which is the mostcommon combination of drugs, may have greatest relevance in motorvehicle accidents. The separate impairments induced by the two drugsappear to be approximately additive, and there are indications thatusers of both drugs are over-represented among motor vehicleaccidents.ReferencesAndreasson, S. and Allebeck, P. (1990) Cannabis and mortality amongyoung men: A longitudinal study of Swedish conscripts. ScandinavianJournal of Social Medicine, 18, 9-15.Belgrave, B. E., Bird, K. D., Chesher, G. B., Jackson, D. M., Lubbe,K. E., Starmer, G. A. & Teo, R. K. C. (1979) The effect of (-)trans-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, alone and in combination with ethanol,on human performance. Psychopharmacology, 62, 53-60.Block, R. I. & Wittenborn, J. R. (1984) Marijuana effects on semanticmemory: verification of common and uncommon category members.Psychological Reports, 55, 503-512.Block, R. I. & Wittenborn, J. R., (1986) Marijuana effects on thespeed of memory retrieval in the letter-matching task. InternationalJournal of Addiction, 21, 281-285.Blum, K. (1984) Handbook of Abusable Drugs. New York: Gardner Press.Borg, J, Gershon, S. & Alpert, M. (1975) Dose effects of smokedmarihuana on human cognitive and motor functions. Psychopharmacologia,42, 211-218.Braden, W., Stillman, R. C. & Wyatt, R. J. (1974) Effects of marihuanaon contingent negative variation and reaction time. Archives ofGeneral Psychiatry, 31, 537-541.Cappell, H. D. & Pliner, P. L. (1973) Volitional control of marijuanaintoxication: A study of the ability to "come down" on command.Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 82, 428-434.Carlin, A. S. & Post, R. D. (1971) Patterns of drug use amongmarijuana smokers. Journal of the American Medical Association, 218,867-868.Carlin, A. S., Bakker, C. B., Halpern, L. & Post, R. D. (1972) Socialfacilitation of ,marijuana intoxication: impact of social set andpharmacological activity. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 80, 132-140.Carlin, A. S., Post, R. D., Bakker, C. B. & Halpern, L. M. (1974) Therole of modeling and previous experience in the facilitation ofmarijuana intoxication. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 159,275-281.Casswell, S. & Marks, D. F. (1973) Cannabis induced impairment ofperformance of a divided attention task. Nature (London), 241, 60.Chait, L. D., Corwin, R. L. & Johanson, C. E. (1988) A cumulativedosing procedure for administering marijuana smoke to humans.Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 29, 553-557.Chait, L. D., Fischman, M. W. & Schuster, C. R. (1985) Hangovereffects the morning after marijuana smoking. Drug and AlcoholDependence, 15, 229-238.Chait, L. D. & Pierri, J. (1992) Effects of smoked marijuana on humanperformance: A critical review. in A. Murphy & J. Bartke (Eds)Marijuana/Cannabinoids: Neurobiology and Neurophysiology, Boca Raton:CRC Press. Chesher, G. B., Franks, H. M., Hensley, V. R., Hensley, W. J.,Jackson, D. M., Starmer, G. A. & Teo, R. K. C. (1976) The interactionof ethanol and 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. Effects on perceptual,cognitive and motor functions. Medical Journal of Australia, 2,159-163.Chesher, G. B., Franks, H. M., Jackson, D. M., Starmer, G. A. & Teo,R. K. C. (1977) Ethanol and 9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Interactiveeffects on human perceptual, cognitive and motor functions. MedicalJournal of Australia, 1, 478-481.Chesher, G. B., Dauncey, H., Crawford, J. C. & Horn, K. (1986) Theinteraction of alcohol and marijuana: A dose dependent study ofeffects on human moods and performance skills. Canberra: FederalOffice of Road Safety.Cimbura, G., Lucas, D.M., Bennet, R.C., Warren, R.A. and Simpson, H.M.(1982) Incidence and toxicological aspects of drugs detected in 484fatally injured drivers and pedestrians in Ontario. Journal ofForensic Science, 27, 855-867.Consensus Development Panel (1985) Drug concentrations and drivingimpairment. Journal of the American Medical Association, 254,2618-2621.Consroe, P. F., Jones, B. & Laird, H. (1976) EEG and behavioraleffects of 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in combination with stimulant drugsin rabbits. Psychopharmacology, 50, 47-52.Crancer, A. Jr., Dille, J. M., Delay, J. C., Wallace, J. E. & Haykin,M. D. (1969) Comparison of the effects of marihuana and alcohol onsimulated driving performance. Science, 163, 851-854.Dalton, W. S., Martz, R., Lemberger, L., Rodda, B. E. & Forney, R. B.(1975) Effects of marijuana combined with secobarbitol. ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 14, 298-304.Dornbush, R. L., Fink M. & Freedman, A. M. (1971) Marijuana, memory,and perception. American Journal of Psychiatry, 128, 194-197.Dott, A. (1972) Effect of marihuana on risk acceptance in a simulatedpassing task. DHEW Publication HSM-72-10010, Washington: DHEW.Drew, W. G., Kiplinger, G. F., Miller, L. L. & Marx, M. (1972) Effectsof propanolol on marijuana-induced cognitive dysfunctioning. ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 13, 526-533.Ellingstad, V., McFarling, L. & Struckman, D. (1973) Alcohol,marijuana and risk-taking. DOT-HS-191-2-301, Vermillion: University ofSouth Dakota, Evans, M. A., Martz, R., Brown, D. J., Rodda, B. E., Kiplinger, G. F.,Lemberger, L. & Forney, R. B. (1973) Impairment of performance withlow doses of marihuana. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 14,936-940.Evans, M. A., Martz, R., Rodda, B. E., Lemberger, L. & Forney, R. B.(1976) Effects of marihuana-dextroamphetamine combination. ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 20, 350-358.Forney, R. B., Martz, R., Lemberger, L. & Rodda, B. (1976) Thecombined effect of marijuana and dextroamphetamine. Annals of the NewYork Academy of Science, 281, 172-170.Freemon, F. R., Rosenblatt, J. E. & El-Yousef, M. K. (1975)Interaction of physostigmine and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man.Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 17, 121-126.Galanter, M., Weingartner, H., Vaughan, T. B., Roth, W. T. & Wyatt, R.J. (1973) 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and natural marijuana. Archives of GeneralPsychiatry, 28, 278-281Gieringer, D.H. (1988) Marijuana, driving and accident safety. Journalof Psychoactive Drugs, 20, 93-101.Hansteen, R. W., Miller, R. D., Lonero, L., Reid, L. D. & Jones, B.(1976) Effects of cannabis and alcohol on automobile driving andpsychomotor tracking. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 282,240-256.Hardman, H.F. and Hosko, M.J. (1976) An overview of thecardiovascular-autonomic actions of cannabis. In M Braude and S. Szara(eds) Pharmacology of Marihuana, Volume 1. New York: Raven Press.Heishman, S. J., Stitzer, M. L. & Bigelow, G. E. (1989) Alcohol andmarijuana: comparative dose effect profiles in humans. Pharmacology,Biochemistry and Behavior, 31, 649-655.Hingson, R., Heeren, T., Mangione, T., Morelock, S. and Mucatel, M.(1982) Teenage driving after using marijuana or drinking and trafficaccident involvement. Journal of Safety Research, 13, 33-37.Hochhauser, M. (1977) Alcohol and marijuana consumption amongundergraduate polydrug users. American Journal of Drug and AlcoholAbuse, 4, 65-76.Hollister, L. (1986) Interactions of cannabis with other drugs in man.in M. C. Braude & H. M. Ginzburg (Eds.) Strategies for research on theinteractions of drugs of abuse. Rockville, MD: National Institute onDrug Abuse.Hollister, L. & Gillespie, H. K. (1970) Marihuana, ethanol anddextroamphetamine; mood and mental function alterations. Archives ofGeneral Psychiatry, 23, 199-203.Hollister, L. & Gillespie, H. K. (1975) Interactions in man ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. II. Cannabinol and cannabidiol. ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 80-83.Holman, C.D., Armstrong, B. et al (1988). The Quantification ofDrug-Caused Morbidity and Mortality in Australia. Canberra:Commonwealth Department of Community Services and Health. Howes, J. F. (1973) Antagonism of the effects of9-tetrahydrocannabinol by pemoline (CylertR). Research Communicationsin Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology, 6, 901-908.Howlett, A. C., Bidaut-Russell, M., Devane, W. A., Melvin, L. S.,Johnson, M. R. & Herkenham, M. (1990) The cannabinoid receptor:Biochemical, anatomical and behavioral characterization. Trends inNeuroscience, 13, 420-423.Huber, G.L., Griffith, D.L. and Langsjoen, P.M. (1988) The effects ofmarihuana on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. In G.Chesher, P. Consroe, and R. Musty (eds) Marijuana: An InternationalResearch Report. National Campaign Against Drug Abuse Monograph Number7, Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.Hurst, P. M., & Bagley, S. K.. (1972) Acute adaptation to the effectsof alcohol. Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 33, 358-378.Jaffe, J.H. (1985) Drug addiction and drug abuse. In A.G. Gilman, L.S.Goodman & F. Murad (Eds) The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics.(7th Edition) USA: Macmillan.Janowsky, D. S., Meacham, M. P., Blaine, J. D., Schoor, M. & Bozzetti,L. P. (1976) Marijuana effects on simulated flying ability. AmericanJournal of Psychiatry, 133, 384-388.Jones, R.T. (1984) Cardiovascular effects of cannabinoids. In D.J.Harvey, W. Paton and G.G. Nahas (eds) Marihuana '84: Proceedings ofthe Oxford Symposium on Cannabis. Oxford:IRL Press.Jones, R. T. (1987) Drug of abuse profile: cannabis. ClinicalChemistry, 33, 72B-81B.Johnstone, R. E., Lief, P. L., Kulp, R. A. & Smith, T. C. (1975)Combination of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol with oxymorphone orpentobarbitol: Effects on ventilatory control and cardiovasculardynamics. Anesthesiology, 42, 674-684.Karniol, I. G., Shirakawa, I., Kasinski, N., Pfeferman, A. & Carlini,E. A. (1975) Cannabidiol interferes with the effects ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. European Journal of Pharmacology,28, 172-177.Kelly, T. H., Foltin, R. W., Emurian, C. S. & Fischman, M. W. (1990)Multidimensional behavioral effects of marijuana. Progress inNeuro-Psychopharmacology, Biology and Psychiatry, 14, 885-902.Kiplinger, G. F., Manno, J. E., Rodda, B. E., & Forney, R. B. (1971)Dose-response analysis of the effects of tetrahydrocannabinol in man.Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 12, 650-657.Klonoff, H. (1974) Effects of marijuana on driving in a restrictedarea and on city streets: Driving performance and physiologicalchanges. in L. Miller (Ed.) Marijuana: Effects on Human Behavior, NewYork: Academic Press.Klonoff, H., Low, M. & Marcus, A. (1973) Neuropsychological effects ofmarijuana. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 108, 157-164.Kudrin, A. N. & Davydova, O. N. (1968) Elimination of hashish effectwith phenitrone in dogs. Farmakologiia i Toksikologiia, 31, 549-552.Leirer, v.-O., Yesavage, J. A. & Morrow, D. G. (1989) Marijuana, agingand task difficulty effects on pilot performance. Aviation, Space andEnvironmental Medicine, 60, 1145-1152.Leirer, v.-O.,Yesavage, J. A. & Morrow, D. G. (1991) Marijuanacarry-over effects on aircraft pilot performance. Aviation, Space andEnvironmental Medicine, 62, 221-227.Lemberger, L., Dalton, B., Martz, R., Rodda, B. & Forney, R. (1976).Clinical studies of the interaction of psychopharmacologic agents withmarijuana. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 281, 219-228.Low, M., Klonoff, H. & Marcus, A. (1973) The neuropsychological basisof the marijuana experience. Canadian Medical Journal Association,108, 157-164.MacAvoy, M. G. & Marks, D. F. (1975) Divided attention performance ofcannabis users and non-users following cannabis and alcohol.Psychopharmacologia, 44, 147-152.Maykut, M.O. (1984) Health Consequences of Acute and Chronic MarihuanaUse. Oxford: Pergamon Press.McBay, A.J. (1986) Drug concentrations and traffic safety. Alcohol,Drugs and Driving, 2, 51-59.McGlothlin, W., Jamison, K. & Rosenblatt, S. (1970) Marijuana and theuse of other drugs. Nature, 228, 1227-1228.Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G. F., Haine, S. E., Bennett, I. F. & Forney,R. B. (1970) Comparative effects of smoking marihuana or placebo onhuman motor and mental performance. Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 11, 808-815.Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G. F., Scholz, N. & Forney, R. B. (1971) Theinfluence of alcohol and marihuana on motor and mental performance.Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 12, 202-211.Marks, D. F. & MacAvoy, M. G. (1989) Divided attention performance incannabis users and non-users following alcohol and cannabis separatelyand in combination. Psychopharmacology, 99, 397-401.Mason, A.P, & McBay, A.J. (1984) Ethanol, marijuana and other drug usein 600 drivers killed in single-vehicle crashes in North Carolina1978-1981. Journal of Forensic Science, 29, 987-1026.Mendelson, J. (1983) Chronic effects of cannabis on human brainfunction and behavior. in K. O. Fehr & H. Kalant (Eds) Cannabis andHealth Hazards, Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.Miller, N. S., Klahr, A. L., Gold, M. S., Sweeney, K. & Corcores, J.A. (1990) The prevalence of marijuana (cannabis) use and dependence incocaine dependence. New York State Journal of Medicine, 90, 491-492.Milstein, S. L., MacCannell, K., Karr, G. & Clark, S. (1975)Marijuana-produced impairments in coordination. Journal of Nervous andMental Disease, 161, 26-31.Moskowitz, H. (1985) Marijuana and driving. Accident Analysis andPrevention, 17, 323-345.Moskowitz, H., Hulbert, S. & McGlothlin, W. H. (1976) Marijuana:Effects on simulated driving performance. Accident Analysis andPrevention, 8, 45-50.Moskowitz, H. & McGlothlin, W. (1974) Effects of marijuana on auditorysignal detection. Psychopharmacologia, 40, 137-145.Moskowitz, H., Sharma, S. & McGlothlin, W. (1972) Effect of marijuanaupon peripheral vision as a function of the information processingdemands in central vision. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 35, 875-882.Nahas, G.G. (1984) Toxicology and pharmacology. In G.G. NahasMarihuana in Science and Medicine New York: Raven Press.Newman, L. M., Lutz, M. P., Gould, M. H. & Domino, E. F. (1972) 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and ethyl alcohol: Evidence forcross-tolerance in the rat. Science, 175, 1022-1023.Nichols, J. L. (1971) Drug use and highway safety: A review of theliterature. DOT-HS-0.2-1-019, Washington: National Highway TrafficSafety Administration.Norton, R. and Colliver, J. (1988) Prevalence and patterns of combinedalcohol and marijuana use. Journal of Studies in Alcohol, 49, 378-380.Pearl, J. H., Domino, E. F. & Rennick, P. (1973) Short-term effects ofmarijuana smoking on cognitive behavior in experienced male users.Psychopharmacologia, 31, 13-24.Peck, R. C., Biasotti, A., Boland, P. N., Mallory, C. & Reeve, V.(1986) The Effects of marijuana and alcohol on actual drivingperformance. Alcohol, Drugs and Driving, 2, 135-154.Peeke, S. D., Jones, R. T. & Stone, G. C. (1976) Effects of practiceon marijuana-induced changes in reaction time. Psychopharmacology, 48,159-163.Perez-Reyes, M., Burstein, S. H., White, W. R.., McDonald, S. A. &Hicks, R. E. (1991) Antagonism of marihuana effects by indomethacin inhumans. Life Sciences, 48, 507-515.Perez-Reyes, M., Hicks, R. E., Bumberry, J., Jeffcoat, A. R. & Cook,C. E. (1988) Interaction between marihuana and ethanol: Effects onpsychomotor performance. Alcoholism, 12, 268-276.Polen, M.R., Sidney, S., Tekawa, I.S., Sadler, M. and Friedman, G.D.(1993) Health care use by frequent marijuana smokers who do not smoketobacco. Western Journal of Medicine, 158, 596-601.Robbe, H. W. J. & O'Hanlon, J. F. (1993) Marijuana's effect on actualdriving: Summary of a 3-year experimental program. in H.-D. Utzelmann,G. Berghaus & G. Kroj (Eds) Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety - T92(Vol. 2), K"ln: Verlag TV Rheinland.Rosencrantz, H. (1983) Cannabis, marihuana and cannabinoidtoxicological manifestations in man and animals. in K. O. Fehr & H.Kalant (Eds.) Cannabis and Health Hazards. Toronto: Addiction ResearchFoundation.Rubin, V. & Comitas, L. (1975) Ganja in Jamaica. The Hague: MoutonPublishers.Salvendy, G. & McCabe, G. P. (1975) Marihuana and human performance.Human Factors, 17, 229-235.Siemens, A. J. (1980) Effects of cannabis in combination with ethanoland other drugs. in Petersen, R. C. (Ed.) Marijuana Research Findings:1980. National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No. 31.Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Siemens, A. J. & Khanna, J. M. (1977) Acute metabolic interactionsbetween ethanol and cannabis. Alcoholism: Clinical and ExperimentalResearch, 1, 343-348.Simpson, H.M. (1986) Epidemiology of road accidents involvingmarijuana. Alcohol, Drugs and Driving, 2, 15-30.Smart, R. G. (1974) Marijuana and driving risk among college students.Journal of Safety Research, 6, 155-158.Smart, R. G. and Fejer, D. (1976) Drug use and driving risk among highschool students. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 8, 33-38.Smiley, A. (1986) Marijuana: on-road and driving simulator studies.Alcohol, Drugs and Driving, 2, 121-134.Smiley, A., LeBlanc, A. E., French, I. W. and Burford, R. (1975) Thecombined effects of alcohol and common psychoactive drugs: 11 fieldstudies with an instrumented automobile. in S. Israelstam & S. Lambert(Eds.) Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety. Proceedings of the SixthInternational Conference on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety.Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.Smith, D.E. (1968) Acute and chronic toxicity of marijuana. Journal ofPsychedelic Drugs, 2, 37-47.Smith, T. C. & Kulp, R. A. (1976) Respiratory and cardiovasculareffects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol alone and in combination withoxymorphone, pentobarbitol and diazepam. in S. Cohen & R. G. Stillman(Eds.) The Therapeutic Potential of Marijuana. New York: Plenum Press.Soderstrom, C.A., Triffilis, A.L., Shankar, B.S., Clark, W.E., Cowley,R.A. (1988) Marijuana and alcohol use among 1023 trauma patients.Archives of Surgery, 123, 733-737.Stefanis, C., Dornbush, R. & Fink, M. (Eds.) (1977) Ha5. The acute of Long-term Use. New York: Raven Press.Sulkowski, A. & Vachon, L. (1977) Propanolol effects on acutemarijuana intoxication in man. Psychopharmacology, 52, 47-53.Sulkowski, A. Vachon, L. & Rich, E.S. (1977) Propanolol effects onacute marijuana intoxication in man. Psychopharmacology, 52, 47-53.Sutton, L. R. (1983) The effects of alcohol, marihuana and theircombination on driving ability. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 44,438-445.Tart, C. (1970) Marijuana intoxication: Common experiences. Nature,226, 701-704.Tec, N. (1973) A clarification of the relationship between alcohol andmarijuana. British Journal of Addiction, 68, 191-195.Terhune, K.W. (1986) Problems and methods in studying drug crasheffects. Alcohol, Drugs and Driving, 2, 1-13.Thomas, H. (1993) Psychiatric symptoms in cannabis users. BritishJournal of Psychiatry, 163, 141-149.Thompson, P. (1975) "Stoned" driving is unpleasant, say marijuanasmokers. The Journal (Addiction Research Foundation), 4, 13.Weckowicz, T. E., Fedora, O., Mason, J., Radstaak, D., Bay, K. S. &Yonge, K. A. (1975) Effect of marijuana on divergent and convergentproduction cognitive tests. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 84,386-398.Weil, A. (1970) Adverse reactions to marihuana. New England Journal ofMedicine, 282, 997-1000.Williams, A.G., Peat, M.A., Crouch, D.J., Wells, J.K. and Finkle, B.S.(1985) Drugs in fatally injured young male drivers. Public HealthReports, 100, 19-25.Yesavage, J. A., Leirer, v.-O., Denari, M. & Hollister, L. E. (1985)Carry-over effects of marijuana intoxication on aircraft pilotperformance: A preliminary report. American Journal of Psychiatry,142, 1325-1329.Zacny, J. P. & Chait, L. D. (1991) Response to marijuana as a functionof potency and breathhold duration. Psychopharmacology, 103, 223-226.Zalcman, S., Liskow, B., Cadoret, R. & Goodwin, (1973) Marijuana andamphetamine: The question of interaction. American Journal ofPsychiatry, 130, 707-708.Zimmerman, E.G., Yaeger, E.P., Soares, J.R., Hollister, L. and Reeve,V (1983) Measurement of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in wholeblood samples from impaired motorists. Journal of Forensic Sciences,28, 957-962. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-11IA087-000627-B016-129http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051644 text/html 107749HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:16:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:03 GMTContent-length: 107530 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use:chapter 6 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis usechapter 6 National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 6. The chronic effects of cannabis use on health Cellular and immunological effectsThe possible effects of chronic cannabis use on cellular processes andthe immune system are considered together because both effects mayinfluence a cannabis user's susceptibility to diseases. If cannabisuse affects cellular processes then users may be at increased risk ofdeveloping various types of cancer, and if it affects the immunesystem then cannabis users may be at increased risk of contractinginfectious diseases and developing cancer. 6.1 Mutagenicity and carcinogenicity A major reason for research into the effects of cannabinoids oncellular processes is to discover whether cannabinoids are mutagenic,i.e. whether they may produce mutations in the genetic material in thesomatic and germ cells of users. If cannabinoid exposure affects thegenetic material of a user's somatic or bodily cells (such as those ofthe lung, for example) then chronic cannabis use may cause cancer. Ifit affects the genetic material of germ cells (the sperm and ova),then genetic mutations could be transmitted to the children ofcannabis users. There is experimental evidence from in vitro studies of animal cellsthat some cannabinoids, including THC, can produce a variety ofchanges in cellular processes in vitro (i.e. in the test tube). Theseinclude alterations to cell metabolism, DNA synthesis, and celldivision (Nahas, 1984). The potential for cannabinoids to producegenetic change in humans or animals is unclear. There is, at most,mixed evidence that THC and other cannabinoids are mutagenic instandard microbial assays, such as the Ames test, and there iscontradictory evidence on whether the cannabinoids are clastogenic,i.e. produce breaks in chromosomes. According to Bloch (1983) whoreviewed the literature for the World Health Organisation: "in vivoand in vitro exposure to purified cannabinoids or cannabis resinfailed to increase the frequency of chromosomal damage or mutagenesis"(p412). Nahas (1984) reviewed the same evidence and concluded that"cannabinoids and marihuana may exert a weak mutagenic effect" (p117).More recently, Zimmerman and Zimmerman (1990/1991) concluded that"cannabis mutagenicity remains unclear", but argued that there wasevidence that "cannabinoids induce chromosome aberrations in both invivo and in vitro studies" (p19).There is stronger and more consistent evidence that cannabis smoke,like smoke produced by most burning plant material, is mutagenic invitro, and hence, is potentially carcinogenic (Leuchtenberger, 1983).According to Bloch (1983) "marijuana smoke exposure has been reportedto be associated with chromosomal aberrations ... [such as]hypoploidy, mutagenicity in the Ames test ... " (Bloch, 1983, p413).This is consistent with research indicating that cannabis smokecontains many of the same carcinogens as cigarette smoke (Institute ofMedicine, 1982; Leuchtenberger, 1983), suggesting that if cannabissmoke is carcinogenic it is more likely to be because of thecarcinogens it shares with cigarette smoke rather than because of thecannabinoids it contains. If it is the non-cannabinoid components ofcannabis smoke that are mutagenic, then any cancers caused by cannabissmoking are most likely to develop after long-term exposure tocannabis smoke, and they are most likely to develop at sites whichhave had the maximum exposure to that smoke, namely, the upperaerodigestive tract and lung. This possibility is considered in moredetail below (see pp49-50). 6.2 Immunological effects The possibility that cannabis reduces immune system function isimportant for several reasons. First, tobacco smoking suppresses boththe humoral and cell-mediated immune systems. Given the similaritiesbetween the constituents of cigarette and cannabis smoke (Institute ofMedicine, 1982; Leuchtenberger, 1983) it is reasonable to suspect thatcannabis may also be an immunosuppressant (Nahas, 1984). Second, evena modest reduction in immunity caused by cannabis use could havepublic health significance because of the relatively large number ofyoung adults who have used the drug (Munson and Fehr, 1983). Third, ifcannabinoids have immunosuppressive effects, then this would havemixed implications for their therapeutic use. On the one hand, theycould be therapeutically useful as immunosuppressant drugs in patientsundergoing organ transplants. On the other hand, their therapeutic usefor other purposes would be limited in patients with impaired immunesystems, a restriction which would potentially preclude their use asanti-emetic agents in cancer chemotherapy, or as appetite stimulantsand mood enhancers in patients with AIDS.There are a number of difficulties in deciding whether cannabisimpairs the functioning of the immune system. First, the majority ofstudies that have been conducted have been either in vitro studies inwhich animal and human cell cultures have been exposed to cannabissmoke or cannabinoids, or in vivo animal studies in which the effectsof cannabis and cannabinoid exposure on immune system function havebeen assessed in live animals. The usual problems of extrapolationfrom in vivo and in vitro studies to human users are complicated bythe fact that many of the effects of cannabinoids on the immune systemof animals are only obtained at very high doses which are rarely takenby human beings. Second, the difficulties in interpreting thesestudies are exacerbated because the results of the small number ofhuman in vivo studies have been conflicting. Third, there have beenvery few epidemiological studies of immune system functioning anddisease susceptibility in heavy chronic cannabis users.Given that the majority of the in vitro and in vivo animal work wasundertaken in the 1970s, we have relied upon the summary of findingsprovided in the authoritative reviews of this literature undertaken bythe Addiction Research Foundation and World Health Organization(Leuchtenberger, 1983; Munson and Fehr, 1983). This enables thepresent review to focus upon on the clinical and public healthsignificance of the immunological effects observed in the experimentalstudies. Before doing so, a brief and schematic review will beprovided of the components of the human immune system.6.2.1 The immune systemThe immune system in mammals is "an adaptive and a protectivemechanism against noxious foreign materials including pathogens andcancer cells" (Munson and Fehr, 1983). Its multiple componentsinclude: lymphoid tissues such as the spleen and lymph nodes; the bonemarrow and thymus, where lymphocytes and other important cells in theimmune system are manufactured; and the recirculating lymphocytes thatmediate cellular and humoral immunity (see Grossman and Wilson, 1992;and Nossal, 1993). Immunity may be either innate or acquired. Innate immunity consists ofthose responses to foreign substances that do not requiresensitisation from previous exposure, such as the ingestion ofbacteria by macrophages, and the killing of tumour cells by naturalkiller cells. Acquired immunity is that form of immunity in which therecognition and destruction of foreign material depends upon processesproduced by a previous exposure to the material. It is mediated by thecooperative functioning of two major systems of lymphocyte cells: theB-cells (Thymus-independent lymphocytes) which control humoralimmunity, and T-cells (Thymus-dependent lymphocytes) the activity ofwhich controls cell-mediated immunity.Humoral immunity involves the production of antibodies in response toantigens, usually proteins, which are attached to the surface offoreign cells. Antigens are recognised by the B-cells whichproliferate and differentiate into two types of cells, the first ofwhich synthesises and releases antibody, and the second of whichremains as antigen-sensitised cells that are able to respond tosubsequent exposure to the antigen by rapidly releasing large amountsof antibody. The antibodies can act directly to inactivate thepathogens or toxins by damaging cell membranes, or they can workcooperatively with the cell-mediated immune system by enabling cellscalled macrophages to recognise and destroy the foreign cells, eitherby ingesting those cells which have antibodies attached, or byreleasing toxins which kill the cells. Cell-mediated immunity isdirected against foreign cells including many bacteria, viruses andfungi. Macrophages are intimately involved in the early removal offoreign materials directly by ingestion, or indirectly by alteringtheir antigens and presenting them to the T- and B-cells for thefurther development of the immune response. They work in concert withthe humoral immune system to protect the organism from all pathogensin its environment.6.2.2 Effects of cannabinoids on lymphoid organsA non-specific indication of an effect of cannabinoids on the immunesystem would be a reduction in the weight of lymphoid organs, such asthe thymus and spleen, or a decrease in the number of circulatinglymphocytes. A substantial body of anatomical and histological studiesin animals bearing upon this possibility has been reviewed by Munsonand Fehr (1983). These studies reveal that cannabinoids in high dosescan affect the function of the stem cells which produce lymphocytes,and can reduce the size of the spleen in rodents. It is uncertain whatthe implications are for immune system competence because theseeffects all occur after acute exposure, typically in response to veryhigh doses of cannabinoids. It is also unknown whether these effectsoccur as the direct result of cannabinoids acting upon the lymphoidcells, or whether they are an indirect effect of cannabinoids actingon the adrenal-pituitary axis to increase the release ofcorticosteroids which in turn shrink the spleen.6.2.3 Effects of cannabinoids on humoral immunity The effect of cannabinoids on humoral immunity has been assessed invitro by measuring the effect of cannabinoids on the number andfunctioning of animal and human B-cells produced in response to thepresence of sheep red blood cells. Cannabinoids do not consistentlyalter the number or percentage of B-cells (Munson and Fehr, 1983). B-cell function has also been assessed in vitro by measuring theproliferation of B-cells in response to chemicals which stimulate thecells to divide, and by assessing antibody production in B-cells thathave previously been exposed to cannabinoids. While cannabinoids havebeen consistently shown to impair the B-cell responses in mice, nosuch effects have been consistently observed in humans, and the fewpositive studies have produced results which are still within thenormal range (Munson and Fehr, 1983).Antibody formation to THC has been demonstrated in animals. There arealso clinical reports in humans that cannabinoids can exacerbateexisting allergies, and there are several reports of demonstratedallergy to cannabinoids in humans (e.g. Freeman, 1983). Munson andFehr (1983) concluded that: "it appears that cannabinoids can elicitthe formation of specific antibodies ... [and that THC] or ametabolite is probably acting as a hapten, combining with a protein toform an antigenic complex" (p289).Hollister (1992), however, has questioned the clinical significance ofthis evidence, arguing that:While it is possible that a few persons may become truly allergic tocannabinoids, it is far more likely that allergic reactions, whichhave been extremely rare following the use of marijuana, are due tocontaminants .. (e.g. bacteria, fungi, molds, parasites, worms,chemicals) that may be found in such field plants. That such impurematerial, when smoked and inhaled into the lungs, causes so littletrouble is really a marvel (p163).6.2.4 Effects of cannabinoids on cell-mediated immunityResearchers have examined the effects of cannabinoids on both thenumbers and functioning of T-cells and macrophages. There areconsiderable inconsistencies in the results of studies on the effectsof cannabinoids on T-cell numbers in humans, with some studies showingreductions (e.g. Nahas et al, 1974) while others have not (e.g. Dax etal, 1989). There is also mixed evidence on the effect of cannabinoidson T-cell functioning as assessed by response to allogenic cells andmitogens, chemicals which stimulate the cells to divide. A number ofthe earliest studies suggested that T-cells from chronic cannabisusers showed a decreased responsiveness to such stimulation, but laterstudies, including laboratory studies of chronic heavy dosing inhumans (e.g. Lau et al, 1976), have failed to replicate these results.Studies of in vitro exposure of T-cells to cannabinoids have alsoproduced mixed results, while animal studies have showed a decreasedT-cell response to mitogens (Munson and Fehr, 1983).Interpretations of this literature differ. Munson and Fehr (1983)concluded that the fact that cannabinoids can affect T-cell functionin several species of animals "suggests that the same effects couldoccur in humans given exposure to these substances" (pp306-307). Nahas(1984) concluded that "there is only suggestive" evidence thatcannabinoids "exert an immunodepressive effect" (p156). Hollister(1986) argued that even if there were such effects, they were oflimited clinical significance because they were probably transienteffects in healthy young adults, and there was no evidence ofincreased susceptibility to disease in cannabis smokers. Morerecently, Hollister (1992) has concluded that "... the effects ofcannabinoids on cell-mediated immunity are contradictory. Suchevidence as has been obtained to support such an effect has usuallyinvolved doses and concentrations that are orders of magnitude greaterthan those obtained when marijuana is used by human subjects. (p161)"6.2.5 Effects of cannabinoids on host resistanceIt is one thing to decide that in vitro exposure of the immune systemto high doses of cannabinoids impairs its functioning in various ways;it is much more difficult to decide whether the small impairments inimmunity predicted by in vitro studies is likely to impair hostresistance to pathogens and infection with micro-organisms among humancannabis users. There is a very small animal, and almost no human,literature on which to make such a decision. A small number of studies in rodents (mice and guinea pigs) hassuggested that high doses (200mg/kg) of cannabinoids decreaseresistance to infection (Friedman, 1991), e.g. with Lysteriamonocytogenes (Morahan et al, 1979), and herpes simplex type 2 virus(Cabral et al, 1986; Mishkin and Cabral, 1985; Morahan et al, 1979). Areasonably consistent finding in humans has been that exposure tocannabis smoke adversely affects alveolar macrophages, cells in therespiratory system that constitute a first line of bodily defenceagainst many pathogens and micro-organisms which enter the body viathe lungs (Leuchtenberger, 1983). Studies of these cells obtained fromcannabis smokers have demonstrated ultrastructural abnormalities(Tennant, 1980), and studies of the in vitro exposure of alveolarmacrophages to cannabis smoke have demonstrated that their ability toinactivate Staphylococcus aureus (Leuchtenberger, 1983; Munson andFehr, 1983), and more recently the fungus Candida albicans (Sherman etal, 1991) has been impaired. In this case, however, it seems to be thenon-cannabinoid components of cannabis smoke that produce the effect(Leuchtenbeger, 1983). 6.2.6 Human significance of immunological effects of cannabinoids The animal evidence is reasonably consistent that cannabinoids produceimpairments of the cell-mediated and humoral immune systems, and inseveral studies these changes have been reflected in decreasedresistance to bacteria and viruses. There is also evidence that thenon-cannabinoid components of cannabis smoke can impair thefunctioning of alveolar macrophages, the first line of the body'sdefence system. However, the doses required to produce theseimmunological effects have varied from the behaviourally relevant tovery high doses. This raises the issue of whether their findings canbe extrapolated to the doses used by humans.The possibility of tolerance developing to any immunological effectsof cannabinoids also makes the human significance of the results of invitro studies uncertain. If immunological tolerance develops withchronic use, then the possibility of observing even the small effectsprojected from the in vitro studies would be substantially reduced.There have been no demonstrations that such tolerance occurs inanimals, in part because most studies have used short duration, highdosing schedules rather than chronic high dosing required fortolerance to be demonstrated. Given the large number of cannabinoideffects to which tolerance has been shown to develop, it would not besurprising if this were also true of its immunological effects. The very limited human evidence from experimental studies of immunefunction is mixed, with a small number of studies suggestingimmunosuppressant effects that have not been replicated by others. AsMunson and Fehr (1983) concluded: "At present, there is no conclusiveevidence that consumption of cannabinoids predisposes man to immunedysfunction" (p338), as measured by reduced numbers or impairedfunctioning of T-lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes or macrophages, or reducedimmunoglobulin levels. There was "suggestive evidence" of impairedT-lymphocyte functioning reflected in an impaired reaction to mitogensand allogenic lymphocytes (Munson and Fehr, 1983). More recently,Wallace et al (1988, 1993 in press) have failed to find any impairmentof lymphocyte function in alveolar macrophages in marijuana smokers,although they did find such impairment in tobacco smokers.The clinical significance of these possible immunological impairmentsin chronic cannabis users is uncertain. There have been sporadicreports of ill health, including decreased resistance to disease,among chronic heavy cannabis users in Asia and Africa (Munson andFehr, 1983). These reports are difficult to evaluate because of theconfounding effects of poor living conditions and nutritional status,although it may be that the small human immunological impairmentpredicted from the animal literature is most likely to be seen amongsuch populations (Munson and Fehr, 1983).Three field studies of the effects of chronic cannabis use in CostaRica (Carter et al, 1980), Greece (Stefanis et al, 1977), and Jamaica(Rubin and Costas, 1975), have failed to demonstrate any evidence ofincreased susceptibility to infectious diseases among chronic cannabisusers. However, these negative findings are not very convincing. Lessthan 100 users were studied overall, which is too small a sample inwhich to detect a small increase in the incidence of common infectiousand bacterial diseases. While it is difficult to detect a smallincrease in the incidence of infections in an individual or among asmall sample of people, such an increase may have great public healthsignificance. The type of large-scale epidemiological studies that areneeded to explore this issue have not been conducted until veryrecently. A recent study by Polen et al (1993) compared health serviceutilisation by non-smokers and daily cannabis only smokers enrolled ina health maintenance organisation. Their results provided the firstsuggestive evidence of an increased rate of presentation forrespiratory conditions among cannabis-only smokers, although itssignificance remains uncertain because infectious and non-infectiousrespiratory conditions were aggregated. Nevertheless, further studiesof this type may enable a more informed decision to be made about theseriousness of the risk that chronic heavy cannabis smoking poses tothe immune and respiratory systems. Hollister (1992) has expressed a sceptical attitude towards the humanhealth implications of the literature on the immunological effects ofcannabis, arguing that: ... Clinically, one might assume that sustained impairment ofcell-mediated immunity might lead to an increased prevalence ofmalignancy. No such clinical evidence has been discovered or has anydirect epidemiological data incriminated marijuana use with theacquisition of human immunodeficiency virus or the clinicaldevelopment of AIDS. (p161)Given the duration of large-scale cannabis use by young adults inWestern societies, the absence of an epidemic of infectious disease isarguably sufficient to rule out the hypothesis that cannabis smokingproduces major impairments in the immune systems of users comparableto those caused by AIDS. The absence of such epidemics among cannabisusers does not, however, exclude the possibility that chronic heavyuse may produce minor impairments in immunity, since this wouldproduce small increases in the rate of occurrence of common bacterialand viral illnesses (Munson and Fehr, 1983) that would have escapedthe notice of clinical observers. Such an increase could nonethelessbe of public health significance because of the increased expenditureon health services, and the loss of productivity among the youngadults who are the heaviest users of cannabis. Clinical studies of patients with immune systems compromised by AIDSmay provide one of the best ways of detecting any adverseimmunological effects of cannabinoids. AIDS patients and gay advocacygroups have proposed that cannabinoids should be used therapeuticallyto improve appetite and well-being in AIDS patients (see below p195).If it was ethical to conduct trials of the therapeutic use ofcannabinoids in AIDS patients, then monitoring the impact on immunefunctioning would provide one way of evaluating the seriousness of theimmunological effects of cannabinoids, not only for AIDS patients, butalso for other immunologically compromised patients using cannabinoidsfor therapeutic purposes. If there were no effects in patients withcompromised immune systems, it would also be a reasonable to inferthat there was little risk of immunological effects in long-termrecreational users. An epidemiological study of predictors of progression to AIDS amongHIV positive homosexual men suggests that the risks may besufficiently small in the case of HIV positive patients to warrantfurther research. Kaslow et al (1989) conducted a prospective study ofprogression to AIDS among HIV positive men in a cohort of 4,954homosexual and bisexual men. Among the predictor variables studiedwere licit and illicit drug use, including cannabis use. Illicit druguse predicted an increased risk of infection with HIV, as has beenconsistently found in studies of risk factors for HIV infection.However, neither cannabis use, nor any other psychoactive drug use,predicted an increased rate of progression to AIDS among men who wereHIV positive. Nor was cannabis use related to changes in a limitednumber of measures of immunological functioning. 6.2.7 ConclusionsThere is reasonable evidence that cannabis smoke is mutagenic, andhence, potentially carcinogenic, because of the many mutagenic andcarcinogenic substances it shares with tobacco smoke. THC is at mostweakly mutagenic. This suggests that the major cancer risk fromcannabis use is the development of cancers of the respiratory tractarising from smoking as a route of administration, rather than fromthe mutagenicity of the psychoactive components of cannabis.There is reasonably consistent animal evidence that THC can impairboth the cell-mediated and humoral immune systems, producing decreasedresistance to infection by bacteria and viruses. The relevance ofthese findings to human health is uncertain: the doses required toproduce these effects are often very high, and the problem ofextrapolating from the effects of these doses to those used by humansis complicated by the possibility that tolerance develops to theeffects on the immune system.The limited experimental evidence on immune effects in humans isconflicting, with the small number of studies producing adverseeffects not being replicated. Even studies that have produced evidenceof adverse effects observe small changes that are still within thenormal range. The clinical and biological significance of even thesmall positive effects in chronic cannabis users is uncertain. Therehas not been any evidence of increased rates of disease among chronicheavy cannabis users analogous to that seen among homosexual men inthe early 1980s. Given the duration of large-scale cannabis use byyoung adults in Western societies, the absence of such epidemics makesit unlikely that cannabis smoking produces major impairments in theimmune system. It is more difficult to exclude the possibility that chronic heavycannabis use produces minor impairments in immunity. Such effectswould produce small increases in the rates of infectious diseases ofpublic health significance, because of the increased expenditure onhealth services, and the loss of productivity among the young adultswho are the heaviest users. There is one large prospective study ofHIV-positive homosexual men which indicates that continued cannabisuse did not increase the risk of progression to AIDS (Kaslow et al,1989). A recent epidemiological study by Polen et al (1993) whichcompared health service utilisation by non-smokers and dailycannabis-only smokers provided the first suggestive evidence of anincreased rate of medical care utilisation for respiratory conditionsamong cannabis smokers. This remains suggestive, however, becauseinfectious and non-infectious respiratory conditions were notdistinguished. The most sensitive assay of any small immunologicaleffects of cannabis may come from studies of the therapeuticusefulness of cannabinoids in immunologically compromised patients,such as those undergoing cancer chemotherapy, or those with AIDS. 6.3 Cardiovascular effects Both the inhalation of marijuana smoke and the ingestion of THCreliably produces an increase in heart rate of 20 per cent to 50 percent over baseline (Huber et al, 1988; Jones, 1984). When cannabis issmoked, the heart rate increases within two to three minutes, peakswithin 15 to 30 minutes, and may remain elevated for up to two hours.When ingested, these effects are delayed for several hours, and lastfor four to five hours (Maykut, 1984). There are also complex changesin blood pressure which depend upon posture: blood pressure isincreased while the person is sitting or lying, but decreases onstanding, so that a sudden change from a recumbent to an uprightposition may produce postural hypotension and, in extreme cases,fainting (Maykut, 1984). Young, healthy hearts are likely to be only mildly stressed by theseacute effects of cannabis (Tennant, 1983). The clinical significanceof the repeated occurrence of these effects in chronic heavy cannabisusers remains uncertain, because there is evidence from clinical andexperimental studies (Benowitz and Jones, 1975; Jones and Benowitz,1976; Nowlan and Cohen, 1977) that tolerance develops to the acutecardiovascular effects of cannabis. Clinical studies employing chronicdosing over periods of up to nine weeks show that the increased heartrate all but disappears, while the blood pressure increase is muchattenuated. Tolerance to the cardiovascular effects develops withinseven to 10 days in persons receiving high daily doses by the oralroute (Jones, 1984). The field studies of chronic heavy users in Costa Rica (Carter et al,1980), Greece (Stefanis et al, 1977), and Jamaica (Rubin and Costas,1975) failed to disclose any evidence of cardiac toxicity, even inthose subjects with heart disease that was unrelated to their cannabisuse. The findings of the field studies have been supported by the factthat electrocardiographic studies in conditions of both acute andprolonged administration have rarely revealed pathological changes(Benowitz and Jones, 1975; Jones, 1984). It seems reasonable toconclude then that among healthy young adults who use cannabisintermittently, cannabis use is not a major risk factor forlife-threatening cardiovascular events in the way that the use ofcocaine and other psychostimulants can be (Gawin and Ellinwood, 1988).There is suggestive evidence of a small risk, however, since therehave been a number of case reports of myocardial infarction in youngmen who were heavy cannabis smokers and had no personal history ofheart disease (Tennant, 1983; Choi and Pearl, 1989; Pearl and Choi,1992; Podczeck et al, 1990). Such cases deserve close investigation toexclude the role of other cardiotoxic drugs.The possibility remains that chronic heavy cannabis smoking may havemore subtle effects on the cardiovascular system. Jones (1984) hassuggested, for example, that there is a possibility that "after yearsof repeated exposure" there may be "lasting, perhaps even permanent,alterations of the cardiovascular system function" (p331). Arguing byanalogy with the long-term cardiotoxic effects of tobacco smoking, hesuggests that there are "enough similarities between THC and nicotinecardiovascular effects to make the possibility plausible" (p331).Moreover, since many cannabis smokers are also cigarette smokers,there is the possibility that there may be adverse interactionsbetween nicotine and cannabinoids in their effects on thecardiovascular system. 6.3.1 Effects on patients with cardiovascular diseaseThe cardiovascular effects of cannabis may adversely affect patientswith pre-existing cardiovascular disease. As the Institute of Medicineobserved: the possibility is great that the abnormal heart and circulation willnot be as tolerant of an agent that speeds up the heart, sometimesunpredictably raises or drops blood pressure, and modifies theactivities of the autonomic nervous system (pp69-70). There are a number of concerns about the potentially deleteriouseffects of cannabis use on patients with ischaemic heart disease,hypertension, and cerebrovascular disease (Jones, 1984; NationalAcademy of Science, 1982). First, THC appears to increase theproduction of catecholamines which stimulate the activity of theheart, thereby increasing the risk of cardiac arrhythmias insusceptible patients. Second, THC increases heart rate, therebyproducing chest pain (angina pectoris) in patients with ischaemicheart disease, and perhaps increasing the risk of a myocardialinfarction. Third, THC also has analgesic properties (see below p194)which may attenuate chest pain, delaying treatment seeking, andthereby perhaps increasing the risk of fatal arrhythmias. Fourth,marijuana smoking increases the level of carboxyhaemoglobin, therebydecreasing oxygen delivery to the heart, increasing the work of theheart and, perhaps, the risk of atheroma formation. Moreover, thereduced delivery of oxygen to the heart is compounded by a concomitantincrease in the work of the heart - and therefore its oxygenrequirements - because of the tachycardia induced by THC. Fifth,patients with cerebrovascular disease may be put at risk ofexperiencing strokes by unpredictable changes in blood pressure, andpatients with hypertension may experience exacerbations of theirdisease for the same reason.After considering the known cardiovascular effects of THC, and theirlikely interactions with cardiovascular disease, the Institute ofMedicine (1982) concluded that it: " ... seems inescapable that thisincreased work, coupled with stimulation by catecholamines, may taxthe heart to the point of clinical hazard" (p70). Despite theplausibility of the reasoning, there is very little direct evidence ofthe adverse effects of cannabis on persons with heart disease (Jones,1984). Among the few relevant pieces of research evidence are twolaboratory studies of the acute cardiovascular effects of smokingmarijuana cigarettes on patients with occlusive heart disease. Aronowand Cassidy (1974) conducted a double blind placebo control studycomparing the effect on heart rate and the time required to inducechest pain during an exercise tolerance test, of smoking a singlemarijuana cigarette containing 20mg of THC, with the effect of aplacebo marijuana cigarette. Heart rate increased by 43 per cent, andthe time taken to produce chest pain was approximately halved, aftersmoking a marijuana cigarette. It appeared that cannabis increased themyocardial oxygen demand while reducing the amount of oxygen deliveredto the heart (Aronow and Cassidy, 1974). Aronow and Cassidy (1975) compared the effects of smoking a singlemarijuana cigarette and a high nicotine cigarette in 10 men withocclusive heart disease, all of whom were 20 a day cigarette smokers.A 42 per cent increase in heart rate was observed after smoking themarijuana cigarette compared with a 21 per cent increase after smokingthe tobacco cigarette. Exercise tolerance time was halved (49 percent) after smoking a marijuana cigarette by comparison with a 23 percent decline after smoking a tobacco cigarette. Apart from these studies, there is very little direct evidence on therisks of cannabis use by persons with cardiovascular disease. Thereasons for the absence of adverse effects of chronic cannabis use ondiseased cardiovascular systems are unclear. It should not be assumedin the absence of evidence, however, that such effects do not exist.The absence of evidence may simply reflect the lack of systematicstudy. It may be that the development of tolerance to thecardiovascular effects with chronic heavy dosing has protected theheaviest users from experiencing such effects: it may be that therehas been an insufficient exposure to cannabis smoking of asufficiently large number of vulnerable individuals (National Academyof Science, 1982); or it may be that cardiologists have missed anysuch evidence because they have not inquired about cannabis use amongtheir patients.On the face of it, the possibility of cannabis smokers developingheart disease may seem "theoretical". Most cannabis users are healthyyoung adults who smoke intermittently, most discontinue their use bytheir late 20s, and very few of the minority who become heavy cannabisusers are likely to have clinical occlusive heart disease or otheratherosclerotic disease. But the possibility of such adverse effectsis not entirely theoretical. First, any such effects would contraindicate the therapeutic uses ofcannabinoids among older patients, such as those with cancer andglaucoma, who are at higher risk, because they are older, of havingsignificant heart disease (Jones, 1984). Second, the chronic heavy cannabis users who were inducted intocannabis use in the late 1960s and early 1970s are now entering theperiod in which that minority who have continued to smoke cannabis areat risk of experiencing symptoms of clinical heart disease. Among thisgroup cannabis use may contribute to an earlier expression of heartdisease, especially, if they have also been heavy cigarette smokers.Because of the high rates of cessation of cannabis use with age,however, this may be such a small number of persons that the effect isdifficult to detect clinically, especially if cannabis use is notconsidered to be a risk factor about which cardiologistssystematically inquire. It may be worth exploring this possibility byincluding questions on cannabis use in case-control studies ofcardiovascular disease among middle-aged adults.6.3.2 Conclusions On the available evidence, it is still appropriate to endorse theconclusions reached by the expert committee appointed by the NationalAcademy of Science in 1982 that, although the smoking of marijuana"causes changes to the heart and circulation that are characteristicof stress ... there is no evidence ... that it exerts a permanentlydeleterious effect on the normal cardiovascular system..." (p72). Thesituation may be less benign for those with "abnormal heart orcirculation" since there is evidence that marijuana poses "a threat topatients with hypertension, cerebrovascular disease and coronaryatherosclerosis" (p72) by increasing the work of the heart. The"magnitude and incidence" of the threat remains to be determined asthe cohort of chronic cannabis users of the late 1960s enters the ageof maximum risk for complications of atherosclerosis of the cardiac,brain and peripheral vessels. In the interim, because any such effectscould be life threatening in patients with significant occlusion ofthe coronary arteries or other cerebrovascular disease, such personsshould be advised not to smoke cannabis (Tennant, 1983).6.4 Effects on the respiratory system The most reliable acute effect of exposure to cannabis smoke isbronchodilation (National Academy of Science, 1982), which hasprincipally been of interest because of its possible therapeuticeffect upon asthma (see below pp193-194). Other than bronchodilation,it has proved difficult to demonstrate any effects of acute cannabissmoking on breathing "as measured by conventional pulmonary tests"(National Academy of Science, 1982, p58). The major concerns about the respiratory effects of cannabis use havebeen the possible adverse effects of chronic, heavy cannabis smoking(Tashkin, 1993). The two largest issues of concern have been theproduction of chronic bronchitis as a precursor of irreversibleobstructive lung disease, and the possible causation of cancers of theaerodigestive tract (including the lungs, mouth, pharynx, larynx, andtrachea) after 20 to 30 years of regular cannabis smoking. These risksare the primary focus of this section of the review.There is good reason to expect that chronic heavy cannabis smoking mayhave adverse effects upon the respiratory system (Tashkin, 1993).Cannabis smoke is similar in constitution to tobacco smoke, andcontains a substantially higher proportion of particulate matter andof some carcinogens (e.g. benzpyrene) than does tobacco smoke(Leuchtenberger, 1983; National Academy of Science, 1982). Hence, theinhalation of cannabis smoke deposits irritating and potentiallycarcinogenic particulate matter onto lung surfaces. Cigarette smokingis known to cause diseases of the respiratory system, such asbronchitis, emphysema, and various forms of cancer affecting the lung,oral cavity, trachea, and oesophagus (Holman et al, 1988). Althoughtobacco smokers smoke many more cigarettes than cannabis smokers,cannabis smoke is typically inhaled more deeply, and the breath heldfor longer, than tobacco smoke, thereby permitting greater depositionof particulate matter on the lung surface (Hollister, 1986). Ittherefore seems a reasonable inference that chronic daily cannabissmoking may cause diseases of the respiratory system.Despite the reasonableness of this hypothesis, it has nonetheless beendifficult to investigate the contribution of chronic heavy cannabissmoking to diseases of the respiratory system (Huber et al, 1988;National Academy of Science, 1982). A major problem is that mostmarijuana smokers also smoke tobacco, which makes it difficult todisentangle the effects of cannabis from those of tobacco smoking. Theproblems in quantifying current and lifetime exposure to cannabis,because of variations in quality and potency, make it difficult toexamine dose-response relationships between cannabis use and the riskof developing various respiratory diseases. There is also likely to bea long latency period between exposure and the development of thesediseases, especially in the case of cancers of the aerodigestivetract. This period is approximately the length of time since cannabissmoking became widespread in Western societies. There are alsotechnical difficulties in designing studies which are sufficientlysensitive to detect increased risks of diseases arising fromrelatively rare exposures, such as chronic daily cannabis use.6.4.1 Bronchitis and airways obstructionThere is a small clinical literature containing case reports of acutelung diseases among heavy cannabis smokers in the US militarystationed in West Germany during the early 1970s, when hashish wascheap and freely available (Henderson et al, 1972; Tennant et al,1971). Tennant et al studied 31 soldiers who had smoked 100g or moreof hashish monthly for six to 21 months, 21 of whom were also tobaccosmokers. Nine complained of bronchitis which had its onset three tofour months after they began to smoke hashish. Pulmonary functiontests of five cases (two of whom did not smoke tobacco) revealed mildairflow obstruction that partially remitted after a reduction orcessation of hashish use. Tennant (1980) also reportedhistopathological studies of 23 of these patients in which allpatients were found to have atypical cells of the type (squamousmetaplasia in 21 cases) associated with chronic bronchitis andcarcinoma of the lung.Henderson et al (1972) reported on 200 servicemen who sought treatmentfor problems related to hashish use, 90 per cent of whom were alsocigarette smokers. Twenty men who smoked large doses of hashish on aweekly basis presented with symptoms of chronic bronchitis, and ontesting had vital capacity that was 15-40 per cent below normal. Sixhad a bronchoscopic examination which showed epithelial abnormalities.The interpretation of these findings was complicated by the fact thatthe majority of these hashish smokers were also tobacco smokers, aswere Tennant et al's subjects, and there was no adequate comparisongroup. The field studies of chronic cannabis smokers in Costa Rica (Carter etal, 1980) and Jamaica (Rubin and Comitas, 1975), which includedcomparison groups, have failed to support the clinical findings ofHenderson et al, and Tennant et al. Neither of these studies found anystatistically significant differences in lung function, or in theprevalence of respiratory symptoms, between chronic cannabis users andnon-cannabis smoking controls. In both studies, however, the measuresof respiratory function were relatively unsophisticated, the samplesizes were small, making it difficult to detect all but very largedifferences, and the comparisons were often confounded by a failure tocontrol for tobacco smoking. The most convincing evidence that chronic cannabis use may be acontributory cause of impaired lung function and symptoms ofrespiratory disease comes from a series of controlled studies whichhave been conducted by Tashkin and his colleagues since the mid-1970s.One of their early studies evaluated the subacute effects of heavydaily marijuana smoking on respiratory function. The subjects wereyoung male marijuana smokers who were studied in a closed hospitalward where they were allowed ad libitum access to marijuana for 47 to59 days. The results of lung function tests showed a statisticallysignificant decrease in the function of large and medium-sized airwaysover the course of the study. The degree of impairment was positivelycorrelated with the number of marijuana cigarettes smoked, suggestingthat the quantity of inhaled irritants was the important factor,perhaps by producing an inflammatory reaction in the tracheobronchialepithelium. Although the impairment was apparently small and valueswere still within the normal range, these changes were of clinicalsignificance. If continued over a year, for example, the rate ofdecline in lung function would be several times greater than thenormal rate.Tashkin and his colleagues (1987) subsequently recruited a volunteersample of marijuana only smokers (MS, n=144), marijuana and tobaccosmokers (MTS, n=135), tobacco only smokers (TS, n=70), and non-smokingcontrols (NS, n=97). A subset of these subjects were followed toexamine changes in lung function, signs and symptoms of respiratorydisease, and the occurrence of histopathological changes that mayprecede the development of carcinoma. In the baseline observations of their cohort, Tashkin et al (1987)found significant differences in the prevalence of symptoms ofbronchitis (such as cough, bronchitic sputum production, wheeze andshortness of breath) between all types of smokers (MS, MTS, TS) andcontrols. There were no differences between cannabis and tobaccosmokers in the prevalence of these symptoms. Lung function testsshowed significantly poorer functioning and significantly greaterabnormalities in small airways among tobacco smokers (regardless ofconcomitant cannabis use) while marijuana smokers showed poorer largeairways functioning than non-marijuana smokers (regardless ofconcomitant tobacco use). These findings suggest that "habitualsmoking of marijuana or tobacco causes functional alterations atdifferent sites in the respiratory tract, with marijuana affectingmainly the large airways and tobacco predominantly the peripheralairways and alveolated regions of the lung" (Tashkin et al, 1990,p67).Follow-up studies of a subsample of this cohort have broadly supportedthe results of the cross-sectional baseline study, while providingmore detail on some differences between marijuana and tobacco smokingin their effects on lung function (Tashkin et al, 1990). The firstfollow-up study was conducted two to three years after the baselinestudy. Approximately half of these subjects were retested and mostremained in the same smoking categories as at baseline, namely, 40 ofthe 54 MTS, 60 of the 71 MS, 30 of the 32 TS, and 56 of 58 NS,respectively of those who were followed up. The prevalence of bronchitic symptoms of cough, sputum, and wheeze washigher in all smoking groups than among non-smokers at both time oneand time two, and there was no significant change in the respiratorystatus of any of the smoking groups from time one to time two whenthose individuals who ceased smoking were excluded. Substantially thesame results were obtained when the subjects were followed up three tofour years after initial assessment. In addition, there was evidenceof an additive adverse effect of marijuana and cigarette smoking, inthat the MTS group showed effects of both types of damage attributableto marijuana and tobacco smoking alone.Tashkin and his colleagues (Fligiel et al, 1988; Gong et al, 1987)undertook histopathological studies of the lungs of a subsample oftheir cohort. Fligiel et al (1988) compared the bronchial morphologyof males aged 25 to 49 years who were heavy smokers of marijuana only(n=30), marijuana and tobacco (n=17), tobacco only (n=15) andnon-smoking controls (n=11). Bronchial biopsies were examined bypathologists who were "blind" as to their smoking status, and analyseswere made of cellular inflammation. All subjects who smoked (whethercannabis, tobacco or both) showed more prevalent and severehistopathological abnormalities than non-smokers. Many of theseabnormalities were more prevalent in marijuana smokers, and they weremost marked in those who smoked both marijuana and tobacco. These findings were especially striking because they were observed inyoung adults who did not have respiratory symptoms, and they occurredat a younger age on average in marijuana than tobacco smokers, despitethe fact that the marijuana smokers smoked less than a quarter as many"joints" as the tobacco smokers smoked cigarettes. Fliegel et alconcluded that "marijuana smoking may be as damaging or perhaps evenmore damaging to the respiratory epithelium than smoking of tobacco"(p46), and there was "a very good possibility ... that marijuanasmoking combined with smoking of tobacco, leads to a more significantmucosal alteration than either of these substances smoked alone"(p47). Evidence of inflammation was sought by examining the presence ofalveolar macrophages, lymphocytes, neutrophils and eosinophils in thebronchial lavage of the same subjects. This examination revealed thatmarijuana and tobacco smoking induced an inflammatory cellularresponse in the alveoli, and that the combination of marijuana andtobacco smoking produced the largest inflammatory response, "implyingan adverse effect of marijuana smoking on the lung that is independentof and additive to that of tobacco" (Tashkin et al, 1990, p74).Additional research by Tashkin and his colleagues (Tashkin et al,1988; Wu et al, 1988) suggests that the most likely explanations ofthe apparently greater toxicity of marijuana smoking are majordifferences in the topography of marijuana and tobacco smoking.Laboratory studies of the volume of inhaled smoke from tobacco andmarijuana, and analyses of its particulate content, indicated thatmarijuana smokers inhaled a larger volume of smoke (40-54 per centmore), inhaled more deeply, took in more particulate matter per puff,and held their breath about four to five times longer, therebyretaining more particulate matter, and absorbing three times morecarbon monoxide, than cigarette smokers (Wu et al, 1988).Bloom et al (1987) have recently reported findings that broadlyconfirm those of Tashkin and his colleagues. Bloom et al conducted across-sectional study in a general population of the relationshipbetween smoking "non-tobacco" cigarettes and respiratory symptoms andrespiratory function. Their study sample was a community sample of 990individuals aged under 40 years who were being followed as part of aprospective community study of obstructive airways disease. Subjectswere asked about symptoms of cough, phlegm, wheeze and shortness ofbreath, and they were also measured on a number of indicators ofrespiratory function, including forced expiratory volume and forcedvital capacity.The prevalence of ever having smoked a "non-tobacco" cigarette was 14per cent (the same as the prevalence of marijuana smoking in generalpopulation surveys), with 9 per cent being current smokers and 5 percent ex-smokers. Non-tobacco smokers were younger and more likely tobe male than non-smokers of non-tobacco. The mean frequency of currentnon-tobacco smoking was seven times per week, and the average durationof use was nine years. Non-tobacco smokers were more likely thannon-tobacco non-smokers to have smoked tobacco, and more likely toinhale deeply than tobacco smokers.Non-tobacco smoking was related to the prevalence of the self-reportedrespiratory symptoms of cough, phlegm, and wheeze, regardless ofwhether the person smoked tobacco or not. There were also meandifferences in forced expiratory volume and forced vital capacity,with those who had never smoked having the best functioning, followedin decreasing order of function by current cigarette smokers, currentnon-tobacco smokers, and current smokers of both tobacco andnon-tobacco cigarettes. Non-tobacco smoking alone had a larger effecton all flow indices than tobacco smoking alone, and the effect of bothtypes of smoking was additive.Although there were some inconsistencies between the studies ofTashkin and colleagues and those of Bloom and colleagues, there isreasonable coherence in the available evidence on the respiratoryeffects of cannabis use. Taken as a whole, it suggests that chroniccannabis smoking increases the prevalence of bronchitic symptoms,reduces respiratory function, and in very heavy smokers produceshistopathological changes that may portend the subsequent developmentof bronchogenic carcinoma, a well known consequence of heavy tobaccosmoking. Although, "there is still no conclusive evidence in man ofclinically important pulmonary dysfunction produced by smokingmarihuana" (Huber et al, 1988; p8), it is nonetheless a reasonableinference that chronic heavy cannabis smoking probably increases therisk of developing respiratory tract cancer, and possibly influencesthe development of irreversible obstructive pulmonary disease. Personswho wish to reduce their risks of developing these diseases would bewise to desist from cannabis smoking (Tashkin, 1993). 6.4.2 Cancers of the aerodigestive tract Although "not a single case of bronchogenic carcinoma in man has beendirectly attributable to marijuana" (Tashkin, 1988), it would beunwise to infer from the absence of such cases that there is no suchan effect (Huber et al, 1988; National Academy of Science, 1982).There is a 20 to 30-year latency period between the initiation ofregular smoking and the development of cancer, and cannabis smokingonly became widespread in Western societies in the early 1970s(National Academy of Science, 1982). There has also been a lack ofclinical and epidemiological research on this question. Patients withlung or of other types of cancer, for example, have rarely been askedabout their cannabis use as part of the clinical history-taking. Nocohort or case-control studies of cancers among cannabis smokers havebeen reported, because the illegality of cannabis has made itdifficult to obtain reliable information on habits of the largesamples required, while the proportion of cannabis users who becomelong-term heavy users is likely to be small (Huber et al, 1988). Despite the absence of such evidence, there are good reasons forsuspecting that cannabis may contribute to the development of lungcancer and cancers of the aerodigestive tract (the oropharynx, nasaland sinus epithelium, and the larynx). A major reason is thesimilarity between the constituents of cannabis and tobacco smoke, anaccepted cause of cancers in these organs (Doll and Peto, 1980;International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1990). The majorqualitative differences between tobacco and cannabis smoke are thepresence of cannabinoids in cannabis smoke and of nicotine in tobacco.There are also some quantitative differences in the amount of variouscarcinogens with cannabis smoke typically containing higher levelsthan tobacco smoke (Leuchtenberger, 1983; National Academy of Science,1982). The work of Fligiel et al (1988) has indicated that histopathologicalchanges of the type that are believed to be precursors of carcinomacan be observed in the lung tissue of chronic marijuana smokers. Theseresults confirmed the earlier finding of Tennant (1980), who performedbronchoscopies on 30 US servicemen stationed in Europe who had smokedlarge quantities of hashish and experienced symptoms of bronchitis. Hefound that 23 of these who also smoked tobacco had one or morepathological changes "identical to those associated with the laterdevelopment of carcinoma of the lung when it occurs in tobaccosmokers" (Tennant, 1983, p78).The results of these clinical and laboratory studies have recentlyreceived suggestive support from case reports of cancers of the upperaerodigestive tract in young adults who have been chronic cannabissmokers. Donald (1991a, b) reported 13 cases of advanced head and neckcancer occurring in young adults under 40 years of age among 3,000 ofhis cancer patients. Their average age was 26 years (range 19-38years), compared with an average age of 65 years among his otherpatients. Eleven of the 13 had been daily cannabis smokers.Interpretation is complicated by the fact that at least five of thesepatients also smoked tobacco, and at least three were heavy alcoholconsumers, both known risk factors for cancers of the upperaerodigestive tract (Holman et al, 1988; Vokes et al, 1993). Donaldacknowledged these facts, but emphasised that half of his casesneither smoked tobacco nor consumed alcohol. Moreover, he argued, theimplication of marijuana as a cause of cancers of the upperaerodigestive tract was strengthened by the observation that suchcancers are rare under the age of 40 years, even among tobacco smokerswho consume alcohol.Similar findings have been reported by Taylor (1988) in aretrospective analysis of cases of upper respiratory tract canceroccurring in adults under the age of 40 years over a four-year period.Because the medical records did not routinely report the patients' useof cannabis, Taylor asked the attending clinicians to make judgmentsabout their patients' cannabis and other drug use. He found 10 casesamong the 887 cases of cancer that were treated over the study period.They consisted of six males and four females with an average age of33.5 years. Nine were cases of squamous cell carcinomas (of thetongue, the larynx, and the lung). Five cases had a documented historyof heavy cannabis smoking, two patients were described as "regular"cannabis users, one was classified as a "possible" cannabis userbecause he was known to abuse other drugs, and two were judged not tobe cannabis users. As with Donald's case series, interpretation wascomplicated by the fact that six out of 10 were heavy alcoholconsumers, and six were cigarette smokers (four out of the five heavycannabis users in each case). Taylor argued "that the regular use of marijuana is a potent etiologicfactor, particularly in the presence of other risk factors, inhastening the development of respiratory tract carcinomas" (p1216).While he allowed that alcohol and tobacco use may have contributed tothe development of these cancer, he discounted their importance,arguing like Donald, that the patients were well under 40 years ofage, while the peak incidence of such cancers in drinkers and smokersis in the seventh decade of life. Other investigators (e.g. Caplan and Brigham, 1989; Endicott andSkipper, 1991, cited by Nahas and Latour, 1992) have also reportedcases of upper respiratory tract cancers in young adults withhistories of heavy cannabis use. Caplan and Brigham's (1989) report oftwo cases of squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue in men aged 37 and52 years was especially noteworthy because neither of their casessmoked tobacco or consumed alcohol; a history of long-term dailycannabis use was their only shared risk factor. These case reports provide limited support for the hypothesis thatcannabis use is a cause of upper respiratory tract cancers. They didnot compare the prevalence of cannabis use in cases with that in acontrol sample, and cannabis exposure was not assessed in astandardised way or in ignorance of the case or control status, all ofwhich are standard controls to minimise bias in case-control studiesof cancer aetiology. Nonetheless, there is a worrying consistencyabout the reports that should be addressed by case-control studieswhich compare the proportions of cannabis smokers among patients withcancers of the upper aerodigestive tract and appropriate controls(National Academy of Science, 1982). Now may be the time to conductsuch studies, since chronic cannabis smokers who began their use inearly 1970s are now entering the period of risk for such cancers. Ifcarcinomatous changes occur earlier in heavy cannabis smokers, it maybe better to restrict attention to early onset cases (e.g. casesoccurring in individuals under 50 years of age). Information oncannabis use should also be obtained prospectively in newly diagnosedcases, because of the problems with retrospective assessment ofcannabis and other drug use from either clinical records or therelatives of those who have died.6.4.3 ConclusionsChronic heavy cannabis smoking probably causes chronic bronchitis, andimpairs functioning of the large airways. Given the documented adverseeffects of cigarette smoking, it is likely that chronic cannabis usepredisposes individuals to develop irreversible obstructive lungdiseases. There is suggestive evidence that chronic cannabis smokingproduces histopathogical changes in lung tissues that are precursorsof lung cancer. Case studies raise a strong suspicion that cannabismay cause cancers of the aerodigestive tract. The conduct ofcase-control studies of these cancers is a high priority for researchinto the possible adverse health effects of chronic cannabis smoking. 6.5 Reproductive effects of cannabis In the mid-1970s there seemed to be good reason to suspect thatcannabis use had adverse effects on the human reproductive system.There was some animal experimentation which suggested that cannabisadversely affected the secretion of gonadal hormones in both sexes,and the foetal development of animals administered crude marijuanaextract or THC during pregnancy (Bloch, 1983; Institute of Medicine,1982; Nahas, 1984; Nahas and Frick, 1987; Wenger et al, 1992).Cannabis was being widely used by adolescents who were undergoingsexual maturation, and by young adults who were entering the peak agefor reproduction (Linn et al, 1983). The suspicion that cannabinoidshad adverse effects on the human reproductive system was first raisedby case reports of breast development (gynecomastia) in young men aged23 to 26 years of age, all of whom had a history of heavy cannabis use(Harman and Aliapoulios, 1972). The suspicion seemed confirmed byhuman observations published shortly after by Kolodny et al (1974),who reported that males who were chronic cannabis users had reducedplasma testosterone, reduced sperm count and motility, and anincreased prevalence of abnormal sperm. In the light of these observations, the widespread use of cannabisamong young adults which began in the early 1970s and continued wellinto the mid-1980s raised understandable fears that fertility would beimpaired in men, and the rates of unfavourable pregnancy outcomeswould increase among women using cannabis during in their reproductiveyears. These outcomes could possibly include greater foetal loss,lower birth weight, and an increased risk of birth defects andperinatal deaths. Later, concerns were also raised about thepossibility of adverse effects upon the subsequent behaviouraldevelopment and health of children exposed to marijuana in utero.Evidence relevant to each of these concerns will be reviewed in thissection.6.5.1 Effects on the male reproductive systemIn animals, marijuana, crude marijuana extracts, THC and certain otherpurified cannabinoids have been shown to "depress the functioning ofthe male reproductive endocrine system" (Bloch, 1983, p355). If usedchronically, cannabis reduces plasma testosterone levels, retardssperm maturation, reducing the sperm count and sperm motility, andincreasing the rate of abnormal sperm (Bloch, 1983, National Academyof Science, 1982; Wenger et al, 1992). Although the mechanisms bywhich cannabis produces these effects are uncertain, it is likely thatthey occur both directly as a result of action of THC on the testis,and indirectly via effects on the hypothalamic secretion of thehormones that stimulate the testis to produce testosterone (Wenger etal, 1992).The small number of human studies on the effects of cannabis on malereproductive function have produced mixed results. The findings of theearly study by Kolodny et al (1974) which reported reducedtestosterone, sperm production, and sperm motility and increasedabnormalities in sperm were contradicted shortly thereafter by theresults of a larger, well controlled study of chronic heavy users,which failed to find any difference in plasma testosterone at studyentry, or after three weeks of heavy daily cannabis use (Mendelson etal, 1974). Other studies have produced both positive and negativeevidence of an effect of cannabinoids on testosterone, for reasonsthat are not well understood (Institute of Medicine, 1982). Hollister(1986) has conjectured that reductions in testosterone andspermatogenesis probably require long-term exposure. Even if there aresuch effects of cannabis on male reproductive functioning, theirclinical significance in humans is uncertain (Institute of Medicine,1982) since testosterone levels in the studies which have foundeffects have generally remained within the normal range (Hollister,1986). The putative relationship between cannabis use and gynecomastia nowseems very doubtful. The magnitude of reductions observed in thepositive studies are too small to explain the case reports ofgynecomastia among heavy male cannabis smokers (Harman andAliapoulios, 1972), and a small case-control study failed to find anyrelationship between cannabis use and gynecomastia in 11 cases andcontrols (Cates and Pope, 1977). Altho6. The chronic effects othis study did not exclude a four-fold higher risk of gynecomastiaamong cannabis smokers, studies in humans and animals have not shownany increased secretion of the hormone prolactin, the most likelymechanism of such effects in males. As Mendelson et al (1984) haveargued, if chronic cannabis use caused gynecomastia, one would expectmany more cases to have been reported in the clinical literature,given the widespread use of cannabis among young males during the pastfew decades.Hollister has argued that the reductions in testosterone andspermatogenesis observed in the positive studies are probably of"little consequence in adults", although he conceded that they couldbe of "major importance in the prepubertal male who may use cannabis"(p10). He cited a case of growth arrest in a 16-year-old male whobegan heavy cannabis use at the age of 11, and who experienced aretardation of growth and the development of secondary sexualcharacteristics which partially remitted after three months abstinencefrom cannabis (Copeland, Underwood and Van Wyck, 1980). The possibleeffects of cannabis use on testosterone and spermatogenesis maytherefore be most relevant to males whose fertility is alreadyimpaired for other reasons, e.g. a low sperm count. 6.5.2 Effects on the female reproductive system The experimental animal studies suggests that cannabis use has similareffects on female reproductive system to those found in males. Theacute effects of cannabis or THC exposure in the non-pregnant femaleanimal is to transiently interfere with thehypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (Bloch, 1983). Chronic cannabisexposure delays oestrous and ovulation by reducing leutinising hormoneand increasing prolactin secretion. There have been very few human studies of the effects of cannabis onthe female reproductive system because of fears that cannabis use mayproduce teratogenic and genotoxic effects in women of childbearing agewho would be the experimental subjects in such studies (Rosenkrantz,1985). Two studies have been reported with conflicting results. In anunpublished study, Bauman (1980 cited by Nahas, 1984) compared themenstrual cycles of 26 cannabis smokers with those of 17 controls, andfound a higher rate of anovulatory cycles among the cannabis users.Mendelson and Mello (1984) observed hormonal levels in a group offemale cannabis users (all of whom had undergone a tubal ligation)under controlled laboratory conditions. They failed to find anyevidence that sub-chronic cannabis use affected the cycling of the sexhormones, or the duration of the cycle. In the absence of any otherhuman evidence, both Bloch (1983) and the Institute of Medicine (1982)argued on the basis of the animal literature that cannabis useprobably had an inhibitory effect on human female reproductivefunction which was similar to that which occurs in males.6.5.3 Foetal development and birth defects Given evidence that THC affects female reproductive function, onemight expect it to have a potentially adverse effect on the outcome ofpregnancy. The possibility of adverse pregnancy outcomes is increasedby evidence that THC crosses the placenta in animals (Bloch, 1983) andhumans (Blackard and Tennes, 1984). This raises the possibility thatTHC, and possibly other cannabinoids, are teratogens, i.e. substancesthat may interfere with the normal development of the foetus in utero.The animal evidence indicates that in sufficient dosage cannabis can"produce resorption, growth retardation, and malformations" in mice,rats, rabbits, and hamsters (Bloch, 1983, p406). Growth resorption andgrowth retardation have been more consistently reported than birthmalformations (Abel, 1985). There are also several caveats on theevidence that cannabis increases rates of malformations. The dosesrequired to reliably produce malformations have been very high (Abel,1985), and such effects have been observed more often after theadministration of crude marijuana extract than pure THC, suggestingthat other cannabinoids may be involved in producing any teratogeniceffects. There have also been doubts expressed about whether theseteratogenic effects can be directly attributed to THC. Some haveargued, for example, that the malformations may be a consequence ofreduced nutrition caused by the aversive properties of the large dosesof cannabis used in these studies (Abel, 1985; Bloch, 1983). Hollister (1986) has also discounted the animal research data, arguingthat "virtually every drug that has ever been studied fordysmorphogenic effects has been found to have them if the doses arehigh enough, if enough species are tested, or if treatment isprolonged" (p4). Similar views have been expressed by Abel (1985) andby Bloch (1983), who concluded that THC was unlikely to be teratogenicin humans because "the few reports of teratogenicity in rodents andrabbits indicate that cannabinoids are, at most, weakly teratogenic inthese species" (p416).6.5.3.1 Human studiesThe findings from the small number of epidemiological studies of theeffects of cannabis use on human foetal development have been mixedfor a number of reasons. First, both the adverse reproductive outcomesand the prevalence of heavy cannabis use during pregnancy arerelatively rare events. Hence, unless cannabis use produces a largeincrease in the risk of abnormalities, very large sample sizes will berequired to detect adverse effects of cannabis use on foetaldevelopment. Many of the studies that have been conducted to date havebeen too small to detect effects of this size (e.g. Greenland et al,1982 a,b; Fried, 1980). There are also likely to be difficulties in identifying cannabis usersamong pregnant women. The stigma associated with illicit drug use,especially during pregnancy, may discourage honest reporting,compounding the usual problem of women accurately recalling drug usein early pregnancy, when they are asked about it late in theirpregnancy, or after the birth (Day et al, 1985). If, as seems likely,a substantial proportion of cannabis users are misclassified asnon-users, any relationship between cannabis use and adverse outcomeswill be attenuated, requiring even larger samples to detect it(Zuckerman, 1985). Even when large sample sizes have been obtained, there aredifficulties in interpreting any associations found between adversepregnancy outcomes and cannabis use. Cannabis users are more likely touse tobacco, alcohol and other illicit drugs during their pregnancy.They also differ from non-users in social class, education, nutrition,and other factors which predict an increased risk of experiencing anadverse outcome of pregnancy (Fried, 1980, 1982; National Academy ofScience, 1982; Tennes et al, 1985). These sources of confounding makeit difficult to unequivocally attribute any relationship betweenreproductive outcomes and cannabis use to cannabis use per se, ratherthan to other drug use, or other variables correlated with cannabisuse, such as poor maternal nutrition, and lack of prenatal care.Sophisticated forms of statistical control provide the only way ofassessing to what degree this may be the case, but its application islimited by the small number of cannabis smokers identified in moststudies.Given these difficulties, and the marked variation between studies inthe proportion of women who report cannabis use during pregnancy, thedegree of agreement between the small number of studies is moreimpressive than the disagreement that seems at first sight to such bea feature of this literature. There is reasonable consistency(although not unanimity) in the finding that cannabis use in pregnancyis associated with foetal growth retardation, as shown by reducedbirth weight (e.g. Gibson et al, 1983; Hatch and Bracken, 1986;Zuckerman et al, 1989), and length at birth (Tennes et al, 1985). Thisrelationship has been found in the best controlled studies, and it haspersisted after statistically controlling for potential confoundingvariables by sophisticated forms of statistical analysis (e.g. Hatchand Bracken, 1986; Zuckerman et al, 1989). Uncertainty remains about the interpretation of this finding. Is itbecause the "marijuana products were toxic to foetal development", asargued by Nahas and Latour (1992)? Is it because THC interferes withthe hormonal control of pregnancy shortening the gestation period, ashas been reported by Gibson et al (1983) and Zuckerman et al (1989)?The fact that the lower birth weight among the children of women whoused cannabis disappears after controlling for gestation length issupportive of the latter hypothesis. Is it because cannabis isprimarily smoked, since tobacco smoking has been consistently shown tobe associated with reduced birth weight (Fried, 1993)?The findings on the relationship between cannabis use and birthabnormalities are more mixed, and conclusions accordingly lesscertain. Early case reports of children with features akin to theFoetal Alcohol Syndrome born to women who had smoked cannabis but notused alcohol during pregnancy (e.g. Milman, 1982, p42) suggested thatcannabis may increase the risk of birth defects. Subsequent controlledstudies have produced mixed results. Four studies have reported noincreased rate of major congenital abnormalities among children bornto women who use cannabis (Gibson et al, 1983; Hingson et al, 1982;Tennes et al, 1985; Zuckerman et al, 1989). One study has reported a five-fold increased risk of children withfoetal alcohol like features being born to women who reported usingcannabis (Hingson et al, 1982). The significance of this finding isuncertain because the same study also found no relationship betweenself-reported alcohol use and "foetal alcohol syndrome" features. Thisis doubly surprising because of other evidence on the adverse effectsof alcohol, and because the epidemiological data indicates thatcannabis and alcohol use are associated (Norton and Colliver, 1988).An additional study reported an increase in the crude rate of birthabnormalities among children born to women who reported usingcannabis. This result was no longer statistically significant afteradjustment for confounders (Linn et al, 1983), although the confidenceinterval around this adjusted risk (OR=1.36) only narrowly includedthe null value (95 per cent CI: 0.97, 1.91). The study by Zuckerman et al provides the most convincing failure tofind an increased risk of birth defects among women who used cannabisduring pregnancy. A large sample of women was obtained, among whichthere was a substantial prevalence of cannabis use that was verifiedby urinalysis. There was a low rate of birth abnormalities among thecannabis users, and no suggestion of an increase by comparison withthe controls. On this finding, one might be tempted to attribute thesmall increased risk in the positive study (Linn et al, 1983) torecall bias, since the report of cannabis use during pregnancy wasobtained retrospectively after birth, when women who had given birthto children with malformations may have been more likely to recallcannabis use than those who did not. However, given the uncertaintyabout the validity of self-reported cannabis use in many of the nullstudies, it would be unwise to exonerate cannabis as a cause of birthdefects until larger, better controlled studies have been conducted. 6.5.4 Chromosomal abnormalities and genetic effectsTeratogenesis - interference with normal foetal development - is notthe only way in which cannabis use might adversely affect humanreproduction. Cannabis use could conceivably produce chromosomalabnormalities or genetic change in either parent which could betransmitted to their progeny. Although possible, there is no animal orhuman evidence that such events occur. The experimental evidenceindicates that "in vivo and in vitro exposure to purified cannabinoidsor cannabis resin failed to increase the frequency of chromosomaldamage or mutagenesis" (Bloch, 1983, p412). Marijuana smoke exposure,by contrast, "has been ... associated with chromosomal aberrations ...[such as] hypoploidy, mutagenicity in the Ames test ... " (Bloch,1983, p413). The latter fact is more relevant to an appraisal of therisk of cannabis users developing cancers from exposure to cannabissmoke rather than to the risks of transmissible genetic defects intheir offspring. Hollister (1986) discounted the evidence from cytogenetic studies thatcannabinoids may be mutagenic, as did the Institute of Medicine(1982). He also argued that assessing chromosomal damage was "more ofan art than a science", as indicated by poor inter-observer agreement,and that the clinical significance remained unclear because "similartypes and degrees of chromosomal changes have been reported inassociation with other drugs commonly used in medical practice withoutany clinical evidence of harm ..." (p4). Hollister concluded that"even if a small increase in chromosomal abnormalities is produced bycannabis, the clinical significance is doubtful" (p4).6.5.5 Post-natal developmentA further possibility which needs to be considered is that cannabisuse by the mother during pregnancy and breast feeding may affect thepost-natal development of the child. This could occur either becauseof the enduring effects of developmental impairment arising from inutero exposure, or because the infant continued to be exposed tocannabinoids via breast milk. These are not well investigatedpossibilities, although there are a small number of animal studieswhich provide suggestive evidence of such effects (Nahas, 1984; Nahasand Frick, 1987).The most extensive research evidence in humans comes from the OttawaProspective Prenatal Study (OPPS), which studied developmental andbehavioural abnormalities in children born to women who reported usingcannabis during pregnancy (Fried and colleagues, 1980, 1982, 1983,1985, 1986, 1989, 1990, 1992). In this study, mothers were assessedabout their drug use during pregnancy and their children were measuredon the Brazelton scales after birth, neurologically assessed at onemonth, and assessed again by standardised scales of ability at six and12 months. The results indicated that there was some developmentaldelay shortly after birth in the infants' visual system, and there wasalso an increased rate of tremors and startle among the children ofcannabis users. The behavioural effects discernible after birth had faded by onemonth, and no effects were detectable in performance on standardisedability tests at six and 12 months. Effects were subsequently reportedat 36 and 48-month follow-ups (Fried and Watkinson, 1990) but thesedid not persist in a more recent follow-up at 60 and 72 months (Fried,O'Connell, and Watkinson, 1992). These results are suggestive of atransient developmental impairment occurring among children who hadexperienced a shorter gestation and prematurity. There is apossibility that the tests used in later follow-ups are insufficientlysensitive to the subtle effects of prenatal cannabis exposure,although they were able to detect effects of maternal tobacco smokingduring pregnancy on behavioural development at 60 and 72 months (Friedand Watkins, 1990, 1992). Attempts to replicate the OPPS findings have been mixed. Tennes et al(1985) conducted a prospective study of the relationship betweencannabis use during pregnancy and postnatal development in 756 women,a third of whom reported using cannabis during pregnancy. The childrenwere assessed shortly after birth using the same measurementinstruments as Fried (1980), and a subset were followed up andassessed at one year of age. The findings failed to detect anydifferences in behavioural development between the children of usersand non-users after birth; i.e. there was no evidence of impaireddevelopment of the visual system, and no increased risk of tremor orstartle among the children of users. There was also no evidence of anydifferences at one year. More recently, Day et al (in press), havefollowed up children at age three born to 655 women who werequestioned about their substance use during pregnancy. They found arelationship between the mothers' cannabis use during pregnancy andthe children's performances on memory and verbal scales of theStanford-Binet Intelligence Scale. There is suggestive evidence that cannabis use during pregnancy mayhave a more serious and life threatening effect on post-nataldevelopment. This emerged from a case-control study of AcuteNonlymphoblastic Leukemia (ANLL), a rare form of childhood cancer(Neglia et al, 1991; Robinson et al, 1989). The study was not designedas a test of relationship between cannabis use and ANLL; it wasdesigned to examine the possible aetiological role of maternal andpaternal environmental exposures to petrochemicals, pesticides andradiation. Maternal drug use, including marijuana use before andduring pregnancy, were assessed as possible covariates to bestatistically controlled in any relationships observed between ANLLand environmental exposures. An unexpected but strong association was observed between maternalcannabis use and ANLL. The mothers of cases were 11 times more likelyto have used cannabis before and during their pregnancy than were themothers of controls. The relationship persisted after statisticaladjustment for many other risk factors. Comparisons of cases whosemothers did and did not use cannabis during their pregnancies showedthat cases with cannabis exposure were younger, and had a higherfrequency of ANLL with cell types of a specific pathological originthan did the cases without such exposure. The authors argued thatthese differences made it unlikely that the relationship was due tochance. Reporting bias on the part of the mothers of cases is an alternativeexplanation of the finding that is harder to discount. The reports ofcannabis use were obtained retrospectively after diagnosis of theANLL, so it is possible that the mothers of children who developedANLL were more likely to seek an explanation in something they didduring their pregnancies, and hence, may have been more likely toreport cannabis use than were mothers of controls. The authorsinvestigated this possibility by comparing the rates of cannabis usereported in this study with the rates reported in several earliercase-control studies of other childhood cancers that they hadconducted using the same methods. The rate was lower among controls inthe ANLL study, but even when the rate of cannabis use among thecontrols in these other studies was used the odds ratio was stillgreater than three and statistically significant. Nonetheless, sincethis was an unexpected finding which emerged from a large number ofexploratory analyses conducted in a single study, it should bereplicated as a matter of some urgency. 6.5.6 ConclusionsOn the balance of probabilities, high doses of THC probably disruptthe male and female reproductive systems in animals by interferingwith hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal system, reducing secretion oftestosterone, and hence reducing sperm production, motility, andviability in males, and interfering with the ovulatory cycle infemales. It is uncertain whether these effects also occur in humans,given the dose differences, the inconsistency in the literature onhuman males and the absence of research on human females. Even ifcannabinoids have such effects in humans, their clinical significancein normal healthy young adults is unclear. They may be of greaterconcern among young adolescents who are now more likely to use, andamong males with fertility impaired for other reasons.Cannabis use during pregnancy probably impairs foetal development,leading to smaller birthweight, perhaps as a consequence of a shorterperiod of gestation. It is possible although far from certain thatcannabis use during pregnancy produces a small increase in the risk ofbirth defects as a result of exposure of the foetus in utero. Prudencesuggests that until this issue is resolved, we should err in theconservative direction by recommending that women not use cannabisduring pregnancy, or when attempting to conceive (Hollister, 1986).There is not a great deal of evidence that cannabis use can producechromosomal or genetic abnormalities in either parent which could betransmitted to offspring. The available animal and in vitro evidencesuggests that the mutagenic properties of cannabis smoke are greaterthan those of THC, and are probably of greater relevance to the riskof users developing cancer than to the transmission of genetic defectsto children. There is suggestive evidence that infants exposed inutero to cannabis may experience transient behavioural anddevelopmental effects during the first few months after birth. Thereis also a single study which raises concern about an increased risk ofchildhood leukemia occurring among the children born to women who usedcannabis during their pregnancies. ReferencesAbel, E.L. (1985) Effects of prenatal exposure to cannabinoids. InT.M. Pinkert (ed) Current Research on the Consequences of MaternalDrug Abuse. National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No.59. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Aronow, W.S. and Cassidy, J. (1974) Effect of marijuana andplacebo-marijuana smoking on angina pectoris. New England Journal ofMedicine, 291, 65-67.Aronow, W.S. and Cassidy, J. (1975) Effect of smoking marijuana and ahigh-nicotine cigarette on angina pectoris. Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 17, 549-554.Benowitz, N.L. and Jones, R.T. (1975) Cardiovascular effects ofprolonged delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol ingestion. ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics,18, 287-297.Blackard, C. and Tennes, K. (1984) Human placental transfer ofcannabinoids. New England Journal of Medicine, 311, 797.Bloch, E. (1983) Effects of marijuana and cannabinoids onreproduction, endocrine function, development and chromosomes. In K.O.Fehr and H. Kalant (eds) Cannabis and Health Hazards. Toronto:Addiction Research Foundation.Bloom, J.W., Kaltenborn, W.T., Paoletti, P., Camilli, A. and Lebowitz,M.D. (1987) Respiratory effects of non-tobacco cigarettes. BritishMedical Journal, 295, 1516-1518.Cabral, G.A., Mishkin, E.M., Marciano-Cabral, F., Coleman, P., Harris,L. and Munson, A.E. (1986) Effect of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol onHerpes Simplex Virus Type 2 Vaginal Infection in the guinea pig(42325). Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology andMedicine, 182, 181-186.Caplan, G.A. and Brigham, B.A. (1989) Marijuana smoking and carcinomaof the tongue. Is there an association? Cancer, 66, 1005-1006.Carter, W. E, Coggins, W. and Doughty, P.L. (1980) Cannabis in CostaRica: A study of chronic marihuana use. Philadelphia: Institute forthe Study of Human Issues.Cates, W. and Pope, J.N. (1977) Gynecomastia and cannabis smoking: Anonassociation among US Army soldiers. American Journal of Surgery,134, 613-615.Choi, Y.S. and Perl, W.R. Cardiovascular effects of adolescent drugabuse. Journal of Adolescent Health Care, 1989, 10, 332-337.Copeland, K.C., Underwood, L.E., and Van Wyk, J.J. (1980) Marihuanasmoking and prepubertal arrest. Journal of Pediatrics, 96, 1079-1080.Dax, E.M., Pilotte, N.S., Adler, W.H., Nagel, J.E. and Lange, W.R.(1989) The effects of 9-ENE-Tetrahydrocannabinol on hormone release and immune function.Journal of Steroid Biochemistry, 34, 263-270.Day, N.L., Wagener, D.K. and Taylor, P.M. (1985) Measurement ofsubstance use during pregnancy: methodologic issues. In T.M. Pinkert(ed) Current Research on the Consequences of Maternal Drug Abuse.National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No. 59. Rockville,MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Day, N.L., Richardson, G.A., Goldschmidt, L, Robles, N., Taylor, P.M.,Stoffer, D.S., Cornelius, M.D. and Geva, D.D. (in press) The effect ofprenatal marijuana exposure in the cognitive development of offspringat age three. Neonatology and Teratology.Doll, R. and Peto, R. (1980) The Causes of Cancer. Oxford UniversityPress.Donald, P.J. (1991a) Marijuana and upper aerodigestive tractmalignancy in young patients. In G. Nahas and C. Latour (eds)Physiopathology of Illicit Drugs: Cannabis, Cocaine, Opiates. Oxford:Pergamon Press.Donald, P.J. (1991b) Advanced malignancy in the young marijuanasmoker. In H. Freidman, S. Specter, and T.W. Klein (eds) Drugs ofAbuse, Immunity, and Immunodeficiency. London: Plenum Press.Fligiel, S.E.G., Beals, T.F., Venkat, H., Stuth, S. Gong, H. andTashkin, D.P. (1988) Pulmonary pathology in marijuana smokers. In G.Chesher, P. Consroe, and R. Musty (eds) Marijuana: An InternationalResearch Report. National Campaign Against Drug Abuse Monograph Number7. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.Freeman, G.L. (1983) Allergic skin test reactivity to marijuana in thesouthwest. The Western Journal of Medicine, 138, 829-831.Fried, P.A. (1980) Marihuana use by pregnant women: Neurobehaviouraleffects in neonates. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 6, 415-424.Fried, P.A. (1982) Marihuana use by pregnant women and effects onoffspring: an update. Neurobehavioral Toxicology and Teratology, 4,451-454.Fried, P.A. (1985) Postnatal consequences of maternal marijuana use.In T.M. Pinkert (ed) Current Research on the Consequences of MaternalDrug Abuse. National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No.59. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Fried, P.A. (1986) Marijuana and human pregnancy. In I. Chasnoff (ed)Drug Use in Pregnancy: Mother and Child. Lancaster: MTP Press.Fried, P.A. (1989) Postnatal consequences of maternal marijuana use inhumans. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 562, 123-132.Fried, P.A. (1993) Prenatal exposure to tobacco and marijuana: Effectsduring pregnancy, infancy, and early childhood. Clinical Obstetricsand Gynecology, 36, 319-337.Fried, P.A. and Watkinson, B. (1990) 36- and 48-month neurobehavioralfollow-up of children prenatally exposed to marijuana, cigarettes andalcohol. Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 11, 49-58.Fried, P.A., Buckingham, M. and Von Kulmiz, P. (1983) Marihuana useduring pregnancy and perinatal risk factors. American Journal ofObstetrics and Gynecology, 146, 992-994. Fried, P.A., O'Connell, Watkinson, B. (1992) 60- and 72-monthfollow-up of children prenatally exposed to marijuana, cigarettes, andalcohol: cognitive and language assessment. Developmental andBehavioral Pediatrics, 13, 383-391. Friedman, H. (1991) Cannabis and immunity. In G. Nahas and C. Latour(eds) Physiopathology of Illicit Drugs: Cannabis, Cocaine, Opiates.Oxford: Pergamon Press. Gawin, F.H. and Ellinwood, E.H. (1988) Cocaine and other stimulants:Actions, abuse and treatment. New England Journal of Medicine, 318,1173-1182.Gibson, G.T., Baghurst, P.A. and Colley, D.P. (1983) Maternal alcohol,tobacco and cannabis consumption and the outcome of pregnancy.Australian and New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 23,15-19.Gong, H., Fliegel, S., Tashkin, D.P. and Barbers, R.G. (1987)Tracheobronchial changes in habitual, heavy smokers of marijuana withand without tobacco. American Review of Respiratory Disease, 136,142-149.Greenland, S., Staisch, K.J., Brown, N. and Gross, S.J. (1982a) Theeffects of marijuana use during pregnancy. I. A preliminaryepidemiologic study. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,143, 408-413. (a)Greenland, S., Staisch, K.J., Brown, N. and Gross, S.J. (1982b)Effects of marijuana on human pregnancy, labor and delivery.Neurobehavioral Toxicology and Teratology, 4, 447-450. (b)Grossman, C.J. and Wilson, E.J. (1992) The immune system: mechanismsthat counteract disease. Alcohol Health and Research World, 16, 5-14.Harmon, J. and Aliapoulios, M.A. (1972) Gynecomastia in marihuanausers. New England Journal of Medicine, 287, 936.Hatch, E.E. and Bracken, M.B. (1986) Effect of marijuana use inpregnancy on fetal growth. American Journal of Epidemiology, 124,986-993.Hembree, W.C., Nahas, G.G., Zeidenberg, P. and Huang, H.F.S. (1991) InG. Nahas and C. Latour (eds) G. Nahas and C. Latour (eds)Physiopathology of Illicit Drugs: Cannabis, Cocaine, Opiates. Oxford:Pergamon Press. Henderson, R.L., Tennant, F.S., and Guerry, R. (1972) Respiratorymanifestations of hashish smoking. Archives of Otolaryngology, 95,248-251.Hingson, R., Alpert, J., Day, N., Dooling, E., Kayne, H., Morelock,S., Oppenheimer, E. and Zuckerman, B. (1982) Effects of maternaldrinking and marijuana use on fetal growth and development.Pediatrics, 70, 539-546.Hollister, L.E. (1986) Health aspects of cannabis. PharmacologicalReviews, 38, 1-20.Hollister, L.E. (1992) Marijuana and immunity. Journal of PsychoactiveDrugs, 24, 159-164.Holman, C.D., Armstrong, B. et al (1988).The Quantification ofDrug-Caused Morbidity and Mortality in Australia. Canberra:Commonwealth Department of Community Services and Health. Huber, G.L., Griffith, D.L. and Langsjoen, P.M. (1988) The effects ofmarihuana on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. In G.Chesher, P. Consroe, and R. Musty (eds) Marijuana: An InternationalResearch Report. National Campaign Against Drug Abuse Monograph Number7, Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service. Institute of Medicine. (1982) Marijuana and Health. Washington, DC:Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press International Agency on Cancer (1990) Cancer: Causes, Occurrence andControl. (Ed) L. Tomatis. Lyon: International Agency on Cancer.Jones, R.T. and Benowitz, N. (1976) The 30-day trip - clinical studiesof cannabis tolerance and dependence. In M Braude and S. Szara (eds)Pharmacology of Marijuana. Volume 2. New York: Academic Press.Jones, R.T. (1984) Cardiovascular effects of cannabinoids. In D.J.Harvey, W. Paton and G.G. Nahas (eds) Marihuana '84: Proceedings ofthe Oxford Symposium on Cannabis. Oxford: IRL Press.Kaslow, R.A., Blackwelder, W.C., Ostrow, D.G., Yerg, D., Palenick, J.,Coulson, A.H., and Valdiserri, R.O. (1989) No evidence for a role ofalcohol or other psychoactive drugs in accelerating immunodeficiencyin HIV-1-positive individuals: A report from the Multicenter AIDSCohort Study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 261,3424-3429.Kolodny, R.C., Masters, W.H., Kolodner, R.M., and Toro, G. (1974)Depression of plasma testosterone levels after chronic intensivemarihuana use. New England Journal of Medicine, 290, 872-874. Lau, R.J., Tubergen, D.G., Barr, M., Domino, E.F., Benowitz, N. andJones, R.T. (1976) Phytohemagglutinin-induced lymphocytetransformation in humans receiving delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol.Science, 192, 805-807.Leuchtenberger, C. (1983) Effects of marihuana (cannabis) smoke oncellular biochemistry of in vitro test systems. In K.O. Fehr and H.Kalant (Eds) Cannabis and Health Hazards. Toronto: Addiction ResearchFoundation.Linn, S., Schoenbaum, S., Monson, R., Rosner, R., Stubblefield, P.C.,and Ryan, K.J. (1983) The association of marijuana use with outcome ofpregnancy. American Journal of Public Health, 73, 1161-1164.Maykut, M.O. (1984) Health Consequences of Acute and Chronic MarihuanaUse. Oxford: Pergamon Press.Mendelson, J.H., Kuehnle, J., Ellingboe, J. and Babor, T.F. (1974)Plasma testosterone levels before, during, and after chronic marihuanasmoking. New England Journal of Medicine, 291, 1051-1055. Mendelson, J.H. and Mello, N.K. (1984) Effects of marijuana onneuroendocrine hormones in human males and females. In M Braude andJ.P. Ludford (eds) Marijuana Effects on the Endocrine and ReproductiveSystems. Rockville, Maryland: National Institute on Drug Abuse.Milman, D.H. (1982) Psychological effects of cannabis in adolescence.In National Institute on Drug Abuse. Marijuana and Youth: ClinicalObservations on Motivation and Learning. Rockville, Maryland: NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse. . Mishkin, E.M., and Cabral, G.A. (1985) Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinoldecreases host resistance to herpes simplex virus 2 vaginal infectionin the B6C3F1 mouse. Journal of General Virology, 66, 2539-2549.Morahan, P.S., Klykken, P.C., Smith, S.H., Harris, L.S. and Munson,A.E. (1979) Effects of cannabinoids on host resistance to Listeriamonocytogenes and Herpes Simplex Virus. Infection and Immunity, 23,670-674.Munson, A.E., and Fehr, K.O. (1983) Immunological effects of cannabis.In K.O. Fehr and H. Kalant (Eds) Cannabis and Health Hazards. Toronto:Addiction Research Foundation Nahas, G.G. (1984) Toxicology and pharmacology. In G.G. NahasMarihuana in Science and Medicine New York: Raven Press.Nahas, G.G. and Frick, H (1987) Developmental effects of cannabis.Neurotoxicology, 7, 381-395.Nahas, G. and Latour, C. (1992) The human toxicity of marijuana.Medical Journal of Australia, 156, 495-497.Nahas, G.G., Desoize, J.P., Armand, J.P., Hsu, J. and Morishima A.(1976) Natural cannabinoids: apparent depression of nucleic acids andprotein synthesis in cultured human lymphocytes. In M Braude and S.Szara (Eds) The Pharmacology of Marihuana. New York: Raven Press.National Academy of Science. (1982) Marijuana and Health. Washington,DC: Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press.Neglia, J.P., Buckley, J.D. and Robinson, L.L. (1991) Maternalmarijuana use and leukemia in offspring. In G. Nahas and C. Latour(eds) Physiopathology of Illicit Drugs: Cannabis, Cocaine, Opiates.Oxford: Pergamon Press. Norton, R. and Colliver, J. (1988) Prevalence and patterns of combinedalcohol and marijuana use. Journal of Studies in Alcohol, 49, 378-380.Nossal, G. (1993) Life, death and the immune system. ScientificAmerican, 269, 21-30.Nowlan, R. and Cohen, S. (1977) Tolerance to marijuana: heart rate andsubjective "high". Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 22,550-556.Pearl, W. and Choi, Y.S. (1992) Marijuana as a cause of myocardialinfarction. International Journal of Cardiology, 34, 353-354.Podczeck, A, Frohmer, K. and Steinbach, K. (1990) Acute myocardialinfarction in juvenile patients with normal coronary arteries.International Journal of Cardiology, 30, 359-361. Polen, M.R., Sidney, S., Tekawa, I.S., Sadler, M. and Friedman, G.D.(1993) Health care use by frequent marijuana smokers who do not smoketobacco. Western Journal of Medicine, 158, 596-601.Robinson, L.I., Buckley, J.D., Daigle, A.E., Wells, R., Benjamin, D.,Arthur, D and Hammond, G.D. (1989) Maternal drug use and the risk ofchildhood nonlymphoblastic leukemia among offspring: An epidemiologicinvestigation implicating marijuana. Cancer, 63, 1904-1911.Rosenkrantz, H. (1985) Cannabis components and responses ofneuroendochrine-reproductive targets: an overview. In D.J. Harvey, W.Paton and G.G. Nahas (eds) Marihuana '84: Proceedings of the OxfordSymposium on Cannabis. Oxford: IRL Press.Rubin, V. and Comitas, L. (1975) Ganja in Jamaica: A MedicalAnthropological Study of Chronic Marihuana Use. The Hague: MoutonPublishers.Sherman, M.P., Campbell, L.A., Gong, H., Roth, M.D. and Tashkin, D.(1991) Antimicrobial and respiratory burst characteristics ofpulmonary alveolar macrophages recovered from smokers of marijuanaalone, smokers of tobacco alone, smokers of marijuana and tobacco, andnonsmokers. American Review of Respiratory Disease, 144, 1351-1356.Stefanis, C., Dornbush, R. and Fink, M. (eds) (1977) Hashish: Studiesof Long-Term Use. New York: Raven Press.Tashkin, D.P. (1988) Summary of the Session on Pulmonary Effects. InG. Chesher, P. Consroe, and R. Musty (eds) Marijuana: An InternationalResearch Report. National Campaign Against Drug Abuse Monograph Number7. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.Tashkin, D.P. (1993) Is frequent marijuana smoking harmful to health?Western Journal of Medicine, 158, 635-637.Tashkin, D.P., Coulson, A.H., Clark, V.A., Simmons, M., Bourque, L.B.,Duann, S., Spivey, G.H. and Gong, H. (1987) Respiratory symptoms andlung function in habitual heavy smokers of marijuana alone, smokers ofmarijuana and tobacco, smokers of tobacco alone, and nonsmokers.American Review of Respiratory Diseases, 135, 209-216.Tashkin, D.P., Wu, T.C., Djahed, B., and Rose, J.E. (1988) Smokingtopography and delivery of insoluble particulates and carbon monoxideto the lung during the smoking of tobacco and marihuana of varyingpotency in habitual smokers of both substances. In G. Chesher, P.Consroe, and R. Musty (eds) Marijuana: An International ResearchReport. National Campaign Against Drug Abuse Monograph Number 7.Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.Tashkin, D.P., Fligiel, S., Wu, T.C., Gong, H., Barbers, R.G.,Coulson, A.H., Simmons, M.S., and Beals, T.F. (1990) Effects ofhabitual use of marijuana and/or cocaine on the lung. In C.N. Chiangand R.L. Hawks (Eds) Research Findings on Smoking of AbusedSubstances. National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph No.99, Rockville, Maryland: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Taylor, F.M. (1988) Marijuana as a potential respiratory tractcarcinogen: a retrospective analysis of a community hospitalpopulation. Southern Medical Journal, 81, 1213-1216.Tennant, F.S., Preble, M., Prendergast, T.J. and Ventry, P. (1971)Medical manifestations associated with hashish. Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 216, 1965-1969.Tennant, F.S. (1980) Histopathologic and clinical abnormalities of therespiratory system in chronic hashish smokers. In L.S. Harris (ed)Problems of Drug Dependence, 1979, Volume 127. Rockville, Maryland:National Institute on Drug Abuse Tennant, F.S. (1983) Clinical toxicology of cannabis use. In K.O. Fehrand H. Kalant (eds) Cannabis and Health Hazards. Toronto: AddictionResearch Foundation.Tennes, K., Aritable, N., Blackard, C., Boyles, C., Hassoun, B.,Holmes, L., and Kreye, M. (1985) Marihuana: prenatal and postnatalexposure in the human. In T.M. Pinkert (ed) Current Research on theConsequences of Maternal Drug Abuse. National Institute on Drug AbuseResearch Monograph No. 59. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Healthand Human Services.Vokes, E.E., Weichelsbaum, R.R., Lippman, S.M., and Hong, W.K. (1993)Head and neck cancer. New England Journal of Medicine, 328, 183-194.Wallace, J.M., Tashkin, D., Oishi, J.S. and Barbers, R.G. (1988)Peripheral blood lymphocyte subpopulations and mitogen responsivenessin tobacco and marijuana smokers. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 1988,20, 9-14.Wallace, J.M., Oishsi, J.S., Barbers, R.G., Simmons, M.S. and Tashkin,D.P. (1993) Lymphocytic subpopulation profiles in bronchoalveolarlavage fluid and peripheral blood from tobacco and marijuana smokers.Chest (in press).Wenger, T., Croix, D., Tramu, G., and Leonardeli, J. (1992) Effects ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on pregnancy, puberty and theneuroendocrine system. In L. Murphy and A. Bartke (eds)Marijuana/Cannabinoids: Neurobiology and Neurophysiology. Boca Raton:CRC Press.Wu, T., Tashkin, D.P., Djahed, B. and Rose, J.E. (1988) Pulmonaryhazards of smoking marijuana as compared with tobacco. New EnglandJournal of Medicine, 318, 347-351.Zimmerman, S. and Zimmerman, A.M. (1990/1991) Genetic effects ofmarijuana. International Journal of the Addictions, 25, 19-33.Zuckerman, B. (1985) Developmental consequences of maternal drug useduring pregnancy. In T.M. Pinkert (ed) Current Research on theConsequences of Maternal Drug Abuse. NIDA Research Monograph No. 59,Department of Health and Human Services.Zuckerman, B., Frank, D., Hingson, R., Amaro, H., Levenson, S., Kayne,H., Parker, S., Vinci, R., Aboagye, K., Fried, L., Cabral, H.,Timperi, R., and Bauchner, H. (1989) Effects of maternal marijuana andcocaine use on fetal growth. New England Journal of Medicine, 320,762-768. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-12IA087-000627-B016-196http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051756 text/html 335169HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:16:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:02:41 GMTContent-length: 334950 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use:chapter 7 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis usechapter 7 National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 7. The psychological effects of chronic cannabis use A major concern about the psychological consequences of cannabis usehas been the possible effects of its chronic use on psychologicaladjustment in general, and its impact upon motivation and performancein occupational and social roles in particular. There have been twovariations on this concern depending upon the age of the cannabisuser. Among adults, an "amotivational syndrome" has been described, inwhich chronic cannabis users become apathetic, socially withdrawn, andperform at a level of everyday functioning well below their capacityprior to their cannabis use. Among adolescents, the concern has beenabout the effects of heavy cannabis use on motivation to undertake theeducational and other psychological tasks that are an essential partof the transition from childhood to adulthood. The evidence for eachof these adverse outcomes of heavy cannabis use will be consideredseparately, beginning with the effects on adolescent development,which have understandably provoked the greatest concern, and promptedthe most research.7.1 Effects on adolescent development The effects of heavy cannabis use on adolescent development are ofspecial concern for a number of reasons. First, adolescents are minorswhose decisions about whether or not to use drugs are notconventionally regarded as free and informed in the way that adultchoices are (Kleiman, 1989). Second, adolescence is an importantperiod of transition from childhood to adulthood, in which regularcannabis intoxication may be expected to interfere with educationalachievement, the process of disengagement from dependence uponparents, the development of relationships with peers, and makingimportant life choices, such as whether, whom and when to marry, andwhat occupation to pursue (Baumrind and Moselle, 1985; Polich,Ellickson, Reuter and Kahan, 1984). Third, the age at which drug usebegins has implications for subsequent drug use and health andwell-being. Early initiation of cannabis use predicts an increasedrisk of escalation to heavier cannabis use, and to the use of otherillicit drugs. It also means a longer period of heavy use, and hence,an increased risk of experiencing any adverse health effects thatchronic cannabis use may have in later adult life (Kleiman, 1989;Polich, Ellickson, Reuter and Kahan, 1984). Fourth, since adolescenceis a time of risk-taking, the use of any intoxicant, whether alcoholor cannabis while driving a car, increases the risks of accidentalinjury, and hence of premature death (Kleiman, 1989; Polich,Ellickson, Reuter and Kahan, 1984). The type of evidence that initially excited concern about the effectsof chronic cannabis use on adolescents came from clinical case studiesin which bright adolescents' use of cannabis escalated to dailycannabis use, and the use of other illicit drugs, leading to decliningsocial and educational performance, as evidenced by high schooldrop-out, and immersion in the illicit drug subculture (e.g. Kolanskyand Moore, 1971; Lantner, 1982; Milman, 1982; Smith and Seymour,1982). In some of these cases, the syndrome remitted after theadolescent had been abstinent from cannabis for some months (Meeks,1982; Smith and Seymour, 1982). Nonetheless, the evidence was largelyanecdotal and so of limited value in making causal inferences aboutthe contribution that cannabis made to the development of theseoutcomes. It did not, that is, permit a decision to be made as to whatextent cannabis use was a symptom rather than a cause of personality,or other psychiatric disorders, or a form of adolescent rebellionagainst parental values.The concern about the adverse effects of cannabis use on adolescentdevelopment in the late 1970s prompted a number of large-scaleprospective epidemiological studies of the antecedents, and to alimited degree, the consequences of adolescent drug use (e.g. Kandel,1988; Kaplan, Martin and Robbins, 1982; Newcombe and Bentler, 1988).These studies have attempted to tease out the contributions of theusers' pre-existing personal and social characteristics from thespecific effects of drug use. Some of these studies have alsoattempted to examine the impact of illicit drug use in adolescenceupon a number of social and personal outcomes in early adult life(e.g. Kandel, 1988; Newcombe and Bentler, 1988). The most important ofthese studies are reviewed below. 7.1.1 Is cannabis a gateway drug?A major concern about cannabis has been that its use in adolescencemay lead to, or increase the risk of using other more dangerousillicit drugs, such as cocaine and heroin (DuPont, 1984; Goode, 1974;Kleiman, 1992). The most popular evidence for this hypothesis is thefact that the majority of heroin and cocaine users used cannabisbefore heroin and cocaine. Such evidence is weak. In the absence ofcomparative data on the prevalence of cannabis use by non-heroinaddicts we are unable to decide if there is an association betweencannabis and heroin use. Even if there is an association, alternativeexplanations of its possible causal significance have to be evaluatedand excluded (Goode, 1974). There is now abundant evidence of an association between cannabis andheroin use from a series of cross-sectional studies of adolescent druguse in the United States and elsewhere, including Australia. In thelate 1970s and into the 1990s in the United States there was a strongrelationship between degree of current involvement with cannabis andthe use of other illicit drugs such as heroin and cocaine users.Kandel (1984), for example, found that the prevalence of other illicitdrug use increased with current degree of marijuana involvement: 7 percent of those who had never used marijuana, 33 per cent of those whohad used in the past, and 84 per cent of those who were currentlydaily cannabis users, had used other illicit drugs. Current cannabisusers were also likely to have used a larger number of different typesof illicit drugs. Cross-sectional data on drug use among Australian adults in 1993 havealso shown that those who have tried cannabis are more likely to haveused heroin, and the greater the frequency of cannabis use, the higherthe probability of their having tried heroin (see Donnelly and Hall,1994). In the 1993 NCADA survey of drug use in Australia, for example,the crude risk of using heroin was approximately 30 times higher amongthose who have used cannabis than those who have not (even though 96per cent of cannabis users had not used heroin) (see Donnelly andHall, 1994).The relationships between cannabis and heroin use observed in thecross-sectional studies have also been observed in the small number oflongitudinal studies of drug use. In one of the first such studiesRobins, Darvish and Murphy (1970) followed up a cohort of 222African-American adolescents identified from school records at age 33,and interviewed them retrospectively about their drug use inadolescence and young adulthood, and their adult adjustment. Theyfound a higher rate of progression to heroin use among the young menwho had used cannabis before age 20. These early results have been confirmed and elaborated upon in theextensive research on adolescent drug use by Kandel and her colleagues(e.g. Kandel et al, 1986). These investigators have identified apredictable sequence of involvement with licit and illicit drugs amongAmerican adolescents, in which progressively fewer adolescents triedeach drug class, but in which almost all of those who tried drug typeslater in the sequence had used all drugs earlier in the sequence(Kandel and Faust, 1975). Typically, psychoactive drug use began withthe use of the legal drugs alcohol and tobacco, which were almostuniversally used. A smaller group of the alcohol and tobacco users(although often the majority of adolescents) initiated cannabis use,and those whose progressed to regular cannabis use were more likely touse the hallucinogens and "pills" (amphetamines and tranquillisers).The heaviest users of "pills", in turn, were more likely to usecocaine and heroin. Generally, the earlier the initiation of any druguse, and the heavier the use of any particular drug in the sequence,the more likely the user was to use the next drug type in the sequence(Kandel, 1978; Kandel et al, 1984; Kandel, 1988). This sequence of drug involvement has largely been confirmed by otherresearchers. Donovan and Jessor (1983), for example, found much thesame sequence of initiation, with the variation that when problematicalcohol use was distinguished from non-problem alcohol use, thenmarijuana use preceded problem drinking in the sequence ofprogression. These sequences have also been observed in the smallnumber of prospective studies which have followed a cohort ofadolescents into early adulthood and examined the patterns ofprogression in drug use (e.g. Kaplan et al, 1982; Yamaguchi andKandel, 1984a, b). For the majority (87 per cent) of men "the patternof progression is one in which the use of alcohol precedes marijuana;alcohol and marijuana precede other illicit drugs; and alcohol,cigarettes and marijuana precede the use of prescribed psychoactivedrugs" (Yamaguchi and Kandel, 1984a, p671). Among the majority ofwomen (86 per cent) the sequence was such that "either alcohol orcigarettes precedes marijuana; alcohol, cigarettes and marijuanaprecede other illicit drugs; alcohol and either cigarettes ormarijuana precede prescribed psychoactive drugs" (Yamaguchi andKandel, 1984a, p671).Yamaguchi and Kandel (1984b) also examined variables which predictedprogression to illicit drug use beyond cannabis use. They werespecifically interested in "whether the use of certain drugs lower inthe sequence influences the initiation of higher drugs" (p673) andused sophisticated statistical methods to discover if the statisticalrelationship between cannabis use and subsequent illicit drug usepersisted after controlling for temporally prior variables, such aspre-existing adolescent behaviours and attitudes, interpersonalfactors, and age of initiation into drug use. If the relationshippersisted after controlling for these variables, confidence wasincreased that the relationship was a causal one. Yamaguchi and Kandel found that the relationship between marijuana useand progression to the use of other illicit drugs was not onlyexplained by friends' marijuana use (which also predictedprogression). Among men, the age of initiation of marijuana was animportant modifier of this relationship: men who initiated marijuanause under the age of 16, were "even more likely to initiate otherillicit drugs than is expected from the longer period of riskresulting from an early age of onset" (p677). Most importantly,"persons who have not used marijuana have very small probabilities ofinitiating other drugs, ranging from 0.01 to 0.03 (men) or 0.02(women)" indicating that in their cohort, "marijuana appears to be anecessary condition for the initiation of other illicit drugs" (p677).The work of Kandel and her colleagues and that of other researchers(e.g. O'Donnell and Clayton, 1982) has been interpreted by some asconfirming the "gateway drug" hypothesis or "the stepping stone theoryof drug use" (DuPont, 1984). Although it is not always clear what isbeing claimed by proponents of this hypothesis, it does not imply thata high proportion of those who experiment with marijuana will go on touse heroin. Indeed, the overwhelming majority of cannabis users do notuse harder drugs like heroin. Kandel has explicitly disavowed thisinterpretation of her work: The notion of stages in drug behavior does not imply that these stagesare either obligatory or universal ... the model is not meant to be avariant of the controversial `stepping-stone' theory of drug addictionin which use of marijuana was assumed inexorably to lead to the use ofother illicit 'hard' drugs, especially heroin (Kandel, 1988, pp58-61).The view that cannabis use generally leads to the use of other illicitdrugs is contradicted by the evidence from the studies of Kandel andher colleagues. Cannabis use is largely a behaviour of lateadolescence and early adulthood. Kandel's research has shown that ithas been initiated by the age of 19 in 90 per cent of those who everused cannabis, and initiation is rare after 20 years. The frequency ofits use peaks in the early 20s, when 50 per cent of males and 33 percent of females reported using, and rapidly declines by age 23, with"the assumption of the roles of adulthood .. getting married, enteringthe labor force, or becoming a parent .. that may be incompatible withinvolvement in illicit drugs and deviant lifestyles" (Kandel andLogan, 1984, p665). Hence, although those who use cannabis are morelikely to use other illicit drugs than those who do not, it is moreusual for cannabis use to decline in early adult life, with only aminority continuing to use regularly, or progressing to the use ofmore dangerous illicit drugs. Even in the case of the minority (aboutone in four) who progress to daily cannabis use, the majority ceasetheir use by the mid to late 20s (Kandel and Davies, 1992).A better supported hypothesis is that cannabis use, especially heavycannabis use, greatly increases the chances of progressing to the useof other illicit drugs. But even this type of relationship does notnecessarily mean that cannabis use "causes" heroin use. As Kandel(1988) has stressed, the existence of sequential stages of progressiondoes not "necessarily imply causal linkages among different drugs".The sequences "could simply reflect the association of each class ofdrugs with different ages of initiation or [with pre-existing]individual attributes, rather than the specific effects of the use ofone class of drug on the use of another" (Kandel, 1988, p61). A plausible alternative hypothesis is that of selective recruitment.That is, there is a selective recruitment to cannabis use of deviantand nonconformist persons with a predilection for the use ofintoxicating substances. On this hypothesis, the sequence in whichdrugs are typically used reflects their differential availability andsocietal disapproval (e.g. Donovan and Jessor, 1983). Further, thesequence of initiation into drug use is held to be a consequence ofthe availability of different drugs at different ages, with the use ofthe least available, and most strongly socially disapproved "hard"drugs being last. This hypothesis exculpates cannabis use as a causeof progression to other illicit drug use, since cannabis use and otherillicit drug use are the common consequences of adolescent devianceand nonconformity (Kaplan et al, 1982; Newcombe and Bentler, 1988). The selective recruitment hypothesis has received support from anumber of studies. There are substantial correlations between variousforms of nonconforming adolescent behaviour, such as, high schooldrop-out, early premarital sexual experience and pregnancy,delinquency, and alcohol and illicit drug use (Jessor and Jessor,1977; Osgood et al, 1988). All such behaviours are correlated withnonconformist and rebellious attitudes and anti-social conduct inchildhood (Shedler and Block, 1990) and early adolescence (Jessor andJessor, 1977; Newcombe and Bentler, 1988). Recent research indicatesthat those who are most likely to use other illicit drugs, namely,those who become regular cannabis users (Kandel and Davies, 1992), aremore likely to have a history of anti-social behaviour (Brook et al,1992; McGee and Feehan, 1993), nonconformity and alienation (Brook etal, 1992; Jessor and Jessor, 1978; Shedler and Block, 1990), performmore poorly at school (Bailey et al, 1992; Hawkins et al, 1992; Kandeland Davies, 1992), and use drugs to deal with personal distress andnegative affect (Kaplan and Johnson, 1992; Shedler and Block, 1990).In general, the more of these risk factors that adolescents have, themore likely they are to progress to more intensive involvement withcannabis, and hence, to use other illicit drugs (Brook et al, 1992;Newcombe, 1992; Scheier and Newcombe, 1991). One way of testing the selective recruitment hypothesis is to discoverwhether cannabis use continues to predict progression to "harder"illicit drugs after statistically controlling for pre-existingdifferences in personality and other characteristics (e.g. deviance)between cannabis users and non-users. In several such studies (e.g.Kandel et al, 1986; O'Donnell and Clayton, 1982; Robins et al, 1970)the relationship between cannabis and heroin use has been reduced whenpre-existing differences have been controlled for, but in all casesthe relationship has persisted, albeit in attenuated form. O'Donnelland Clayton (1982) have interpreted this type of finding as strongevidence in favour of a causal connection between cannabis and heroinuse. The credibility of such an argument for a causal interpretation of therelationship between cannabis and heroin use depends upon whether themost important prior characteristics have been adequately measured andstatistically controlled for in these studies. It would be difficultto argue that this has been the case. Kandel et al (1986), forexample, were unable to measure the users' attitudes and familycharacteristics at the time of drug initiation, or differential drugavailability, either or both of which "may account for the observedrelationships between the early and late stage drugs" (p679). In boththe studies of O'Donnell and Clayton (1982) and Robins et al (1970)the measures of deviance "prior" to drug use were assessedretrospectively with unknown validity. Baumrind (1983) has contestedthe ability of these studies to exclude the alternative hypothesisthat personality differences which preceded cannabis use were thecauses of the progression to heroin use. She has argued that "it issafer in the absence of evidence of external validity" of thesemeasures to assume that the relationship between marijuana use andheroin use is spurious.Even if we assume for the purpose of argument that the associationbetween cannabis and heroin use is not wholly explained bypre-existing differences in deviant behaviour between cannabis usersand non-users, it remains to be explained how cannabis use "causes"heroin use. It may seem superficially plausible to suggest that thereis something about the pharmacological effect of cannabis whichpredisposes heavy users to progress to the use of other intoxicants,but there is no obvious pharmacological mechanism for suchprogression. Is it the development of tolerance to the positiveeffects of cannabis, or to some form of experiential satiation withits effects? Does the euphoria of cannabis awaken appetite forintoxication by other drugs? These possibilities are difficult totest. Any pharmacological explanation in which more potent illicit drugsserve as "substitutes" for less potent drugs like alcohol and cannabishas to contend with a number of facts. As already indicated, there arerelatively low rates of progression from cannabis use to the sustaineduse of other illicit drugs; experimentation and abandonment is morethe norm. Even those heavy cannabis users who use other illicit drugscontinue to use cannabis as well as the new illicit drugs. As Donovanand Jessor (1983) have noted: "...`harder' drugs do not serve assubstitutes for `softer' drugs. Rather, a deepening of regularsubstance use appears to go along with a widening of experience in thedrug domain" (p548-549). There is also good reason for believing that the pattern ofprogression observed among American adolescents in the 1970s wasconditioned by historical differences in drug availability (Kandel,1978). Historical evidence from among earlier cohorts of heroin usersindicated that prior involvement with cannabis was confined to thosegeographic areas of the US in which it was readily available (Goode,1974). Research on African-American adolescents also showed avariation in the sequence of drug use, with the use of more readilyavailable cocaine and heroin preceding the use of the less readilyavailable hallucinogens and "pills" (Kandel, 1978). Most dramatically,American soldiers in Vietnam were more likely to use heroin thanalcohol because heroin was cheaper and more freely available thanalcohol to most American troops who were younger than the minimumdrinking age of 21 (Robins, 1993).The historical and geographical variations in sequencing of illicitdrug use suggest a sociological explanation of both the sequencing ofillicit drug use and the higher rates of progression to heroin useamong heavy cannabis users. One of the most popular sociologicalhypotheses is that cannabis use increases the chance of using otherillicit drugs by increasing contact with other drug users as part of adrug using subculture. On this hypothesis, heavy cannabis use leads togreater involvement in a drug using subculture which, in turn, exposescannabis users to the example of peers who have used other illicitdrugs. Such exposure also increases opportunities to use other illicitdrugs because of their increased availability within their socialcircle, and places the individual in a social context in which illicitdrug use is encouraged and approved (e.g. Goode, 1974). Although plausible, there is surprisingly little direct evidence onthe drug subculture hypothesis. Goode (1974) presented data from thelate 1960s indicating that the number of friends who used heroin was astronger predictor of heroin use than was frequency of cannabis use,arguing that the "correlation between frequency of use and the use ofdangerous drugs ... [is] the result of interaction and involvementwith others who use" (p332). These observations have been supported byKandel's (1984) finding that the strongest predictor of continuedcannabis use in early adulthood was the number of friends who werecannabis users. The hypotheses of selective recruitment and socialisation in adrug-using subculture are not mutually exclusive; both processes couldindependently contribute to the relationship between regular marijuanause and progression to heroin use (Goode, 1974). As already noted, theselective recruitment hypothesis is supported by the consistentfinding of pre-existing differences between those who use marijuanaand those who do not, which are most marked in those whose continueduse of cannabis predicts their use of other illicit drugs. Onceinitiated into cannabis use, heavy users become further distinguishedfrom non-users and those who have discontinued their use by theintensity of their social relations and activities which involve theuse of marijuana, such as mixing with other drug users, and buying andselling illicit drugs. The illegality of these activities confers onthe use, possession and sale of cannabis a socialising and subculturalinfluence not possessed by the possession and use of the legal drugs(Goode, 1974).On the available evidence, the case for a pharmacological explanationof the role of cannabis use in progression to other illicit drug useis weak. A sociological explanation is more plausible than apharmacological one. The predictive value of cannabis use is morelikely to reflect a combination of: the selective recruitment to heavycannabis use of persons with combination of pre-existing personalityand attitudinal traits that predispose to the use of otherintoxicants; and the effects of socialisation into an illicit drugsubculture in which there is an increased availability of, andencouragement to use, other illicit drugs. 7.1.2 Educational performance A major concern about the effects of adolescent cannabis use has beenthe possibility that its use impairs educational performance, andincreases the chances of students discontinuing their education. Sucha possibility is plausible: heavy cannabis use in the high schoolyears would impair memory and attention, thereby interfering withlearning in and out of the classroom (Baumrind and Moselle, 1985). Ifuse became chronic, persistently impaired learning would producepoorer performance in high school and later in college, and increasethe chance of a student dropping out of school. If the adolescent'sschool performance was marginal to begin with, as research reviewedabove suggests it is more likely to be among marijuana users, thenregular use could increase the pre-existing risk of high schoolfailure. Because of the importance of high school education tooccupational choice, this potential effect of adolescent cannabis usecould have consequences which ramified throughout the affectedindividual's adult life.Such a possibility has been supported by cross-sectional studies (e.g.Kandel, 1984; Robins et al, 1970). These and other studies (seeHawkins et al, 1992) have found a positive relationship between degreeof involvement with cannabis as an adult and the risk of dropping outof high school. Studies of relationships between performance incollege and marijuana smoking have produced more equivocal results(see below), usually failing to find consistent evidence that theperformance of cannabis users was more impaired than would bepredicted by their performance prior to cannabis use. These studieshave been criticised (Baumrind and Moselle, 1985; Cohen, 1982),however. Baumrind and Moselle have argued that grade point average isan insensitive measure of adverse educational effects among brighthigh school and college students, while Cohen has argued that studentswhose learning has been most adversely affected by their chronic heavycannabis use would not be found in college samples (Cohen, 1982).Longitudinal studies of the effect of cannabis use on educationalachievement have produced mixed support for the hypothesis (e.g.Kandel et al, 1986; Newcombe and Bentler, 1988). Kandel et al (1986),for example, analysed the follow-up data from the cohort on whichtheir earlier cross-sectional finding of a relationship betweencannabis use and high school drop-out had been reported. They reporteda negative relationship between marijuana use in adolescence and yearsof education completed in early adulthood but this relationshipdisappeared once account was taken of the fact that those who usedcannabis in adolescence had much lower educational aspirations thanthose who did not. Newcombe and Bentler (1988) used a different approach to analysis intheir study of the effects of adolescent drug use on educationalpursuits in early adulthood. They used a composite measure of degreeof drug involvement, which measured frequency of use of alcohol,cannabis and "hard drugs", and a measure of social conformity inadolescence as a control variable in the analyses, which examined therelationships between adolescent drug use and educational pursuits inearly adulthood. They found negative correlations between adolescentdrug use and high school completion, but after controlling for thehigher nonconformity and lower academic potential among adolescentdrug users, there was only a modest negative relationship between druguse and college involvement. The only specific effect of anyparticular type of drug use, over and above their measure of drug useinvolvement, was a negative relationship between hard drug use inadolescence and high school completion.On the whole then, the available evidence from the longitudinalstudies suggests that there may be a modest statistical relationshipbetween cannabis and other illicit drug use in adolescence and pooreducational performance. The apparently strong relationship betweencannabis use and high school drop-out observed in cross-sectionalstudies exaggerates the adverse impact of cannabis use on schoolperformance because adolescents who perform less well at school, andhave lower academic aspirations, are more likely to use cannabis. Buteven if the relationship is statistically small, it may besubstantively important, especially among those whose educationalperformance was marginal to begin with, because of the adverse effectsthat educational underachievement has on subsequent life choices, suchas occupation, and the opportunities that they provide or exclude.7.1.3 Occupational performanceAmong those young adult cannabis users who enter the work-force, thecontinued use of cannabis and other illicit drugs in young adulthoodmight impair job performance for the same reasons that it has beensuspected of impairing school performance, namely, that chronicintoxication impairs work performance. There is some suggestivesupport for this expectation, in that cannabis users report higherrates of unemployment than non-users (e.g. Kandel, 1984; Robins et al,1970), but this comparison is likely to be confounded by the differenteducational qualifications of the two groups. Longitudinal studieshave suggested that there is a relationship between adolescentmarijuana use and job instability among young adults which is notexplained by differences in education and other characteristics whichprecede cannabis use (e.g. Kandel et al, 1986). Newcombe and Bentler(1988) provided a more extensive analysis of the effects of adolescentdrug use on occupational performance in young adulthood. They examinedthe relationships between adolescent drug use and income, jobinstability, job satisfaction, and resort to public assistance inyoung adulthood, while controlling for differences between users andnon-users in social conformity, academic potential and income inadolescence. Their findings supported those of Kandel and colleaguesin that adolescent drug users had a larger number of changes of jobthan non-drug users. Newcombe and Bentler conjectured that thisreflects either impaired work performance, or a failure of illicitdrug users to develop responsible employment behaviours such asconscientiousness, thoroughness, and reliability. 7.1.4 Interpersonal relationshipsThere are developmental and empirical reasons for suspecting thatcannabis use may adversely affect interpersonal relationships. Thedevelopmental reason is that heavy adolescent drug use may produce adevelopmental lag, entrenching adolescent styles of thinking andcoping which would impair the ability to form adult interpersonalrelationships (Baumrind and Moselle, 1985). The empirical reason isthe strong positive correlation between drug use, precocious sexualactivity, and early marriage, which in turn predicts a high rate ofrelationship failure (Newcombe and Bentler, 1988). Cross-sectional studies of drug use in young adults have indicatedthat a high degree of involvement with marijuana predicts a reducedprobability of marriage, an increased rate of cohabiting, an increasedrisk of divorce or terminated de facto relationships, and a higherrate of unplanned parenthood and pregnancy termination (Kandel, 1984;Robins et al, 1970). Kandel (1984) also found that heavy cannabisusers were more likely to have a social network in which friends andthe spouse or partner were also cannabis users (Kandel, 1984). Thesefindings have been largely confirmed in analyses of the longitudinaldata from this cohort of young adults (Kandel et al, 1986). Newcombe and Bentler (1988) found similar relationships between druguse and early marriage in their analysis of the cross-sectional datafrom their cohort of young adults in Los Angeles. Drug use inadolescence predicted an increased rate of early family formation inlate adolescence and of divorce in early adulthood, which theyinterpreted as evidence that: "early drug involvement leads to earlymarriage and having children which then results in divorce" (p97).Newcombe and Bentler argued that this finding provided evidence fortheir theory of "precocious development", according to which drug useaccelerates development and "... drug users tend to bypass orcircumvent the typical maturational sequence of school, work andmarriage and become engaged in adult roles of jobs and familyprematurely without the necessary growth and development to enhancesuccess with these roles ... [developing] a pseudomaturity that illprepares them for the real difficulties of adult life" (pp35-36).Less attention has been paid to the possibility that cannabis use hasadverse effects on the development of social relationships outsidemarriage. Newcombe and Bentler (1988) have reported one of the fewsuch studies. They investigated the relationship between adolescentdrug use and degree of social support and the experience of lonelinessreported in young adulthood. Cross-sectional analyses of data on druguse and degree of social support in adolescence showed that drug usersreported having less social support than non-users (Newcombe andBentler, 1988). But the effects of adolescent drug use on socialsupport and loneliness in young adulthood were minor. Alcohol use inadolescence was associated with decreased loneliness in adulthood,while only hard drug use in adolescence was associated with decreasedsocial support and increased loneliness in early adulthood.7.1.5 Mental healthThe impact of adolescent cannabis and other drug use on general healthin early adult life has not been investigated, in large part becauseit will be difficult to detect any adverse effects of adolescent druguse on adult health in the longitudinal studies that have beenconducted. In such cohorts, heavy cannabis use - the riskiest patternof use from the perspective of health effects - has generally beenobserved to occur at low rates. In any case, young adulthood is toosoon to expect any adverse health effects to be evident, because ofthe relatively short period of use by young adults. For good reasons, the effects of cannabis use on mental health havebeen the health outcomes most studied. Cannabis is a psychoactive drugwhich effects the users' mood and feeling, so chronic heavy use couldpossibly adversely affect mental health, especially among those whoseadjustment prior to their cannabis use was poor and who use cannabisto modulate and control their negative mood states and emotions. Therelationships between cannabis use and the risks of developingdependence upon cannabis or major mental illnesses such asschizophrenia, are reviewed below (see pp110-122 and pp173-178respectively). In this section attention is confined to non-psychoticsymptoms of depression and distress. A number of studies have suggested an association between cannabis useand poor mental health. Kandel's (1984) cross-sectional study found aninverse association between the intensity of marijuana involvement anddegree of satisfaction with life, and a positive association betweenmarijuana involvement and a greater likelihood of having consulted amental health professional, and having been hospitalised for apsychiatric disorder (Kandel, 1984). Longitudinal analyses of thissame cohort, however, found only weak associations between adolescentdrug use and these adult outcomes; the strongest relationship betweenadolescent drug use and mental health, was a positive relationshipbetween cigarette smoking in adolescence and increased symptoms ofdepression in adulthood (Kandel et al, 1986). The cross sectional adult data in Newcombe and Bentler's (1988) studyshowed strong relationships between adolescent drug use and emotionaldistress, psychoticism and lack of a purpose in life. Emotionaldistress in adolescence predicted emotional distress in youngadulthood, but there were no relationships between adolescent drug useand the experience of emotional distress, depression and lack of asense of purpose in life in young adulthood. There were a number ofsmall but substantively significant effects of adolescent drug use onmental health in young adulthood. Adolescent drug use predictedpsychotic symptoms in young adulthood, and hard drug use inadolescence predicted increased suicidal ideation in young adulthood,after controlling for general drug use and earlier emotional distress.Newcombe and Bentler interpreted these findings as evidence thatadolescent drug use "interferes with organised cognitive functioningand increases thought disorganisation into young adulthood" (p180).7.1.6 Delinquency and crimeSince initiation into illicit drug use and the maintenance of regularillicit drug use are both strongly related to degree of socialnonconformity or deviance (e.g. Donovan and Jessor, 1980; Newcombe andBentler, 1988; Polich et al, 1984) it is reasonable to expectadolescent illicit drug use to predict social nonconformity andvarious forms of delinquency and crime in young adulthood.Cross-sectional studies of adult drug users seem to support thishypothesis: they indicate that there is a relationship between theextent of marijuana use as an adult and a history of lifetimedelinquency (e.g. Kandel, 1984; Robins et al, 1970), having beenconvicted of an offence, and having had a motor vehicle accident whileintoxicated (Kandel, 1984). Johnston et al (1978) reported a detailed analysis of the relationshipbetween intensity of drug use and delinquency across two waves ofinterviews of adolescent males undertaken as part of the "Youth inTransition" study. They found in their cross-sectional data that therewas a strong relationship between involvement in delinquency anddegree of involvement with illicit drugs, that is, self-reported ratesof delinquent activity increased steadily with increasing degree ofdrug involvement. However, a series of analyses looking at changes indrug use and crime over time indicated that the groups defined onintensity of drug involvement differed strongly in their rate ofdelinquent acts before their drug use. Moreover, the onset of illicitdrug use (including cannabis) had little effect on delinquent acts,except perhaps among those who used heroin, among whom there was asuggestion that the rates of delinquency increased. Finally, rates ofdelinquent acts declined over time in all drug use groups and at aboutthe same rate. The findings were interpreted as delivering "asubstantial, if not mortal, blow" to the hypothesis that "drug usesomehow causes other kinds of delinquency" (p156).Newcombe and Bentler (1988) reported a somewhat more complicatedalthough no less plausible picture in their longitudinal study. Theyreported a positive relationship between drug use and criminalinvolvement in adolescence, but found more mixed results in therelationship between adolescent drug use and criminal activity inyoung adulthood. Adolescent drug use predicted drug crime involvementin young adulthood; but after controlling for other variables, it wasnegatively correlated with violent crime, and general criminalactivities in young adulthood. Newcombe and Bentler argued that thesenegative correlations indicated that the correlation between differentforms of delinquency in adolescence decreases with age, as criminalactivities become differentiated into drug-related andnon-drug-related offences. Hard drug use in adolescence also had aspecific effect on young adult crime over and above that of drug usein general: it predicted an increased rate of criminal assaults inyoung adulthood. 7.1.7 ConclusionsThere are a number of clear outcomes of research on adolescentcannabis and other illicit drug use. First, there is strong continuityof development from adolescence into early adult life in which many ofthe indicators of adverse development which have been attributed tocannabis use precede its first use (Kandel, 1978). These include minordelinquency, poor educational performance, nonconformity, and pooradjustment. Second, there was a predictable sequence of initiationinto the use of illicit drugs among American adolescents in the 1970sin which the use of licit drugs preceded experimentation withcannabis, which preceded the use of hallucinogens and "pills", whichin turn preceded the use of heroin and cocaine. Generally, the earlierthe age of initiation into drug use, and the greater the involvementwith any drug in the sequence, the greater the likelihood ofprogression to the next drug in sequence.The causal significance of these findings, and especially the role ofcannabis in the sequence of illicit drug use, remains controversial.The hypothesis that the sequence of use represents a directpharmacological effect of cannabis use upon the use of later drugs inthe sequence is the least compelling. A more plausible and bettersupported explanation is that it reflects a combination of theselective recruitment into cannabis use of nonconforming and deviantadolescents who have a propensity to use illicit drugs, and thesocialisation of cannabis users within an illicit drug usingsubculture which increases the exposure, opportunity, andencouragement to use other illicit drugs.There has been some support for the hypothesis that heavy adolescentuse of cannabis impairs educational performance. Cannabis use appearsto increase the risk of failing to complete a high school education,and of job instability in young adulthood. The apparent strength ofthese relationships in cross-sectional studies has been exaggeratedbecause those who are most likely to use cannabis have lowerpre-existing academic aspirations and high school performance thanthose who do not. Even though more modest than has sometimes beensupposed, the apparently adverse effects of cannabis and other druguse upon educational performance may cascade throughout young adultlife, affecting choice of occupation, level of income, choice of mate,and quality of life of the user and his or her children. There is weaker but suggestive evidence that heavy cannabis use hasadverse effects upon family formation, mental health, and involvementin drug-related (but not other types of) crime. In the case of each ofthese outcomes, the apparently strong associations revealed incross-sectional data are much more modest in longitudinal studiesafter statistically controlling for associations between cannabis useand other variables which predict these adverse outcomes. On balance, there are sufficient indications that cannabis use inadolescence adversely affects adolescent development to conclude thatit is a socially desirable goal to discourage adolescent cannabis use,and especially regular cannabis use. 7.2 Psychological adjustment in adults 7.2.1 Is there an amotivational syndrome?Anecdotal reports that chronic heavy cannabis use impairs motivationand social performance have been described in the older literature oncannabis use in societies with a long history of use, such as Egypt,the Carribean and elsewhere (e.g. Brill and Nahas, 1984). In thesesocieties, heavy cannabis use is the prerogative of the poor,impoverished and unemployed. With the increase of cannabis use amongyoung adults in the USA in the early 1970s, there were clinicalreports of a similar syndrome occurring among heavy cannabis users(e.g. Kolansky and Moore, 1971; Millman and Sbriglio, 1986; Tennantand Groesbeck, 1972). These investigators have typically described astate among chronic, heavy cannabis users in which the users' focus ofinterest narrowed, they became apathetic, withdrawn, lethargic,unmotivated, and showed evidence of impaired memory, concentration andjudgment (Brill and Nahas, 1984; McGlothin and West, 1968). Thisconstellation of symptoms has been described as an "amotivationalsyndrome" (e.g. McGlothin and West, 1968; Smith, 1968), which somehave claimed is an organic brain syndrome caused by the effects ofchronic cannabis intoxication (Tennant and Groesbeck, 1972). All thesereports have been uncontrolled, and often poorly documented, so thatit has not been possible to disentangle the effects of chroniccannabis use from those of poverty and low socioeconomic status, orpre-existing personality and other psychiatric disorders (Edwards,1976; Millman and Sbriglio, 1986; National Academy of Science, 1982;Negrete, 1983).There is no research evidence which unequivocally demonstrates thatcannabis does or does not adversely affect the motivation of chronicheavy adult cannabis users. It has proved singularly difficult toprovide better controlled research evidence which has permitted aconsensus to emerge upon the issue. Two types of investigation havebeen carried out in an attempt to assess the motivational effects ofchronic heavy cannabis use: field studies of chronic heavy cannabisusing adults in societies with a tradition of such use, e.g. CostaRica (Carter et al, 1980) and Jamaica (Rubin and Comitas, 1975); andlaboratory studies of the effects on the motivation and performance ofvolunteers who have been administered heavy doses of cannabis overperiods of up to 21 days (e.g. Mendelson et al, 1974). There has alsobeen some evidence on the prevalence of adverse psychological effectsof cannabis from a small number of studies of chronic cannabis users(e.g. Halikas et al, 1982). 7.2.2 Field studies of motivation and performanceRubin and Comitas (1975) examined the effects of ganja smoking on theperformance of Jamaican farmers who regularly smoked cannabis in thebelief that it enhanced their physical energy and work productivity.They used videotapes to measure movement and biochemical measures ofexhaled breath to assess caloric expenditure before and after ganjasmoking. Four case histories were reported which indicated that thelevel of physical activity increased immediately after smoking ganja,as did caloric expenditure, but not productivity. It seemed to be thatafter smoking ganja the workers engaged in more intense andconcentrated labour, but this was done less efficiently, especially byheavy users. Contrary to the hypothesis that cannabis use produced animpairment in motivation, they concluded: "In all Jamaican settingsobserved, the workers are motivated to carry out difficult tasks withno decrease in heavy physical exertion, and their [mistaken]perception of increased output is a significant factor in bolsteringtheir motivation to work." (p79).A study of Costa Rican cannabis smokers produced mixed evidence on theimpact of chronic cannabis use on job performance (Carter et al,1980). A comparison was made of the employment histories of 41 pairsof heavy users (10 marijuana cigarettes per day for 10 or more years)and non-users who had been matched on age, marital status, education,occupation, and alcohol and tobacco consumption. The comparisonindicated that non-users were more likely than users to have attaineda stable employment history, to have received promotions and raises,and to be in full-time employment. Users were also more likely tospend all or more than their incomes, and to be in debt. Among users,however, the relationship between average daily marijuana consumptionand employment was the obverse of what the amotivational hypothesiswould predict, that is, those "who had steady jobs or who wereself-employed were smoking more than twice as many marijuanacigarettes per day as those with more frequent job changes, or thosewho were chronically unemployed" (p153), indicating that "the level ofconsumption was related more to relative access than to individualpreference" (p154).Evidence from these field studies is usually interpreted as failing todemonstrate the existence of the amotivational syndrome (e.g.Dornbush, 1974; Hollister, 1986; Negrete, 1988). There are critics,however, who raise doubts about how convincing such apparentlynegative evidence is. Cohen (1982), for example, has argued that thechronic users in three field studies have come from socially marginalgroups, so that the cognitive and motivational demands of theireveryday lives were insufficient to detect any impairment caused bychronic cannabis use. Moreover, the sample sizes of these studies havebeen too small to exclude the possibility of an effect occurring amonga minority of heavy users. Other evidence suggests that an amotivational syndrome is likely to bea rare occurrence, if it exists. Halikas et al (1982), for example,followed up 100 regular cannabis users six to eight years afterinitially recruiting them and asked them about the experience ofsymptoms suggestive of an amotivational syndrome. They found onlythree individuals who had ever experienced such a cluster of symptomsin the absence of significant symptoms of depression. Theseindividuals were not distinguished from the other smokers by theirheaviness of use. Nor was their experience of these symptoms obviouslyrelated to changes in pattern of use; they seemed to come and goindependently of continued heavy cannabis use. 7.2.3 Laboratory studies of motivation and performanceIn the light of Halikas et al's low estimate of the prevalence ofamotivational symptoms among chronic heavy cannabis users, it isperhaps not surprising that the small number of laboratory studies oflong-term heavy cannabis use have failed to provide unequivocalevidence of impaired motivation (Edwards, 1976). The early studiesconducted as part of the LaGuardia Commission inquiry (see Mendelsonet al, 1974) reported deterioration in behaviour among prisoners givendaily doses of cannabis over a period of some weeks, but these reportswere based upon largely uncontrolled observation. So too was the morerecent study of Georgotas and Zeidenberg (1979) in which it wasreported that five healthy male marijuana users who were placed on adose regimen of 210mg of THC per day for a month appeared "moderatelydepressed, apathetic, at times dull and alienated from theirenvironment and with impaired concentration" (p430). A study which used standardised measures of performance rather thanrelying on observational data failed to observe such effects(Mendelson et al, 1974). In this study 10 casual and 10 heavy cannabissmokers were observed over a 31 days study period in a researchlaboratory. For 21 of these days, subjects were given access to asmany marijuana cigarettes as they earned by performing a simpleoperant task which involved pressing a button to move a counter. Thepoints could be exchanged for money (60 points equal to a cent),packets of cigarettes (3,000 each), and marijuana cigarettes (6,000each). Mendelson et al found that all subjects earned the maximumnumber of points allowed per day (60,000) throughout the study andthat output was unaffected by marijuana smoking whereas ad libitumaccess to alcohol by heavy drinking subjects in the same settingprofoundly disrupted performance of the same task. Mendelson et alconcluded that: "our data disclosed no indication of a relationshipbetween decrease in motivation to work at an operant task and acute orrepeat dose effects of marihuana" (p176).A number of criticisms can be made of this study. First, the period ofheavy use was only 21 days by comparison with the life histories of 15or more years daily use in heavy cannabis users in the field studies.Second, the subjects in the study were volunteers who were allhealthy, young cannabis users with a mean IQ of 120 and nearly threeyears of college education, and some of whom reported duringdebriefing that they were motivated to perform well so as todemonstrate that their cannabis use did not have any adverse effect ontheir performance (Mendelson et al, 1974). Third, the tasks that userswere asked to perform (button presses) were undemanding. Mendelson etal countered that these tasks had nonetheless been shown to detect thedeleterious effects of heavy alcohol use. Moreover, they argued, therewere other indicators that their subjects' performance and motivationwas unimpaired while using cannabis, namely, all subjects completedthe study, most undertook the daily assessments conducted throughout,all complied with a roster for cleaning and house-keeping duties, andall kept up their preferred recreational activities throughout thestudy period. A similar study was completed at the Addiction Research Foundation,the results of which have not been fully published, although Campbell(1976) has provided a brief account of its findings. In this study,young cannabis users were studied in a residential token economy inwhich they could earn tokens that could be exchanged for money andother goods by manufacturing woven woollen belts. Unlike the Mendelsonstudy, subjects' cannabis doses were under the experimenters' controland subjects were given mandatory high doses. The subjects showed nogross behavioural changes, no social deterioration, and no alterationsin intellectual functioning, but the results suggested, contrary tothose of Mendleson et al, that chronic heavy cannabis use reducedproductivity, especially during the period of mandatory high dosing(30mg of THC per day) which many subjects found aversive. It remainsunclear how applicable the results of performance with mandatory highdosing are to the situation where users have control over their owndose.7.2.4 DiscussionThe status of the amotivational syndrome remains contentious, in partbecause of differences in the appraisal of evidence from clinicalobservations and controlled studies. On the one hand, there are thosewho find the small number of cases of "amotivational syndrome"compelling clinical evidence of the marked deterioration infunctioning that chronic heavy cannabis use can produce. On the other,there are those who are more impressed by the largely unsupportivefindings of the small number of field and laboratory studies. Althoughthe controlled studies have largely been interpreted as failing tosubstantiate the clinical observations (e.g. Millman and Sbriglio,1986), the possibility has been kept alive by suggestive reports thatregular cannabis users experience a loss of ambition and impairedschool and occupational performance as adverse effects of their use(e.g. Hendin et al, 1987), and that some ex-cannabis users giveimpaired occupational performance as a reason for stopping (Jones,1984). It seems reasonable to conclude that if there is anamotivational syndrome, it is a relatively rare consequence ofprolonged heavy cannabis use. If this is the case, then studies ofmotivation and performance among dependent cannabis users may be themost promising place to look for examples of the syndrome. Even if we assume that chronic heavy cannabis use impairs adultmotivation and performance, there remains the question of mechanism(Baumrind, 1983). Is there a specific amotivational syndrome caused bythe chronic intake of cannabinoids, or are we mistaking it for theimpaired cognitive and psychomotor performance of chronicallyintoxicated dependent cannabis users (Edwards, 1976)? Are we perhapsmistaking a depressive syndrome among heavy cannabis users for theamotivational syndrome? (Cohen, 1982) Assuming that cases can beidentified, how easy is it to reverse the syndrome or behaviourpattern after a period of abstinence from cannabis?7.2.5 Conclusions The evidence for an amotivational syndrome among adults is, at best,equivocal. The positive evidence largely consists of case histories,and observational reports. The small number of controlled field andlaboratory studies have not found compelling evidence for such asyndrome, although their evidential value is limited by the smallsample sizes and limited sociodemographic characteristics of the fieldstudies, by the short periods of drug use, and the youthful goodhealth and minimal demands made of the volunteers observed in thelaboratory studies. It nonetheless is reasonable to conclude that ifthere is such a syndrome, it is a relatively rare occurrence, evenamong heavy, chronic cannabis users.ReferencesBailey, S.L., Flewelling, J.V., and Rachal, J.V. (1992) Predictingcontinued use of marijuana among adolescents: the relative influenceof drug-specific and social context factors. Journal of Health andSocial Behavior, 33, 51-66.Baumrind, D. (1983) Specious causal attribution in the socialsciences: the reformulated stepping stone hypothesis as exemplar.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 1289-1298.Baumrind, D. and Moselle, K.A. (1985) A developmental perspective onadolescent drug abuse. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse, 5,41-67.Brill, H. and Nahas, G.G. (1984) Cannabis intoxication and mentalillness. In G.G. Nahas Marihuana in Science and Medicine. New York:Raven Press.Brook, J.S., Cohen, P., Whiteman, M. and Gordon, A.S. (1992)Psychosocial risk factors in the transition from moderate to heavy useor abuse of drugs. In M. Glantz and R. Pickens (eds) Vulnerability toDrug Abuse. Washington: American Psychological Association.Campbell, I. (1976) The amotivational syndrome and cannabis use withemphasis on the Canadian Scene. Annals of New York Academy ofSciences, 282, 33-36.Carter, W. E, Coggins, W. and Doughty, P.L. (1980) Cannabis in CostaRica: A study of chronic marihuana use. Philadelphia: Institute forthe Study of Human Issues.Cohen, S. (1982) Cannabis effects upon adolescent motivation. InNational Institute on Drug Abuse. Marijuana and Youth: ClinicalObservations on Motivation and Learning. Rockville, Maryland: NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse.Donnelly, N. and Hall, W. (1994) Patterns of Cannabis Use inAustralia. Paper prepared for the National Task Force on Cannabis.National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 27. Canberra: AustralianGovernment Publishing Service.Donovan, J.E. and Jessor, R. (1983) Problem drinking and the dimensionof involvement with drugs: A Guttman Scalogram analysis of adolescentdrug use. American Journal of Public Health, 73, 543-552.Dornbush, R.L. (1974) The long-term effects of cannabis use. In L.L.Miller (ed) Marijuana: Effects on Behavior. New York: Academic Press.DuPont, R. (1984) Getting Tough on Gateway Drugs. Washington, DC,American Psychiatric Press.Edwards, G. (1976) Cannabis and the psychiatric position. In J.D.P.Graham (ed) Cannabis and Health. London: Academic Press.Georgotas, A. and Zeidenberg, P. (1979) Observations on the effects offour weeks of heavy marijuana smoking on group interaction andindividual behavior. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 20, 427-432.Goode, E. (1974) Marijuana use and the progression to dangerous drugs.In L.L. Miller (Ed) Marijuana: Effects on Human Behavior. New York:Academic Press.Halikas, J.A., Weller, R.A., Morse, C. and Shapiro, T. (1982)Incidence and characteristics of amotivational syndrome, includingassociated findings, among chronic marijuana users. In NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse. Marijuana and Youth: Clinical Observations onMotivation and Learning. Rockville, Maryland: National Institute onDrug Abuse.Hawkins, J.D., Catalano, R.F. and Miller, J.Y. (1992) Risk andprotective factors for alcohol and other drug problems in adolescenceand early adulthood: implications for substance abuse prevention.Psychological Bulletin, 112, 64-105.Hendin, H., Haas, A.P., Singer, P., Eller, M. and Ulman, R. (1987)Living High: Daily Marijuana Use Among Adults. New York: HumanSciences Press.Hollister, L.E. (1986) Health aspects of cannabis. PharmacologicalReviews, 38, 1-20.Jessor, R. and Jessor, S.L. (1977) Problem Behavior and PsychosocialDevelopment: A Longitudinal Study of Youth. New York: Academic Press.Jessor, R. and Jessor, S.L. (1978) Theory testing in longitudinalresearch on marihuana use. In D.B. Kandel (ed) Longitudinal Researchon Drug Use: Empirical Findings and Methodological Issues. New York:John Wiley and Sons.Johnston, L.D., O'Maley, P.M. and Eveland, L.K. (1978) Drugs anddelinquency: A search for causal connections. In D.B. Kandel (ed)Longitudinal Research on Drug Use: Empirical Findings andMethodological Issues. New York: John Wiley and Sons.Jones, R.T. (1984) Marijuana: Health and treatment issues. PsychiatricClinics of North America, 7, 703-712.Kandel, D.B. (1978) Convergences in prospective longtudinal surveys ofdrug use in normal populations. In D.B. Kandel (ed) LongitudinalResearch on Drug Use: Empirical Findings and Methodological Issues.New York: John Wiley and Sons.Kandel, D.B. (1984) Marijuana users in young adulthood. Archives ofGeneral Psychiatry, 41, 200-209.Kandel, D.B. (1988) Issues of sequencing of adolescent drug use andother problem behaviors. Drugs and Society, 3, 55-76.Kandel, D.B. and Davies, M. (1992) Progression to regular marijuanainvolvement: Phenomenology and risk factors for near daily use. In M.Glantz and R. Pickens (eds) Vulnerability to Drug Abuse. Washington:American Psychological Association.Kandel, D. and Faust, R. (1975) Sequence and stages in patterns ofadolescent drug use. Archives of General Psychiatry, 32, 923-932.Kandel, D.B. and Logan, J.A. (1984) Patterns of drug use fromadolescence to young adulthood: I. Periods of risk for initiation,continued use and discontinuation. American Journal of Public Health,1984, 74, 660-666.Kandel, D.B., Davies, M., Karus, D. and Yamaguchi, K. (1986) Theconsequences in young adulthood of adolescent drug involvement.Archives of General Psychiatry, 1986, 43, 746-754.Kaplan, H.B., Martin, S. and Robbins, C. (1982) Pathways to adolescentdrug use: self-derogation, peer influence, weakening of socialcontrols, and early substance use. Journal of Health and SocialBehavior, 25, 270-289.Kaplan, H.B. and Johnson, R.J. (1992) relationships betweencircumstances surrounding initial drug use and escalation of drug use:moderating effects of gender and early adolescent experiences. In M.Glantz and R. Pickens (eds) Vulnerability to Drug Abuse. Washington:American Psychological Association.Kleiman, M.A.R. (1989) Marijuana: Costs of Abuse, Costs of Control.New York: Greenwood Press.Kleiman, M.A.R. (1992) Against Excess: Drug Policy for Results. NewYork: Basic Books.Kolansky, H. and Moore, W.T. (1971) Effects  of marihuana onadolescents and young adults. Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 216, 486-492.Lantner, I.L. (1982) Marijuana abuse by children and teenagers: apediatrician's view. Cohen, S. (1982) Cannabis effects upon adolescentmotivation. In National Institute on Drug Abuse. Marijuana and Youth:Clinical Observations on Motivation and Learning. Rockville, Maryland:National Institute on Drug Abuse.McGee, R.O. and Feehan, M. (1993) Cannabis use among New Zealandadolescents. New Zealand Medical Journal, 106, 345.McGlothin, W.H. and West, L.J. (1968) The marijuana problem: Anoverview. American Journal of Psychiatry, 125, 370-378.Meeks, J.E. (1982) Some clinical comments on chronic marijuana use inadolescent psychiatric patients. In National Institute on Drug Abuse.Marijuana and Youth: Clinical Observations on Motivation and Learning.Rockville, Maryland: National Institute on Drug Abuse.Mendelson, J.H., Rossi, A.M., and Meyer, R.E. (1974) The Use ofMarihuana: A Psychological and Physiological Inquiry. New York: PlenumPress.Millman, R.B. and Sbriglio, R. (1986) Patterns of use andpsychopathology in chronic marijuana users. Psychiatric Clinics ofNorth America, 9, 533-545.National Academy of Science. (1982) Marijuana and Health. Washington,DC: Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press.Milman, D.H. (1982) Psychological effects of cannabis in adolescence.In National Institute on Drug Abuse. Marijuana and Youth: ClinicalObservations on Motivation and Learning. Rockville, Maryland: NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse.National Academy of Science, Institute of Medicine. (1982) Marijuanaand Health. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Negrete, J (1983) Psychiatric aspects of cannabis use. In K.O. Fehrand H. Kalant (eds) Cannabis and Health Hazards. Toronto: AddictionResearch Foundation.Negrete, J (1988) What's happened to the cannabis debate? BritishJournal of Addiction, 83, 359-372.Newcombe, M.D. (1992) Understanding the multidimensional nature ofdrug use and abuse: The role of consumption, risk factors andprotective factors. In M. Glantz and R. Pickens (eds) Vuln7. The psDrug Abuse. Washington: American Psychological Association.Newcombe, M.D. and Bentler, P. (1988) Consequences of Adolescent DrugUse: Impact on the Lives of Young Adults. Newbury Park, California:Sage Publications.O'Donnell, J.A. and Clayton, R.R. (1982) The stepping stone hypothesis- marijuana, heroin and causality. Chemical Dependencies, 4, 229-241.Osgood, D.W., Johnston, L.D., O'Malley, P.M., and Bachman, J.G. (1988)The generality of deviance in late adolescence and early adulthood.American Sociological Review, 53, 81-93.Polich, J.M., Ellickson, P.L., Reuter, P., and Kahan, J.P. (1984)Strategies for Controlling Adolescent Drug Use. Santa Monica,California: The Rand Corporation.Robins, L., Darvish, H.S., and Murphy, G.E. (1970) The long-termoutcome for adolescent drug users: A follow-up study of 76 users and146 nonusers. In J. Zubin and A.M. Freedman (eds) The Psychopathologyof Adolescence. New York: Grune and Stratton.Robins, L. (1993) Vietnam veterans' rapid recovery from heroinaddiction: a fluke or normal expectation? Addiction, 88, 1041-1054.Rubin, V. and Comitas, L. (1975) Ganja in Jamaica: A MedicalAnthropological Study of Chronic Marihuana Use. The Hague: MoutonPublishers.Scheier, L.M. and Newcombe, M.D. (1991) Psychosocial predictors ofdrug use initiation and escalation: an expansion of the multiple riskfactors hypothesis using longitudinal data. Contemporary DrugProblems, 18, 31-73.Shedler, J. and Block, J. (1990) Adolescent drug use and psychologicalhealth. American Psychologist, 45, 612-630.Smith, D.E. (1968) Acute and chronic toxicity of marijuana. Journal ofPsychedelic Drugs, 2, 37-47.Smith, D.E. and Seymour, R.B. (1982) Clinical perspectives on thetoxicity of marijuana: 1967-1981. In National Institute on Drug Abuse.Marijuana and Youth: Clinical Observations on Motivation and Learning.Rockville, Maryland: National Institute on Drug Abuse.Tennant, F.S. and Groesbeck, C.J. (1972) Psychiatric effects ofhashish. Archives of General Psychiatry, 33, 383-386.Yamaguchi, K. and Kandel, D.B. (1984a) Patterns of drug use fromadolescence to adulthood. II Sequences of progression. AmericanJournal of Public Health, 1984, 74, 668-672.Yamaguchi, K. and Kandel, D.B. (1984b) Patterns of drug use fromadolescence to adulthood. III Predictors of progression. AmericanJournal of Public Health, 1984, 74, 673-681.7.3 Is there a cannabis dependence syndrome? 7.3.1 The significance of dependenceIf there is a cannabis dependence syndrome, it has importantimplications for both cannabis users and public health (Edwards,1982). First, people who currently use cannabis, and young adults whoare considering whether to use it, should make decisions which areinformed by an appraisal of the risk of their becoming dependent onthe drug. If there is a risk of dependence, and cannabis continues tobe regarded as a drug that does not produce dependence, such decisionscannot be informed.Second, if there is a cannabis dependence syndrome, then persons whobecome dependent on cannabis place themselves at an increased risk ofexperiencing any adverse health effects attributable to cannabis use.Dependent cannabis users typically smoke two or more cannabiscigarettes daily over many years, putting themselves at risk of thepulmonary hazards of smoking. A chronic state of cannabis intoxicationcould place them at increased risk of accidents, and the THC theyabsorb may accumulate in their bodies, placing them at increased riskof experiencing any adverse health effects of THC (Edwards, 1982). Third, although a dependent pattern of cannabis use may be rare incomparison with the more prevalent pattern of experimental andintermittent use, it may nonetheless have public health significancebecause of the widespread experimentation with cannabis in manyWestern societies. The public health significance of cannabisdependence would also increase if the prevalence of use substantiallyincreased as a result of changes in the availability of the drug.7.3.2 The nature of dependenceFor much of the 1960s and 1970s the apparent absence of tolerance tothe effects of cannabis, and of a withdrawal syndrome analogous tothat seen in alcohol and opioid dependence, supported the consensus ofinformed opinion that cannabis was not a drug of dependence. Expertviews on the nature of dependence changed during the late 1970s andearly 1980s, when the more liberal definition of drug dependenceembodied in Edwards and Gross's (1976) alcohol dependence syndrome wasextended to all psychoactive drugs (Edwards et al, 1981). The drugdependence syndrome reduced the emphasis upon tolerance andwithdrawal, and attached greater importance to symptoms of acompulsion to use, a narrowing of the drug using repertoire, rapidreinstatement of dependence after abstinence, and the high salience ofdrug use in the user's life. This new conception influenced thedevelopment of the Third Revised Edition of the Diagnostic andStatistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (1987)(DSM-III-R), which reduced the importance of tolerance and withdrawalsymptoms in favour of a greater emphasis upon continued use of a drugin the face of its adverse effects. 7.3.2.1 Drug dependence in DSM-III-R"Psychoactive substance use disorders" include all forms of drug andalcohol dependence in DSM-III-R (American Psychiatric Association,1987; Kosten et al, 1987). "The essential feature of this disorder isa cluster of cognitive, behavioral and physiologic symptoms thatindicate that the person has impaired control of psychoactivesubstance use and continues use of the substance despite adverseconsequences" (p166). A diagnosis of psychoactive substance dependenceis made if any three of the nine criteria listed below have beenpresent for one month or longer:1.  the substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longerperiod than the person intended;2.  there is a persistent desire or one or more unsuccessful effortsto cut down or control substance use;3. a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to get thesubstance (e.g., theft), taking the substance..., or recovering fromits effects;4.  frequent intoxication or withdrawal symptoms when expected tofulfil major role obligations at work, school, or home..., or whensubstance use is physically hazardous...;5.  important social, occupational, or recreational activities givenup or reduced because of substance use;6. continued substance use despite knowledge of having a persistent orrecurrent social, psychological, or physical problem that is caused orexacerbated by the use of the substance;7. marked tolerance;8. characteristic withdrawal symptoms;9. substance often taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms"(American Psychiatric Association, 1987, pp167-8).Criteria 8 and 9, are not required for the dependence syndromes ofcannabis, hallucinogens and PCP to be diagnosed. These criteria may seem to conflict with community conceptions of drugdependence, in that they explicitly include tobacco smoking as a formof drug dependence, and could conceivably include caffeine dependence(among heavy coffee drinkers). The fact that these forms of drugtaking are not usually be regarded as producing drug dependence isless a reason for rejecting these diagnostic criteria than a signal ofthe need to persuade the community to adopt a broader conception ofdrug dependence, which reduces the emphasis upon "physical" dependenceas evidenced by the occurrence of a marked withdrawal syndrome onabstinence.7.3.2.2 Cannabis tolerance and withdrawal: experimental evidenceAlthough tolerance and withdrawal symptoms are not required withinDSM-III-R, there is evidence that both can occur under certainconditions of dosing with cannabinoids. This should not be surprisingsince, as Hollister (1986) has observed, cannabis "would have been anexceptional centrally acting drug if tolerance/dependence were not oneof its properties" (p9). Yet for many years it was believed that therewas little tolerance to cannabis and no withdrawal syndrome. Thepredominant recreational pattern of intermittent use in the community,and the use of low doses of THC and short dosage schedules inlaboratory studies, contributed to this belief (Hollister, 1986), asdid the expectation that if there was a cannabis withdrawal syndrome,it would be as readily recognised as the opioid withdrawal syndrome(Edwards, 1982).Since the middle 1970s evidence has emerged from human and animalstudies that chronic administration of high doses of THC results inthe development of marked tolerance to a wide variety of cannabinoideffects, such as cardiovascular effects, and to the subjective high inhumans (Compton, Dewey, and Martin, 1990; Fehr and Kalant, 1983;Hollister, 1986; Jones, Benowitz, and Herning, 1981; National Academyof Science, 1982). Moreover, the abrupt cessation of chronic highdoses of THC generally produces a mild withdrawal syndrome like thatproduced by other long-acting sedative drugs (Compton et al, 1990;Jones and Benowitz, 1976; Jones et al, 1981). Jones and Benowitz (1976) provided convincing evidence in humans ofthe development of tolerance to the cardiovascular and subjectiveeffects of THC. They conducted human laboratory studies of the effectsof high doses of THC (210 mg per day) administered orally over aperiod of 30 days on a fixed dosing schedule to healthy malevolunteers who had an extensive history of cannabis use. Clinicalobservations of the subjects showed that as the duration of the highdose regimen increased, there was a decline in the positive effects ofintoxication, and in the subjects' ratings of the "high". There was amarked deterioration in the subjects' social functioning according tonurses' ratings during the early days of the high dose regimen, butthere was almost complete recovery to baseline levels by the end ofthe dosing period. There was similar evidence of recovery in cognitiveand psychomotor performance in the course of the high dose regimen.The most convincing evidence of tolerance came from observations ofthe cardiovascular and subjective effects of smoking a marijuanacigarette at various points during the study. The magnitude of boththe cardiovascular and subjective responses to smoking a single"joint" decreased with the length of time subjects had received a highdose of THC. After a few days of high doses of THC, the increasedheart rate was replaced by a normal, and in some cases a slowed, heartrate. Similarly, self-ratings indicated that the "high" produced bythe cigarette all but disappeared in the course of the high doseregimen. Similar observations of tolerance to the subjective effects ofcannabis have been made by Georgotas and Zeidenberg (1979). Theystudied five healthy male marijuana smokers over a four-week period,in which they smoked an average of 10 joints per day, providing anaverage daily dose of 210mg of THC. In the course of this experiment,subjects rapidly developed tolerance to the drug's effects: Although initially they found the marijuana to be of good quality,they now found it much weaker and inferior to what they were gettingoutside. They felt it did not make them as high as often as they wereaccustomed (p429). An abstinence syndrome has been observed in monkeys maintained on aschedule of chronic high doses of THC. Its symptoms consisted of:"yawning, anorexia, piloerection, irritability, tremors andphotophobia" (Jones and Benowtiz, 1976). Similar symptoms wereobserved by Jones and Benowitz (1976) after their subjects wereabruptly withdrawn from high doses of THC. Within six hours ofwithdrawal subjects complained of "inner unrest", and by 12 hours,"increased activity, irritability, insomnia, and restlessness werereported by the subjects and obvious to staff" (p632). Common symptomsreported were " `hot flashes', sweating, rhinorrhea, loose stools,hiccups and anorexia" (p632) which many subjects compared to a bout ofinfluenza. These symptoms were reduced by the resumption of marijuanause (Jones et al, 1981).Georgotas and Zeidenberg (1979) reported similar withdrawal phenomenain their long-term dosing study. During the first week of a four-weekwash-out period after four weeks of receiving 210mg of cannabis a day,the subjects "became very irritable, uncooperative, resistant, and attimes hostile ... their desire for food decreased dramatically andthey had serious sleeping difficulties" (p430). These effectsdisappeared during the final three weeks of the wash out. Thesestudies suggest that tolerance can develop to cannabis's effects andthat a withdrawal syndrome can occur on abstinence under certainconditions, namely, chronic administration of doses as low as 10 mgper day for 10 days (Jones et al, 1981). The results of laboratory studies have received suggestive supportfrom a small number of studies of heavy cannabis users. Weller andHalikas (1982), for example, found that the self-reported positiveeffects of cannabis use diminished over a five to six-year period inregular users of cannabis. The average reduction in the frequency ofexperiencing the positive effects was small, perhaps because only 27per cent were daily users, but they were consistent and included someof the symptoms reported in laboratory studies. The laboratory and observational studies raise the followingquestions: How relevant are these observations to contemporarycannabis users? How often does sufficient tolerance to cannabisdevelop for users to experience a withdrawal syndrome? How often iscannabis used to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms, and if so, doessuch behaviour play any role in maintaining use and producingdependence? These questions remain unanswered (Edwards, 1982; Jones,1984), although (as will be seen below) there is clinical andobservational evidence that some heavy chronic users experiencetolerance and withdrawal symptoms, and that some use cannabis tocontrol these symptoms.7.3.3 Clinical and observational evidence on dependenceThere has not been an organised program of research on the cannabisdependence syndrome comparable to that undertaken on the alcohol andthe opiate dependence syndromes. Instead, its existence andcharacteristics have had to be inferred from a diverse body ofresearch studies. This comprises: limited data on the prevalence andcharacteristics of persons seeking professional help in dealing withtheir cannabis use and associated problems; a small number ofobservational studies of problems reported by non-treatment samples oflong-term cannabis users; and a very small and recent literatureexamining the validity of the cannabis dependence syndrome, usually aspart of larger investigations of the validity of the substancedependence syndromes embodied in DSM-III-R and other classificationsystems.During the 1980s evidence began to emerge that there had been anincrease in the number of persons seeking help with cannabis as theirmajor drug problem. Jones (1984), for example, reported that 35,000patients sought treatment in the United States in 1981 for drugproblems in which "cannabis was their primary drug" (p703), anincrease of 50 per cent over three years. Many of these patientsbehaved "as if they were addicted to cannabis" and they presented"some of the same problems as do compulsive users of other drugs"(p711). More recently, Roffman and colleagues (1988) have reported astrong response to a series of community advertisements offering helpto people who wanted to stop using marijuana.Sweden, which has had a long history of hashish use, has alsoexperienced an increase in numbers of heavy hashish users presentingto treatment services for assistance with problems caused by its use(Engstrom et al, 1985). Tunving et al (1988) have described theirexperience treating approximately 100 individuals per year whopresented to Swedish treatment services requesting help in controllingtheir cannabis use. Although no data were reported on the proportionof these individuals who satisfied the DSM-III-R criteria for cannabis dependence, these patients typicallycomplained of symptoms which arguably would meet some of its criteria.They reported, for example, that they had been unable to stop usingcannabis after having made several unsuccessful attempts to stop orcut down, that they were frequently intoxicated, often every day, andthat they continued to use despite suffering adverse effects whichthey recognised were connected with their cannabis use, such assleeplessness, depression, diminished ability to concentrate andmemorise, and blunting of emotions. Hannifin (1988) and Miller andGold (1989) have reported similar behaviour patterns among cannabisusers who have sought assistance. In Australia, there are indications that some heavy cannabis usersrequest help in controlling their use. Didcott et al (1988), forexample, reported on the characteristics of 3,462 clients seen in 12residential treatment services in New South Wales in 1985 and 1986.They found that cannabis was identified as the "primary drug problem"by 25 per cent of clients seen, second only to the opioid drugs, whichwere so identified by 73 per cent of clients. Just over half of allclients (52 per cent), the majority of whom were polydrug users,identified their cannabis use as "a problem". The prevalence ofcannabis use as a principal drug problem was lower in a 1992 NationalCensus of Clients of Australian Treatment Service Agencies (Chen,Mattick and Bailey, 1993). In this census cannabis use was the maindrug problem for 6 per cent of the 5,259 clients, fifth in order ofimportance behind alcohol (52 per cent), opiates (26 per cent),tobacco (9 per cent) and opiate/polydrug problems (7 per cent). Suggestive evidence of cannabis dependence has emerged from a smallnumber of observational studies of regular cannabis users. Weller,Halikas and Morse (1984), for example, followed up a cohort of 100regular marijuana users who were first identified in 1970-1971, andassessed them for alcohol and marijuana abuse using Feighner'scriteria for alcoholism and an analogous set of criteria for marijuana(see Weller and Halikas, 1980). Their concept of abuse would arguablyhave included most cases of dependence. They were able to interview 97of their subjects about the amount and frequency of alcohol andmarijuana use, and their experience of problems related to the use ofboth drugs. According to Feighner's criteria, 9 per cent of subjectswere alcoholic and 9 per cent were "abusers" of marijuana, with 2 percent qualifying for both diagnoses. The most common symptoms reportedamong those classified as marijuana abusers were feeling "addicted", ahistory of failed attempts to limit use, early morning use, andtraffic arrests related to marijuana use.Hendin et al (1987) reported on the experiences of 150 long-term dailycannabis users who had been recruited through newspaperadvertisements. Although they did not explicitly inquire about thesymptoms of a cannabis dependence syndrome, substantial proportions oftheir sample reported experiencing various adverse effects oflong-term use, despite which they continued to use cannabis. Theseincluded: impaired memory (67 per cent); an impaired ability toconcentrate on complex tasks (49 per cent); difficulty getting thingsdone (48 per cent); or thinking clearly (43 per cent); reduced energy(43 per cent); ill health (36 per cent); and accidents (23 per cent).Substantial minorities reported that it had impeded their educational(31 per cent), and career achievements (28 per cent), and half of thesample reported that they would like to cut down or stop their use.These findings have been broadly supported by Kandel and Davies (1992)and by Stephens and Roffman (1993). Kandel and Davies reported on thecharacteristic problems reported by near daily cannabis users (aged28-29 years) who were identified in a prospective study of theconsequences of adolescent drug use. The major adverse consequences ofuse were: subjectively experienced cognitive deficits; reduced energy;depression; and problems with spouse. Stephens and Roffman's sample ofusers answering an advertisement offering assistance in quittingcannabis complained of: "feeling bad about using"; procrastinatingbecause of their use; memory impairment; loss of self-esteem;withdrawal symptoms; and spouse complaints about their use. In theabsence of control groups, however, it is impossible to be certainthat the prevalence of these symptoms is higher than in the community,and that they were not present prior to cannabis use, as has beenreported in some longitudinal studies (e.g. Shedler and Block, 1990).The most direct support for the validity of the cannabis abusedependence syndrome comes from a series of studies of the validity ofdiagnostic criteria for substance dependence. Kosten et al (1987)tested the extent to which the DSM-III-R psychoactive substancedependence disorders for alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, hallucinogens,opioids, sedatives and stimulants constituted syndromes. A sample of83 persons (41 from an inpatient psychiatric unit and 42 from anoutpatient substance abuse treatment unit) was interviewed using astandardised psychiatric interview schedule to elicit the symptoms ofdrug dependence as defined in DSM-III-R for each of the drug classes.Multiple diagnoses were allowed, so many individuals qualified formore than one type of drug dependence.There was consistent support for a unidimensional dependence syndromefor alcohol, cocaine and opiates. The results were more equivocal inthe case of the cannabis dependence syndrome. All the items weremoderately positively correlated, had good internal consistency, andseemed to comprise a Guttman scale, but a Principal ComponentsAnalysis of the cannabis items suggested that (unlike alcohol, cocaineand heroin, all of which had a single underlying factor) there seemedto be three independent dimensions of dependence: compulsion indicatedby impaired social activity attributable to drug use, preoccupationwith drug use, giving up other interests, and using more thanintended; inability to stop use, indicated by not being able to cutdown the amount used, rapid reinstatement after abstinence, andtolerance to drug effects; and withdrawal identified by withdrawalsymptoms, use of cannabis to relieve withdrawal symptoms, andcontinued use despite problems.Two more recent studies on much larger samples have provided strongersupport for the concept of a cannabis dependence syndrome. Newcombe(1992) reported factor analyses of 29 questionnaire items designed tomeasure DSM-III-R abuse and dependence for a community sample of 614young adults reporting on their use of alcohol, cocaine, and cannabis.He reported a strong common factor for all three drug types whichaccounted for 36 per cent to 40 per cent of the item variance.Rounsaville, Bryant, Babor, Kranzler and Kadden (1993) report theresults of factor analyses of items designed to assess dependence ineach of three diagnostic systems (DSM-III-R. DSM-IV and ICD-10) foreach of six drug classes (alcohol, cocaine, marijuana, opiates,sedatives and stimulants). Their sample comprised 521 personsrecruited from inpatient and outpatient drug treatment, psychiatrictreatment services, and the general community. They found that asingle common factor explained the variation between diagnosticcriteria for all diagnostic systems, and for all drug types.7.3.4 Epidemiological evidence on cannabis abuse and dependence The best evidence on the prevalence of cannabis abuse and dependencein the community comes from the Epidemiological Catchment Area (ECA)study (Robins and Regier, 1991) which involved face-to-face interviewswith 20,000 Americans in five catchment areas: Baltimore, Maryland;Los Angeles, California; New Haven, Connecticut; Durham, NorthCarolina; and St Louis, Missouri. A standardised and validatedclinical interview schedule was used to elicit a history ofpsychiatric symptoms found in 40 major psychiatric diagnoses,including drug abuse and dependence. This information was used todiagnose the presence or absence of a DSM-III diagnosis of drugdependence (Anthony and Helzer, 1991). Although not a true randomsample of the American population, it is the best available data onthe prevalence of different types of drug dependence and theircorrelates in a non-treatment population. Illicit drug use was defined as "any non-prescription psychoactiveagents other than tobacco, alcohol and caffeine, or inappropriate useof prescription drugs" (Anthony and Helzer, 1991, p116). To excludeindividuals who had only briefly experimented with illicit drugs,individuals had to have used an illicit drug on more than fiveoccasions before they were asked about any symptoms of drugdependence. The focus of the interview schedule was on the "consequentpsychiatric symptoms and behavioral changes that constitute thesyndromes of drug abuse and dependence" (p117). The criteria used to define drug abuse and dependence were derivedfrom the DSM-III, which divided symptoms of abuse and dependence intofour main groups: (1) tolerance to drug effects; (2) withdrawalsymptoms; (3) pathological patterns of use; and (4) impairments insocial and occupational functioning due to drug use. Drug abuserequired a pattern of pathological use and impaired functioning. Inthe case of cannabis, a diagnosis of dependence required pathologicaluse, or impaired social functioning, in addition to either signs oftolerance or withdrawal. The problem had to have been present for atleast one month, although there was no requirement that all criteriahad to be met within the same period of time. In reporting the resultsAnthony and Helzer report the prevalence of abuse and/or dependencecombined for all drug types. Illicit drug use was relatively common in the sample, with 36 per centof persons having used at least one illicit drug. Cannabis was themost commonly used illicit drug, having been used by 76 per cent ofthose who had used any illicit drug more than five times. Drug abuseand dependence were relatively common, with 6.2 per cent of thepopulation qualifying for such a diagnosis. Cannabis abuse and/ordependence was the most common form of abuse and/or dependence, with4.4 per cent of the population being so diagnosed compared with 1.7per cent for stimulants, 1.2 per cent for sedatives, and 0.7 per centfor opioid drugs. Two-thirds of cases of cannabis abuse and/ordependence had used cannabis within the past year, and half had usedwithin the past month. "Almost two-fifths (38 per cent) of those witha lifetime history of cannabis abuse and/or dependence reported activeproblems in the prior year" (Anthony and Helzer, 1991, p123)When DSM-III-R diagnoses of dependence and abuse were approximated,three fifths of those with a diagnosis of dependence and/or abuse metthe criteria for dependence. The proportion of current users who weredependent increased with age, from 57 per cent in the 18-29 year agegroup to 82 per cent in the 45-64 year age group, reflecting theremission of less severe drug abuse problems with age. Only a minorityof those who had a diagnosis of abuse and/or dependence (20 per centof men and 28 per cent of women) had mentioned their drug problem to ahealth professional, even though 60-70 per cent had sought medicaltreatment in the previous month. There were predictable age and genderdifferentials in prevalence of drug abuse and/or dependence. Men hadhigher prevalence than women (7.7 per cent versus 4.8 per cent). Thiswas largely due to differences in exposure to illicit drugs, since theprevalence of a diagnosis of abuse and/or dependence among persons whohad used an illicit drug more than five times was the about the samefor men and women (21 per cent and 19 per cent). The highestprevalence of abuse and/or dependence (13.5 per cent) was in the 18-29year age group (16.0 per cent among men and 10.9 per cent amongwomen), declining steeply thereafter in both sexes. It is difficult to make clear inferences about the prevalence ofcannabis dependence in the community from the ECA study, becauseDSM-III rather than DSM-III-R criteria were used, and the data on theprevalence of drug abuse and/or dependence have not been broken downeither by abuse and dependence or by drug class. The first of theseproblems may not be too serious, since studies comparing DSM-III andDSM-III-R criteria (e.g. Rounsaville et al, 1987) suggest that thereis reasonable agreement between a DSM-III diagnosis of abuse ordependence and DSM-III-R dependence, in the case of cannabisdependence. Any disagreements in diagnosis seem to be in the directionof DSM-III-R identifying more cases as dependent than DSM-III,suggesting that any errors in the prevalence of drug abuse in the ECAstudy will be in the direction of underestimation.The absence of detailed ECA reports on the separate prevalence of drugabuse and dependence is more difficult to circumvent. If we assumethat any differences between drug types in the proportion of users whobecame dependent would have been reported (and hence that the ratio ofcases of dependence to abuse for cannabis is 3:2), then the prevalenceof cannabis dependence in the USA in 1982-1983 would have been 2.6 percent of the population. If we also assume that the ratio of cases ofcannabis dependence to cases of cannabis abuse was the same for menand women, then 3.2 per cent of men and 2.0 per cent of women wouldhave been diagnosed as cannabis dependent. Similar estimates of the population prevalence of cannabis dependencewere produced by a community survey of psychiatric disorder conductedin Christchurch, New Zealand, in 1986, using the same samplingstrategy and diagnostic interview as the ECA study (Wells et al,1992). This survey used the DIS to diagnose a restricted range ofDSM-III diagnoses in a community sample of 1,498 adults aged 18-64years of age. The prevalence of having used cannabis on five or moreoccasions was 15.5 per cent, remarkably close to that of the ECAestimate, as was the proportion who met DSM-III criteria for marijuanaabuse or dependence, namely 4.7 per cent. The fact that this surveylargely replicated the ECA findings for most other diagnoses,including alcohol abuse and dependence, enhances confidence in thevalidity of the ECA study findings. 7.3.5 The risk of cannabis dependenceIt is important to put the existence of a cannabis dependence syndromeinto perspective to avoid a falsely alarmist impression that allcannabis users run a high risk of becoming dependent upon cannabis. Avariety of estimates suggest that the crude risk is small, andprobably more like that for alcohol rather than nicotine or theopioids. Other data suggests that certain characteristics of usersincrease the risk of dependence developing, although in most cases itis impossible to place quantitative estimates on the latter risks. As with all drugs of dependence, persons who use cannabis on a dailybasis over periods of weeks to months are at greatest risk of becomingdependent upon it. The ECA data suggested that approximately half ofthose who used any illicit drug on a daily basis satisfied DSM-IIIcriteria for abuse or dependence (Anthony and Helzer, 1991). Sincethis estimate was based upon drug abuse and dependence for all drugtypes, including opioids, it probably overestimates the risks ofdependence among daily cannabis users. Kandel and Davis (1992)estimated the risk of dependence among near daily cannabis (accordingto approximated DSM-III criteria) at one in three. The risk of developing dependence among less frequent users ofcannabis, including experimental and occasional users, would besubstantially less than that for daily users. A number of reasonablyconsistent estimates of the risks of a broader spectrum of usersbecoming dependent on cannabis can be obtained from recent studies. Acrude estimate from the ECA study was that approximately 20 per centof persons who used any illicit drug more than five times met DSM-IIIcriteria for drug abuse and dependence at some time. The specific rateof abuse and dependence for cannabis (calculated by dividing theproportion who met criteria for abuse and dependence by the proportionwho had used the drug more than five times) was 29 per cent. A moreconservative estimate which removed cases of abuse (40 per cent) fromthe overall estimate of cannabis abuse and dependence would be that 17per cent of those who used cannabis more than five times would meetDSM-III criteria for dependence. Estimates derived from a number of other studies suggest that the ECAestimates of the risk of dependence are reasonable. The crudepercentage of cases of dependence and abuse among persons who had usedcannabis five or more times in the Christchurch epidemiology study(Wells et al, 1992) was 30 per cent, while an estimate derived fromNewcombe's community survey of young adults was 25 per cent of thosewho had ever used cannabis. A comparable estimate can be derived fromKandel and Davies' (1992) study of near daily cannabis users. [Thiswas done by multiplying the ECA estimate of the proportion of dailyusers who met criteria for abuse and dependence (50 per cent) by theproportion of near daily users in Kandel and Davis sample (44 percent), and adding this to the ECA estimate of the proportion ofnon-daily illicit drug users who met the criteria (30 per cent)multiplied by their proportion in the Kandel and Davies sample (55 percent)]. On Kandel and Davies data the estimated rate of abuse anddependence among those who had used cannabis 10 or more times was 39per cent, the higher rate reflecting the higher number of times of userequired to be counted as a cannabis user in Kandel and Davies study(10 times versus five times in ECA). A lower estimate of 12 per centfor DSM-III-R cannabis dependence was obtained by McGee and colleagues(1993) in a prospective study of 18-year-old youth in Dunedin, NewZealand. A lower estimate was to be expected given the youth of thesample, and the fact that the estimate is the proportion of dependentusers among those who had ever used cannabis.Although one would not want to claim a great deal of precision for anyof these individual estimates of the risk of cannabis dependence, itis reassuring that they are within a range of 12-37 per cent, and thatthe estimates vary in predictable ways with the ages of the samplesand the stringency of the criteria used in defining cannabis use. Thereasonable consistency of the estimates suggests the following rulesof thumb about the risks of cannabis dependence. For those who haveever used cannabis, the risks of developing dependence is probably ofthe order of one chance in 10. The risk of dependence rises with thefrequency of cannabis use, as it does with all drugs, so that amongthose who use the drug more than a few times the risk of developingdependence is in the range of from one in five to one in three. Therange of the estimates reflects variations in the number of occasionsof use that is taken to reflect more than simple experimentation, withthe general rule being that the more often the drug has been used, andthe longer the period of use, the higher is the risk of becomingdependent. Although there have been few formal comparisons of thedependence potential of cannabis with that of other drugs, these risksare probably more like those associated with alcohol than thoseassociated with tobacco and opiates (Woody, Cottler and Cacciola,1993).Apart from frequency of use, other risk factors have been identifiedin the series of prospective studies of adolescent illicit drug usereviewed above. These include the following factors which have beenshown to predict continued use and more intensive involvement withillicit drugs: poor academic achievement; deviant behaviour inchildhood and adolescence; nonconformity and rebelliousness; personaldistress and maladjustment; poor parental relationships; earlier use;and a parental history of drug and alcohol problems (Brook et al,1992; Kandel and Davies, 1992; Newcombe, 1992; Shedler and Block,1990). For most of these variables it is difficult to attach anyquantitative estimates to the increased risk of dependence, becausethey have been measured in different ways in different studies.These overall statements of the risks of cannabis dependence ignorethe fact that the risk of dependence is not equally distributed in thepopulation. The ECA study suggested that men have a higher risk ofdeveloping dependence than women, and that the risk was highest amongthe younger 18-29 year old cohort. In both cases, however, the mostlikely explanation was the different rates of exposure to cannabisamong men and women, and among younger and older persons (Anthony andHelzer, 1991). When this was controlled by looking at the rates ofdependence among daily users of the drug among men and women andyounger and older persons, the differences in the risk of dependencelargely disappeared (Anthony and Helzer, 1991).7.3.6 The consequences of cannabis dependenceAnother important issue that needs to be considered when placing therisks of cannabis dependence into perspective is that of theconsequences of developing dependence. How easy or difficult is it forthose who decide to stop using cannabis to achieve and maintainabstinence? This question is difficult to answer in the absence ofsystematic research on the natural history of cannabis dependence. Thefollowing are reasonable inferences about what the rate of remissionmight be. First, cannabis dependence resembles alcohol dependence inthe risk of dependence, and the similarity in the age and genderdistributions of heaviest use, and abuse, and dependence. It seemsreasonable then to suppose that there is likely to be a high rate ofremission without treatment in cannabis dependence, as there is in asin alcohol dependence in the community (Helzer, Burnham and McEvoy,1991). The large discrepancy between the ECA estimates of cannabisabuse and dependence in the community, and the proportions of cannabisusers among drug users seeking treatment provides indirect support forthis inference. Kandel and Davies' (1992) findings provide more directsupport. They found that 44 per cent of those who had used cannabismore than 10 times became near daily users for an average period ofthree years. Yet by age 28-29, less than 15 per cent of those who hadever been daily users were still daily users, indicating a very highrate of remission during the 20s.Among those who develop cannabis dependence, how disruptive toeveryday life and functioning is it? This is even more difficult toanswer. All that can be said with confidence is that there are somecannabis users who are sufficiently troubled by the consequences oftheir dependence to seek assistance. The experience of Roffman andcolleagues suggests that this number may be increased if more effortwas made to attract dependent cannabis users into treatment. Among thepopulation of cannabis dependent persons seeking treatment, the majorcomplaints have been the loss of control over their drug use,cognitive and motivational impairments which interfere withoccupational performance, lowered self-esteem and depression, and thecomplaints of spouses and partners (see above). There is no doubt thatsome dependent cannabis users report impaired performance and areduced enjoyment of everyday life, but more detailed research isnecessary to make a better judgment about how common this is, and howsevere the impairment typically produced by cannabis dependence is. 7.3.7   The treatment of cannabis dependence Given the widespread scepticism about the existence of a cannabisdependence syndrome, the question of what should be done to assistthose who present for help with their cannabis use has largely beenignored (see Kleber, 1989). Indeed, Stephens and Roffman (1993) havesuggested that there is a widespread view among drug and alcoholtreatment practitioners that cannabis dependence does not requiretreatment because the withdrawal syndrome is so mild that most userscan quit without assistance. Although, as argued above, it is likelythat rates of remission without treatment are substantial, the factthat many users succeed without professional assistance does not meanwe should ignore requests for assistance from those who are unable tostop on their own. As with persons who are nicotine dependent, thosedependent cannabis users who have repeatedly failed in attempts tostop their cannabis use need professional assistance to do so. Butwhat types of treatment should be offered?There is not a lot of information on which to base usefulrecommendations. The available literature largely consists oftreatment suggestions based upon personal experience, or upon clinicalwisdom derived from opinions about the best forms of treatment forother related forms of dependence, such as alcohol and tobacco (e.g.de Silva, DuPont, and Russell, 1981). Jones (1984), for example,suggested that because cannabis was usually smoked in social settings,the treatment for cannabis dependence should be based upon principlesderived from successful forms of treatment for nicotine dependence.Such treatment would include: assisted cessation of cannabis useaccompanied by education about the acute and chronic effects of thedrug; social skills training in resisting the social cues for cannabisuse; and the mobilisation of peer support to maintain abstinencethrough self-help groups. Others have preferred to adopt approaches adapted from those developedto treat alcohol dependence. Hannifin (1988), in arguing for theconcept of "cannabism" by analogy to "alcoholism", implied that it bemanaged in much the same way. Miller and his colleagues (Miller andGold, 1989; Miller, Gold and Pottash, 1989) have recommended atreatment model based upon the preferred form of treatment for alcoholdependence in the United States, namely, detoxification, a 12-stepprogram delivered during an extended inpatient stay, and enrolment inAlcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous after discharge. Stephensand Roffman (1993) and Zweben and O'Connell (1992) have suggestedeclectic approaches combining management of withdrawal, relapseprevention methods, and enrolment in 12-step programs. Tunving et al(1988) have described their experience with a similar eclecticoutpatient program for cannabis users in Sweden. De Silva et al (1981)provide short accounts of a variety of treatment approaches formarijuana dependent adolescents.There have been very few controlled evaluations of the effectivenessof these recommendations. Smith et al (1988) reported a simplepre-treatment and post-treatment comparison of cannabis use amongpatients who received outpatient aversion therapy and groupself-management counselling. They found good self-reported rates ofabstinence, but these were obtained from telephone interviewsconducted by the therapists who delivered the treatment. Roffman et al(1988) have reported a randomised controlled trial comparing groupbased relapse prevention or social support. Subjects were 120 men andwomen (average age 32 years with an average history of 16 yearsmarijuana use) who had answered advertisements publicising a treatmentprogram for adults seeking help to stop using marijuana. Their resultsat one month follow-up were much less positive than those of Smith etal: only 30 per cent of their patients were still abstinent, although75 per cent had set abstinence as a treatment goal. By the end of ayear the abstinence rate had dropped to 17 per cent. Results were alittle more positive when evaluated in terms of average number of daysof use, and in problems experienced, suggesting that the outcome ofcannabis cessation treatment is much like that for alcohol and tobacco(Heather and Tebbutt, 1989).Much more research is clearly required before sensible advice can begiven about the best ways to achieve abstinence from cannabis. In theabsence of better evidence of treatment effectiveness, those who offertreatment for cannabis dependence should avoid replicating experiencein the alcohol field, where intensive and expensive forms of inpatienttreatment have been widely adopted in the absence of any good evidencethat they are more effective than less intensive outpatient forms oftreatment (Heather and Tebbut, 1989; Miller and Hester, 1986).7.3.8 ConclusionsIn 1982 Edwards reviewed the available evidence on the question ofwhether there was a cannabis dependence syndrome as defined by the1981 World Health Organisation criteria. Although he argued that therewas good evidence of tolerance and a withdrawal syndrome, there wasinsufficient evidence bearing on the criteria of compulsion, narrowingof repertoire, reinstatement after abstinence, use to relieve orprevent withdrawal symptoms and salience of cannabis use. He addedthat although tolerance and withdrawal were insufficient to prove theexistence of a dependence syndrome, they nonetheless constituted"grounds for believing that such a syndrome may exist" (p38). Untilthese issues were resolved, he concluded, the question remained "veryopen".On the basis of evidence gathered since Edwards wrote, we concludethat there probably is a cannabis dependence syndrome like thatdefined in DSM-III-R which occurs in heavy chronic users of cannabis.There is good experimental evidence that chronic heavy cannabis usecan produce tolerance and withdrawal symptoms, and some clinical andepidemiological evidence that some heavy cannabis users experienceproblems controlling their cannabis use, and continue to use despitethe experience of adverse personal consequences of use. There isreasonable observational evidence that there is a cannabis dependencesyndrome like that for alcohol, cocaine and opioid dependence. If theestimates of drug dependence from the ECA study are approximatelycorrect, cannabis dependence is the most common form of dependence onillicit drugs, reflecting its high prevalence of use in the community.The risk of developing the syndrome is probably of the order of: onechance in ten among those who ever use the drug; between one in fiveand one in three among those who use more than a few times; and aroundone in two among those who become daily users of the drug. Recognition of the cannabis dependence syndrome has been delayedbecause of its apparent rarity in Western societies, which reflects anumber of factors. First, heavy daily cannabis use has been relativelyuncommon by comparison with the intermittent use of small quantitiesof cannabis. Second, until recently there have been few individualswho have presented requesting assistance for cannabis relatedproblems. This may have been because it is easier to stop usingcannabis than opioids or alcohol without specialist assistance, or itmay be that the impact of cannabis dependence on the user is not astransparently adverse as that of alcohol or opioid problems to usersand their families. Third, an overemphasis on the occurrence oftolerance and a withdrawal syndrome in the past has hindered itsrecognition in those individuals who have presented for treatment.Fourth, cannabis dependence (which is widespread among opioiddependent persons) has been perceived to be a less serious problemthan dependence on alcohol, opioids and stimulants, which haveaccordingly been given priority in treatment (Hannifin, 1988).Given the widespread use of cannabis, and its continued reputation asa drug which is free of the risk of dependence, the clinical featuresof cannabis dependence deserve to be better delineated and studied.This would enable its prevalence to be better estimated, andindividuals with this dependence to be better recognised and treated.Treatment should probably be on the same principles as what iseffective for other forms of dependence. Treatment for tobaccodependence may provide a better model than treatment for alcoholdependence, although this area is in need of research. Although cannabis dependence is likely to be a larger problem thanpreviously thought, we should be wary of over-estimating its socialand public health importance. It will be most common in the minorityof heavy chronic cannabis users. Even in this group, the prevalence ofdrug-related problems may be relatively low by comparison with thoseof alcohol dependence, and the rate of remission without formaltreatment is likely to be high. While acknowledging the existence ofthe syndrome, we should avoid exaggerating its prevalence and theseverity of its adverse effects on individuals. Better research on theexperiences of long-term cannabis users should provide more preciseestimates of the risk.ReferencesAmerican Psychiatric Association. (1987) Diagnostic and StatisticalManual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III-R). (3rd Edition, Revised)Washington: American Psychiatric Association.Anthony, J and Helzer, J.E. (1991) Syndromes of drug abuse anddependence. In L.N. Robins and D.A. Regier (eds) Psychiatric Disordersin America. New York: Free Press, MacMillan.Brook, J.S., Cohen, P., Whiteman, M. and Gordon, A.S. (1992)Psychosocial risk factors in the transition from moderate to heavy useor abuse of drugs. In M. Glantz and R. Pickens (eds) Vulnerability toDrug Abuse. Washington: American Psychological Association.Chen, R., Mattick, R.P and Baillie, A. (1993) Clients of TreatmentService Agencies. March, 1992 Census Findings. Canberra: AustralianGovernment Publishing Service.Compton, D.R., Dewey, W.L. and Martin, B.R. (1990) Cannabis dependenceand tolerance production. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse, 9,128-147.De Silva, R., DuPont, R.L. and Russell, G.K. (eds) (1981) Treating theMarijuana-Dependent Person. New York: The American Council onMarijuana and Other Psychoactive Drugs, Inc.Didcott, P., Flaherty, B. and Muir, C. (1988) A profile of addicts inresidential treatment in New South Wales. Directorate of the DrugOffensive, In House Report Series. Sydney: New South Wales Departmentof Health.Edwards, G. (1982) Cannabis and the question of dependence. AdvisoryCouncil on the Misuse of Drugs. Report of the Expert Group on theEffects of Cannabis Use. London: Home Office.Edwards, G.  and Gross, M.M. (1976) Alcohol dependence: provisionaldescription of a clinical syndrome. British Medical Journal, 1,1058-1061.Edwards, G., Arif, A. & Hodgson, R. (1981) Nomenclature andclassification of drug-and alcohol-related problems: A WHO memorandum.Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 59 (2), 225-242.  Engstrom, A., Allebeck, P., Rodwall, Y. and Rydberg, U. (1985) Adversepsychic effects of cannabis - with special focus on Sweden. In D.J.Harvey, W. Paton and G. Nahas (Eds) Marihuana '84: Proceedings of theOxford Symposium on Cannabis. Oxford: IRL Press.Fehr, K.O. and Kalant, H. (1983) (Eds) Cannabis and Health Hazards.Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.Georgotas, A. and Zeidenberg, P. (1979) Observations on the effects offour weeks of heavy marijuana smoking on group interaction andindividual behavior. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 20, 427-432.Hanniffin, J. (1988) The ownership debate: Cannabis and the concept of"cannabism". In G. Chesher, P. Consroe, and R. Musty (eds) Marijuana:An International Research Report. Canberra: Australian GovernmentPublishing Service. Heather, N. and Tebbut, J. (eds) (1989) An Overview of theEffectiveness of Treatment for Drug and Alcohol Problems. NationalCampaign Against Drug Abuse Monograph Series Number 11. Canberra:Australian Government Publishing Service.Helzer, J.E., Burnham, A. and McEvoy, L.T. (1991) Alcohol abuse anddependence. In L.N. Robins and D.A. Regier (eds) Psychiatric Disordersin America. New York: Free Press, MacMillan.Hendin, H., Haas, A.P., Singer, P., Eller, M. and Ulman, R. (1987)Living High: Daily Marijuana Use Among Adults. New York: HumanSciences Press.Hollister, L.E. (1986) Health aspects of cannabis. PharmacologicalReviews, 38, 1-20.Jones, R.T. (1984) Marijuana: Health and treatment issues. PsychiatricClinics of North America, 7, 703-712.Jones, R.T. and Benowitz, N. (1976) The 30-day trip - clinical studiesof cannabis tolerance and dependence. In M Braude and S. Szara (eds)Pharmacology of Marijuana. Volume 2. New York: Academic Press.Jones, R.T., Benowitz, N. and Herning, R.I. (1981) The clinicalrelevance of cannabis tolerance and dependence. Journal of ClinicalPharmacology, 21, 143S-152S.Kandel, D.B. and Davies, M. (1992) Progression to regular marijuanainvolvement: Phenomenology and risk factors for near daily use. In M.Glantz and R. Pickens (eds) Vulnerability to Drug Abuse. Washington:American Psychological Association.Kleber, H.D. (1989) Treatment of drug dependence: What works?International Review of Psychiatry, 1, 81-100.Kosten, T.R., Rounsaville, B.J., Babor, T.F., Spitzer, R.L. andWilliams, J.B.W. (1987) Substance-use disorders in DSM-III-R. BritishJournal of Psychiatry, 151, 834-843.McGee, R.O. and Feehan, M. (1993) Cannabis use among New Zealandadolescents. New Zealand Medical Journal, 106, 345.Miller, N.S. and Gold, M.S. (1989) The diagnosis of marijuana(Cannabis) dependence. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 6,183-192.Miller, N.S., Gold, M. and Pottash, A (1989) A 12-step treatmentapproach for marijuana (Cannabis) dependence. Journal of SubstanceAbuse Treatment, 6, 241-250. Miller, W.M. and Hester, R.K. (1986) The effectiveness of alcoholismtreatment: what research reveals. In Miller, W.M. and Heather, N.(eds) Treating Addictive Behaviors: Processes of Change. New York:Plenum Press.National Academy of Science, Institute of Medicine. (1982) Marijuanaand Health. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Newcombe, M.D. (1992) Understanding the multidimensional nature ofdrug use an abuse: The role of consumption, risk factors andprotective factors. In M. Glantz and R. Pickens (eds) Vulnerability toDrug Abuse. Washington: American Psychological Association.Robins, L.N.  and Regier, D.A. (1991) (Eds) Psychiatric Disorders inAmerica. New York: Free Press, MacMillan.Roffman, R.A., Stephens, R.S., Simpson, E.E. and Whitaker, D.L. (1988)Treatment of marijuana dependence: preliminary results. Journal ofPsychoactive Drugs, 20, 129-137.Rounsaville, B.J., Kosten, T.R., Williams, J.B.W. and Spitzer, R.L.(1987) A field trial of DSM-III-R psychoactive substance dependencedisorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 144, 351-355. Rounsaville, B.J., Bryant, K., Babor, T., Kranzler, H. and Kadden, R.(1993) Cross-system agreement for substance use disorders. Addiction,88, 337-348.Shedler, J. and Block, J. (1990) Adolescent drug use and psychologicalhealth. American Psychologist, 45, 612-630.Smith, J.W., Schmeling, G. and Knowles, P.L. (1988) A marijuanasmoking cessation clinical trial utilizing THC-free marijuana,aversion therapy, and self-management counseling. Journal of SubstanceAbuse Treatment, 5, 89-98.Stephens, R.S. and Roffman, R.A. (1993) Adult marijuana dependence. InJ.S. Baer, G.A. Marlatt, and R.J. MacMahon (eds) Addictive BehaviorsAcross the Lifespan: Prevention, Treatment and Policy Issues. NewburyPark, California: Sage Publications.Tunving, K., Lundquist, T., and Eriksson, D. (1988) "A way out of thefog": An outpatient program for cannabis users. In G. Chesher, P.Consroe, and R. Musty (eds) Marijuana: An International ResearchReport. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.Weller, R.A. and Halikas, J. (1980) Objective criteria for thediagnosis of marijuana abuse. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,168, 98-103.Weller, R.A. and Halikas, J. (1982) Changes in effects of marijuana: afive- to six-year follow-up. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 43,362-365.Weller, R.A., Halikas, J. and Morse, C. (1984) Alcohol and marijuana:comparison of use and abuse in regular marijuana users. Journal ofClinical Psychiatry, 45, 377-379.Wells, J.E., Bushnell, J.A., Joyce, P.R., Oakley-Browne, M.A. andHornblow, A.R. (1992) Problems with alcohol, drugs and gambling inChristchurch, New Zealand. In M. Abbot and K. Evans (eds) Alcohol andDrug Dependence and Disorders of Impulse Control. Auckland: AlcoholLiquor Advisory Council.Woody, G.E., Cottler, L.B. and Caciola, J. (1993) Severity ofdependence: data from the DSM-IV field trials. Addiction, 88,1573-1579.Zweben, J.E. and O'Connell, K. (1992) Strategies for breakingmarijuana dependence. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 24, 165-171.7.4 Effects of chronic cannabis use on cognitive functioningBecause cannabis use acutely impairs cognitive processes, a concernhas arisen that chronic cannabis use may cause chronic cognitiveimpairment. Such a chronic effect need not necessarily be permanent,but it would persist beyond the elimination of cannabinoids from thebody, and hence would be the result of secondary changes induced bycumulative exposure to cannabinoids. Such chronic effects couldproduce relatively enduring behavioural deficits which presumablyreflect changes in brain function. This chapter deals with the evidence from a variety of different typesof study about the cognitive effects of chronic cannabis use. Thecaveats mentioned in the introduction must be born in mind whilstcritically assessing this evidence: many other factors must becontrolled in order to confidently attribute any cognitive effects tocannabis use. Among these, the most important are ensuring that thecognitive impairment did not precede cannabis use, and ensuring thatthe cognitive effects are not the result of the multiple drug use thatis especially common among heavy cannabis users (Carlin, 1986).7.4.1 Clinical observationsConcerns about the cognitive effects of chronic cannabis use duringthe early 1970s were first prompted by clinical reports of mentaldeterioration in persons who had used cannabis heavily (at leastdaily) for more than one year (Fehr and Kalant, 1983). Kolansky andMoore (1971, 1972), for example, reported cases of psychiatricdisorder in adolescents and young adults (38 cases) and among adults(13 cases) who had used marijuana at least twice per week. Theclinical picture was one of "very poor social judgment, poor attentionspan, poor concentration, confusion, anxiety, depression, apathy,passivity, indifference and often slowed and slurred speech" (Kolanskyand Moore, 1971). Cognitive symptoms included: apathetic and sluggishmental and physical responses; mental confusion; difficulties withrecent memory; and incapability of completing thoughts during verbalcommunication. These symptoms typically began after cannabis use anddisappeared within three to 24 months of abstinence. The course andremission of symptoms also appeared to be correlated with pastfrequency and duration of cannabis smoking. Those with a history ofless intensive use showed complete remission of symptoms within sixmonths; those with more intensive use took between six and nine monthsto recover; while those with chronic intensive use were stillsymptomatic nine months after discontinuation of drug use. These clinical reports, similar observations by Tennant and Groesbeck(1972) among hashish smoking US soldiers in West Germany, and a reportof cerebral atrophy in young cannabis users (Campbell et al, 1971)excited substantial controversy about the cognitive effects of chroniccannabis use. Critics were quick to object to the lack of objectivemeasures of impairment and the biased sampling from psychiatricpatient populations. It was also difficult to rule out alternativeexplanations of the apparent association between cannabis use andcognitive impairment, namely, that many of these effects eitherpreceded cannabis use, or were the result of other drug use. Whatevertheir limitations, these clinical reports alerted the community to thepossible risks of using cannabis when it was becoming popular amongthe young in Western countries; they also prompted better controlledempirical research on the issue. 7.4.2 Cross-cultural studiesIn response to public anxiety about the increase in marijuana use inthe late 1960s, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) in theUnited States commissioned three cross-cultural studies in Jamaica,Greece and Costa Rica to assess the effects of chronic cannabis use oncognitive functioning (among other things). The rationale for thesestudies was that any cognitive effects of chronic daily cannabis usewould be most apparent in cultures with a long-standing tradition ofheavy cannabis use.7.4.2.1 JamaicaBowman and Pihl (1973) conducted two field studies of chronic cannabisuse in Jamaica, one with a small sample of 16 users and 10 controlsfrom rural and semi-rural areas, and the other with a small urban slumsample of 14 users and controls. Users had consumed cannabis daily fora minimum of 10 years (current use of about 23 high potencyjoints/day), while controls had no previous experience with cannabis.Tests were selected on the basis of having previously been shown to besensitive to impairment following chronic heavy alcohol use (Bowmanand Pihl, 1973). The groups were matched for age, sex, social class,alcohol use, education and "intelligence", but most subjects wereilliterate or semi-literate, with an average age of 30. No differenceswere found between the users and non-users in either study, even whenthe rural and urban samples were combined. Soueif (1976b) argued that a null result would be expected accordingto his hypothesis that cannabis-induced impairments require a minimumlevel of literacy to be detected. Bowman and Pihl replied that thecontrols were sufficiently literate to enable any impairment in theusers to manifest. Moreover, their study required only a minimum offour hours abstinence prior to testing, which meant that some subjectswere still intoxicated at the time of testing. This possibility wouldhave biased the test results in favour of finding poorer performanceamong the users. A more extensive study of 60 working class males in Jamaica (Rubin andComitas, 1975) compared 30 users and 30 non-users matched on age,socioeconomic status and residence. The users who were aged between 23and 53 years with a mean age of 34 years, had used cannabis for anaverage of 17.5 years (range seven to 37 years) at around seven jointsper day (range one to 24) containing an estimated 60mg of THC. Theyhad not used any other substances other than alcohol and tobacco.While no control subject had used cannabis heavily in recent years,nine were current "occasional" users of cannabis and all but 12 of thecontrols had some experience with cannabis. A battery of 19 psychological tests were administered after three daysof abstinence, as part of a six-day inpatient stay. The psychologicaltests included three tests of intellectual and verbal abilities, and15 neuropsychological tests measuring abilities previously shown to beaffected by acute cannabis intoxication. Comparisons of the users andnon-users on 47 test scores failed to reveal any consistentsignificant differences. There were three statistically significantresults which were not easily interpreted and were considered chancefindings. There was no strong suggestion of differences that failed tobe detected because of a small sample size, since the user groupscored better than the non-user group on 29 variables, albeitnon-significantly. The interpretation of these null results must be qualified becauseseveral factors may have attenuated differences between users andnon-users. First, the tests used were not standardised for use inJamaica. The authors' arguednerability toDrug Abuse. Washington: Amfor both users and controls and therefore would not obscure any groupdifferences (Rubin and Comitas, 1975, p111). Second, the WeschlerAdult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) subtests may have been too easy or toodifficult to allow detection of group differences. Third, theinclusion of cannabis users in the control group may have furtherreduced the chance of detecting group differences. Fourth, theJamaican sample were primarily farmers, fishermen and artisans fromrural areas, or casual urban labourers. The failure of cannabis toimpair their cognitive performance does not exclude the possibilitythat the long-term use of cannabis may impair the performance ofpersons required to perform at a cognitively more demanding level.7.4.2.2 GreeceThe Greek NIDA study (Stefanis et al 1976, 1977) compared thecognitive performance of a sample of 47 chronic hashish users and 40controls matched for age, sex, education, demographic region,socioeconomic status and alcohol consumption. The subjects were mostlyrefugees from Asia Minor, residing in a low income, working class areaof Athens. The average duration of hashish use was 23 years of 200mgper day. Most users had smoked hashish on the day before testing, andsome had smoked several hours before the test session. Controls wereslightly better educated than users. These researchers administered the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale(WAIS) and Raven's Progressive Matrices to assess general intelligenceand mental functioning (Kokkevi and Dornbush, 1977). Subtests of theWAIS were used to evaluate impairment in specific cognitive andperceptual functions. The Raven's test was considered to be a moreculture-free assessment of intelligence and was used for reliabilityand validity purposes. The groups did not differ in global IQ score oneither the WAIS or Raven's Progressive Matrices, but non-usersobtained a higher verbal IQ score than users. The users' performancewas worse than controls on all but one of the subtests of the WAIS,even if not significantly so. Significant differences in performancebetween the two groups were obtained in three subtests of the WAIS,indicating possible defects in verbal comprehension and expression,verbal memory, abstraction and associative thinking, visual-motorcoordination and memorising capacity, and logical sequential thought. The interpretation of these results was complicated by the lack of arequirement that subjects abstain from hashish prior to testing.Consequently, it was not clear whether the impairments found on thesesubtests were related to long-term use of hashish, or were due to thepersistence of an acute drug effect at the time of testing. Becausethe differences between verbal and performance IQ were similar in bothgroups, the authors argued that there was no evidence of deteriorationin mental abilities in the hashish users. 7.4.2.3 Costa RicaThe NIDA study of chronic heavy cannabis users in Costa Rica wasmodelled upon the Jamaican project, but with greater sensitivity tocross-cultural issues. It involved an intensive physiological,psychological, sociological and anthropological study of matched pairsof users and non-users (Carter, 1980). Satz, Fletcher and Sutker(1976) compared 41 male long-term heavy cannabis users (9.6 joints perday for 17 years) with matched controls on an extensive test batterydesigned to assess the impact of chronic cannabis use onneuropsychological, intellectual and personality variables. Theeducational level of the Costa Rican sample was slightly higher thanthat of either the Greek or the Jamaican samples, although more thanhalf of the user group had not completed primary school, and bothusers and non-users had left school at 12 years of age. The users wereworking class, mostly tradesmen with lower than average income, whoreported that they often used cannabis to improve their workperformance.Despite their long duration and heavy use, the Costa Rican users didnot differ significantly from controls on any test. Users scoredconsistently lower, if not significantly so, than non-users on 11 of16 neuropsychological tests. Although users' performance was poorer,particularly in the mean number of errors made, learning curves weresimilar for both groups. The authors concluded that there wasinsufficient evidence for significant impairment of memory function inthe chronic cannabis users. Users performed slightly better on six ofthe 11 WAIS subtests and had a slightly higher verbal and full-scaleIQ. There were no correlations between test results and the level ofmarijuana use. A 10-year follow-up of the Costa Rican sample was conducted by Page,Fletcher and True (1988). By the time of follow-up, the users had anaverage 30 years experience with cannabis, but the sample size haddropped to 27 of the 41 original users and 30 of the 41 controls. Thetest protocol included some of the original tests, as well asadditional tests which measured short-term memory and attention, andwhich had been selected for their sensitivity in detecting subtlechanges in cognitive functioning. No differences were detected on any of the original tests, but threetests from the new battery yielded significant differences betweenusers and controls. In Buschke's Selective Reminding Test, the usergroup retrieved significantly fewer words from long-term storage thanthe non-user group, although the groups did not differ on a measure ofstorage. Users performed more slowly than non-users in the UnderliningTest, with particularly poor performance in the most complex subtest.The Continuous Performance Test also revealed users to be slower thancontrols on measures requiring sustained attention and effortfulprocessing, although there were no differences in performance. Page et al (1988) interpreted their results as evidence that long-termconsumption of cannabis was associated with difficulties in sustainedattention and short-term memory. They hypothesised that such testsrequire more mental effort than the tests used in the original study,and, as such, that long-term users of cannabis experience greaterdifficulties with effortful processing. This study differs fromprevious cross-cultural investigations in that it found differencesbetween users and non-users in tests of information processing,sustained attention and short-term memory. Nevertheless, Page et al(1988) emphasised that the differences they found were "quite subtle"and "subclinical", with only a small number of subjects beingclinically impaired. Because the differences are so small and subtle,it was difficult to exclude the alternative explanation that thedifferences were due to acute intoxication or recent use, since24-hour abstinence was requested but not verified. 7.4.2.4 EgyptSoueif (1971) studied 850 Egyptian hashish smokers and 839 controlsobtained from a male prison population which was poorly educated,largely illiterate and of low socioeconomic status. Significantdifferences were found between users and controls on 10 out of 16measures of perceptual speed and accuracy, distance and timeestimation, immediate memory, reaction time and visual-motor abilities(Soueif, 1971; 1975; 1976a; 1976b). These differences were more markedin those under 25 years and among the best educated urban users. Soueif's study was subsequently criticised for methodological reasons(Fletcher and Satz, 1977). A major criticism was that the groupsdiffered on a number of variables that were relevant to cognitiveperformance, including education (with literate non-users being bettereducated than illiterate users). There were also higher rates ofopiate and alcohol use among the cannabis users. Soueif (1977) laterreported that in his sample, differences between users and non-userswere not explained by education or polydrug use (Soueif, 1977). Thevalidity of these findings remain under doubt, however, because someof the tests used did not have established neuropsychological validity(Carlin, 1986).7.4.2.5 IndiaAgarwal et al (1975) studied 40 subjects who had used bhang (atea-like infusion of cannabis leaves and stems) daily for about fiveyears. These users were less than 45 years of age, and reasonably welleducated: none were illiterate and 65 per cent had completed highschool. There was no control group, so scores were compared tonormative data on the tests used. By comparison with these norms, 18per cent of the bhang users had memory impairment, 28 per cent showedmild intellectual impairment on an intelligence test (IQs less than90) and 20 per cent showed substantial cognitive disturbances on theBender-Gestalt Visuo-Motor Test. Wig and Varma (1977) substantiallyreplicated these results. Mendhiratta, Wig and Verma (1978) compared 50 heavy cannabis users(half bhang drinkers, half charas smokers of at least 25 days permonth for a mean of 10 years) with matched controls. The entire samplewas of low socioeconomic status. Tests were administered after 12hours abstinence which was verified by overnight admission to ahospital ward. The cannabis users reacted more slowly, and performedmore poorly in concentration and time estimation. The charas smokerswere the poorest performers, showing impaired memory function, loweredpsychomotor activity and poor size estimation. A follow-up of 11 ofthe original bhang drinkers, 19 charas smokers and 15 controls nine to10 years later (Mendhiratta et al, 1988) showed significantdeterioration on several of the tests.Ray et al (1978) assessed the cognitive functioning of 30 chroniccannabis users (aged 25-46) who had used bhang, ganja or charas for aminimum of 11 times/month for at least five years. They compared theirperformance to 50 randomly selected non-user controls of similar age,occupation, socioeconomic status and educational background. Fewdifferences were found on tests of attention, visuomotor coordination,or memory. Cannabis users' performance was impaired on one of thesubtests of the memory scale. However, the matching of subjects wasnot rigorous, and the fact that all subjects were illiterate may haveproduced a floor effect masking differences between groups. Varma et al (1988) administered 13 psychological tests selected toassess intelligence, memory and other cognitive functions, to 26 heavymarijuana smokers and 26 controls matched on age, education andoccupation. The average daily intake of the cannabis users wasestimated as 150mg THC, with a frequency of at least 20 times permonth, and a mean duration of use 6.8 years (minimum five years).Twelve hours abstinence was ensured by overnight hospitalisation.Cannabis users were found to react more slowly on perceptuomotortasks, but did not differ from controls on the tests of intelligence.When the scores of all the memory tests were combined, there was nodifference between the total scores of cannabis users and controls,although cannabis users scored significantly more poorly on a subtestof recent memory. There were trends toward poorer performance onsubtests of remote memory, immediate and delayed recall, retention andrecognition. 7.4.2.6 SummaryThe results of the cross-cultural studies of long-term heavy cannabisusers provided at most equivocal evidence of an association betweencannabis use and more subtle long-term cognitive impairments. Giventhat cognitive impairments are most likely to be found in subjectswith a long history of heavy use, it is reassuring that most suchstudies have found few and typically small differences. It is unlikelythat the negative results of these studies can be attributed to aninsufficient duration or intensity of cannabis use within the samplesstudied, since the duration of cannabis use ranged between 16.9-23years, and the estimated amount of THC consumed daily ranged from20-90mg daily in Rubin and Comitas's Jamaican study to 120-200mg dailyin the Greek sample.The absence of differences is all the more surprising, since a numberof factors may have biased these studies toward finding poorerperformance among cannabis users. These include: higher rates ofpolydrug use, poor nutrition, poor medical care, and illiteracy amongusers; and the failure in many studies to ensure that subjects werenot intoxicated at the time of testing. Given the generally positivebiases in these studies, it has been argued that if cannabis use didproduce cognitive impairment, then these studies should have shownpositive results (Wert and Raulin, 1986b).The force of this argument is weakened by the fact that most of thesestudies also suffered from methodological difficulties which may haveoperated against finding a difference. First, the instruments usedhave been developed and standardised on Western populations. Second,many of these studies were based on small samples of questionablerepresentativeness. Third, a number of studies failed to include acontrol group, while others used inappropriate controls. Fourth,generalisation of the results of these studies to users in the West orother cultures is difficult, given the predominance of illiterate,rural, older and less intelligent or less educated subjects in thesestudies. Fifth, the studies were only capable of detecting grossdeficits. Sixth, few attempts were made to examine relationshipsbetween neuropsychological test performance and frequency and durationof cannabis use. Despite all these problems, there was nonetheless suggestive evidenceof more subtle cognitive deficits. Slower psychomotor performance,poorer perceptual motor coordination, and memory dysfunction were themost consistently reported deficits. In terms of memory function, fourstudies detected persistent short-term memory and attentional deficits(Page et al, 1988; Soueif, 1976a; Varma et al, 1988; Wig and Varma,1977), while three failed to detect such deficits (Bowman et al, 1973;Satz et al, 1976; Mendhiratta et al, 1978). The measures of short-termmemory were often inadequate, failing to determine which processes maybe impaired (e.g. acquisition, storage, encoding, retrieval) and oftenexcluded higher mental loads and conditions of distraction. A properevaluation of the complexity of effects of long-term cannabis use onhigher cognitive functions requires greater specificity in theselection of assessment methods, as well as the use of more sensitivetests.7.4.3 Studies of young Western users A number of studies have been conducted on the cognitive performanceof American or Canadian cannabis users. These samples have generallybeen young and well educated college students with relativelyshort-term exposure to cannabis, by comparison with the long historyof use among chronic users in the cross-cultural studies. In one of the earliest studies, Hochman and Brill (1973) surveyed1,400 college students and compared the performance of non-users (66per cent), occasional users (26 per cent) and chronic users (9 percent: defined as having used three times/week for three years or, hadused daily for two years). They found no relationship between eitherfrequency or duration of use and academic achievement. In about 1 percent of marijuana users there was impaired ability to function. In afollow-up of the original sample over two consecutive years (1971:N=1,133; 1972: N=901), Brill and Christie (1974) compared non-users,occasional users (<2 times per week), frequent (2-4/week), and regular users(5/week) by a self-report questionnaire. the majority ofusers reported no effect of cannabis use on psychosocialadjustment. a small proportion (12 per cent) who reported thattheir academic performance had declined were likely to haveeither reduced their frequency of use or quit. there were nosignificant differences between users, non-users or former usersin grade point average. a series of studies conducted since thenhas largely confirmed the results of hochman and brill's studies.grant et al (1973), for example, studied the effects of cannabisuse on psychological test performance on eight measures from thehalstead-reitan battery among medical students. they found nodifferences between 29 cannabis users (of median duration, fouryears and median frequency of use, three times per month) and 29age and intelligence matched non-users on seven of the eightmeasures. the failure to find any difference in sensory-motorintegration or immediate sensory memory was later replicated byrochford, grant and lavigne (1977) in a comparison of 25 users(of at least 50 times over a mean 3.7 years) and 26 controlsmatched on sex, age and scholastic aptitude scores. weckowicz andjanssen (1973) compared eleven male college students who smokedcannabis three to five times per week for at least three yearswith non-users who were matched on age, education andsocioeconomic and cultural backgrounds. they were assessed on avariety of tests of cognitive function. users performed betterthan controls on eight of the 11 cognitive tests but performedmore poorly on one which suggested that chronic use may affectsequential information processing. otherwise, there was noevidence of gross impairment of cognitive functioning. weckowicz,collier and spreng (1977) largely replicated these findings in acomparison of 24 heavy smokers (at least daily for three years)belonging to the "hippie subculture" with non-user controlsmatched for age, education, and social background. similarresults were reported by culver and king (1974) in a comparisonof the neuropsychological performance of three groups ofundergraduates (n="14)" from classes in two successive years:marijuana users (at least twice/month for 12 months); marijuanaplus lsd users (lsd use at least once/month for 12 months); andnon-drug users. there were no consistent differences between thegroups across the different years. in 1981, schaeffer et al(1981) reported no impairment of cognitive function in one of thefirst studies of a prolonged heavy cannabis using population inthe united states, who used the drug for religious reasons. theyassessed 10 long-term heavy users of ganja, aged between 25 and36 years, all of whom were caucasian, and had been born, raisedand educated in the usa. all had smoked between 30gm and 60gm ofmarijuana (>8 per cent THC) per day for a mean of 7.4 years. They hadnot consumed alcohol or other psychoactive substances. This study wasalso used a laboratory test to detect recent ingestion of cannabis.Schaeffer et al reported that at the time of testing, all subjects hadat least 50ng/ml cannabinoids in their urines. Performance on a seriesof tests of cognitive ability was compared with thestandardised-normative information available for each test. Overall,WAIS IQ scores were in the superior to very superior range, and thescores of all other tests were within normal limits. Despite the heavyand prolonged use of cannabis, there was no evidence of impairment inthe cognitive functions assessed, namely, language function,non-language function, auditory and visual memory, remote, recent andimmediate memory, or complex multimodal learning. Carlin and Trupin (1977) assessed 10 normal subjects (mean age 24years) who smoked marijuana daily for at least two years (mean fiveyears) and who denied other drug use. They administered the HalsteadNeuropsychological Test Battery after 24 hours abstinence. Nosignificant impairment was found by comparison with non-smokingsubjects matched for age, education and full-scale IQ. Cannabis usersperformed better on a test sensitive to cerebral impairment thannon-users. Not all studies have produced null results, however. Gianutsos andLitwack (1976), for example, compared the verbal memory performance of25 cannabis smokers who had used for two to six years and at leasttwice/week for the last three months, with 25 non-smokers who hadnever smoked cannabis. Subjects were drawn from an undergraduateuniversity student population and were matched on age, sex, year atuniversity, major and grade point average. Cannabis users reportedthat they had not smoked prior to testing, although the length ofabstinence was not reported. Cannabis users recalled significantlyfewer words overall than non-users, and the difference in performanceincreased as a function of the number of words they were required tolearn. Entin and Goldzung (1973) also found evidence of impairment in twostudies of the residual impact of cannabis use on memory processes. Inthe first study, verbal memory was assessed by the use ofpaired-associate nonsense syllable learning lists. Twenty-six cannabisusers (defined as daily for at least six months) were compared to 37non-users drawn from a student population. Cannabis users scoredsignificantly more poorly on both free recall (the number of wordsrecalled after a delay) and on acquisition, measured as improvement inrecall over repeated trials. In the second study, verbal and numericalmemory were tested by the presentation of word lists, interspersedwith arithmetic problems prior to recall. Cannabis users (N=37)recalled significantly fewer words than non-users (N=37), but did notdiffer from controls on arithmetic test scores. These findings wereinterpreted as residual impairment of both the acquisition and recallphases of long-term memory processes. The authors attributed theimpairments to either an enduring residual pharmacological effect onthe nervous system, or to an altered learning or attention pattern dueto repeated exposure to cannabis. 7.4.3.1 SummaryThe results of these empirical studies served to allay fears thatcannabis smoking caused gross impairment of cognition and cerebralfunction in young adults. The lack of consistent findings failed tosupport Kolansky and Moore's (1971, 1972) clinical reports of anorganic impairment, although some critics (e.g. Cohen, 1982) arguedthat the value of these studies was weakened by their small samplesizes and the fact that by studying college students, they had sampledfrom a population unlikely to contain many impaired persons. OnCohen's hypothesis, the younger, brighter college cannabis users mayreflect the survivors, whereas Kolansky and Moore sampled thecasualties. Such an hypothesis conflicts with the explanationsprovided for the failure to find impairment in the cross culturalstudies. Soueif's hypothesis, for example, was that the lower thenon-drug level of proficiency, the smaller the size of functionaldeficit associated with drug usage. This would imply maximaldifferences at the high end of cognitive ability. A more pertinent explanation for the lack of impairment is that theduration of cannabis use in these samples was quite brief, generallyless than five years. It has been argued that cannabis has not beensmoked long enough in Western countries for impairments to emerge.Further, when psychometric testing was used as a metric of cognitivefunction as opposed to self-report questionnaires, sample sizes wereoften too small to permit the detection of all but very largedifferences between groups. Not all studies found negative results. A small number of studies didfind significant impairments in their cannabis users. It is noteworthythat these studies selected tests to assess a specific cognitivefunction (memory), and attempted to determine the specific stages ofprocessing where dysfunction occurred. Entin and Goldzung (1973), forexample, found that users were impaired on both verbal recall andacquisition of long-term storage memory tasks, but not on arithmeticmanipulations which require short-term storage of information. 7.4.4 Controlled laboratory studiesA different approach to the investigation of the cognitiveconsequences of chronic cannabis use is to examine the cognitiveeffects of daily cannabis use over periods of weeks to months. Suchstudies have attempted to control for variation in quantity, frequencyand duration of use, as well as other factors such as nutrition andother drug use, by having subjects reside in a hospital ward whilereceiving known quantities of cannabis. All such studies employed pre-and post-drug observation periods. Because of their expense, samplesizes in these studies have been small and the duration of cannabisadministration has ranged from 21 to 64 consecutive days.Dornbush et al (1972) administered 1g of marijuana containing 14mg THCto five regular smokers (all healthy young students) for 21consecutive days. The subjects were tested immediately before and 60minutes after drug administration. Data were collected on short-termmemory and digit symbol substitution tests. Performance on theshort-term memory test decreased on the first day of drugadministration but gradually improved until by the last day of thestudy, performance had returned to baseline levels. On thepost-experimental day baseline performance was surpassed. Performanceon the digit symbol substitution test was unaffected by drugadministration and also improved with time, suggesting a practiceeffect. Mendelson, Rossi and Meyer (1974) reported a 31-day cannabisadministration study in which 20 healthy, young male subjects (10casual and 10 heavy users, mean age 23) were confined in a researchward and allowed 21 days of ad libitum marijuana smoking.Psychological tests were administered during a five-day drug-freebaseline phase, the 21 day smoking period and a five-day drug-freerecovery phase. Acute and repeat dose effects of marijuana oncognitive function were studied with a battery of psychological testsknown to be sensitive to organic brain dysfunction. There was no overtimpairment of performance prior to or following cannabis smoking, norwas there any difference between the performance of the heavy and thecasual users. Short-term memory function, as assessed by digit spanforwards and backwards, was impaired while intoxicated, and there wasa relationship between performance and time elapsed since smoking.Similar failures to detect cognitive effects have been reported bythree other groups of investigators. Frank et al (1976) assessedshort-term memory and goal directed serial alternation and computationin healthy young males over 28 days of cannabis administration.Harshman et al (1976) and Cohen (1976) conducted a 94-day cannabisstudy in which 30 healthy moderate to heavy male cannabis users, aged21-35, were administered on average 5.2 joints per day (mean 103mgTHC, range 35-198mg) for 64 days, and were assessed on brainhemisphere dominance before, during and after cannabis administration.Psychometric testing was not employed, but subjects were given twowork assignments with financial incentive: a "psychomotor" taskinvolving the addition of two columns of figures on a calculator, anda "cognitive task" of learning a foreign language. No long-termimpairments were detected with these somewhat inadequate assessmentmethods. 7.4.4.1 SummaryThe experimental studies of daily cannabis usage for periods of up tothree months in young adult male volunteers have consistently failedto demonstrate a relationship between marijuana use andneuropsychological dysfunction. This is not surprising given the shortperiods of exposure to the drug in these studies. Furthermore, sincesubjects served as their own controls, and had all used cannabis forat least one year prior to the study, it would be surprising if a fewadditional weeks of cannabis use produced any significant decrementsin performance. 7.4.5 Recent research The equivocal results of the early investigations into long-termeffects of cannabis on cognitive function led to something of a hiatusin research on the cognitive effects of cannabis in the 1980s.Although the accumulated evidence indicated that cannabis did notseverely affect intellectual functioning, uncertainty remained aboutmore subtle impairments. Their study required advances in methodologyand assessment techniques which were made in the field of cognitivepsychology and neuropsychology in the 1980s. Modern theories ofcognition, memory function and information processing were developed,as were more sensitive measures of cognitive processes. By the late1980s, interest in the cognitive effects of cannabis revived at a timewhen cannabis had been widely used for more than 15 years, its use waswidespread and initiated at a progressively younger age among youngAmericans. Research from the late 1980s through the 1990s improved upon thedesign and methodology of previous studies by using adequate controlgroups, verifying abstinence from cannabis prior to testing, andprecisely measuring the quantity, frequency and duration of cannabisuse. In addition, greater attention was paid to investigating specificcognitive processes and relating impairments in them to the quantity,frequency and duration of cannabis use. The greater specificity in study focus was made possible byaccumulating evidence that cannabis primarily exerts its effect uponthose areas of the brain responsible for attention and memory. Millerand Branconnier (1983), for example, reviewed the literature andconcluded that impaired memory was the single most consistentlyreported psychological deficit produced by cannabinoids acutely, andthe most consistently detected impairment in long-term cannabis use.Intrusion errors were one of the most robust type of cannabis-inducedmemory deficits in both recall and recognition (Miller andBranconnier, 1983). Such errors involve the introduction of extraneousitems, word associations or new material during free recall of words,or the false identification of previously unseen items in recognitiontasks. Miller and Branconnier conjectured that these intrusion errorsoccurred because cannabis users were unable to exclude irrelevantassociations or extraneous stimuli during concentration of attention,a process in which the hippocampus plays a major role. The finding ofhigh densities of the cannabinoid receptor in the cerebral cortex andhippocampus (Herkenham et al, 1990) supports the hypothesis thatcannabinoids are involved in attentional and memory processes. 7.4.5.1 Studies of long-term adult usersSolowij et al (1991; 1992; 1993) conducted a series of studies of theeffects of long-term cannabis use on specific stages of informationprocessing. In keeping with Miller and Branconnier's hypothesis,Solowij et al assessed the integrity of attentional processes inlong-term cannabis users using a combination of performance and brainevent-related potential measures. Event-related potential (ERP)measures are sensitive markers of covert cognitive processesunderlying overt behaviour; the amplitude and latency of various ERPcomponents have been shown to reflect various stages of informationprocessing.Solowij et al, (1991) studied a small and heterogeneous group oflong-term cannabis users (N=9), aged 19-40, who had used cannabis fora mean of 11.2 years at the level of 4.8 days per week. The cannabisusers were matched on age, sex, years of education and alcoholconsumption with nine non-user controls who had either never used orhad limited experience with cannabis (maximum use 15 times). Strictexclusion criteria were applied to any subjects with a history of headinjury, neurological or psychiatric illness, significant use of otherdrugs, or high levels of alcohol consumption. The groups did notdiffer in premorbid IQ, as estimated by the NART score (Nelson, 1984).Subjects were instructed to abstain from cannabis and alcohol for 24hours prior to testing and two urine samples were analysed to ensurethat subjects were not acutely intoxicated at the time of testing.Subjects completed a multidimensional auditory selective attentiontask in which random sequences of tones varying in location, pitch andduration were delivered through headphones while brain electricalactivity (EEG) was recorded. They were instructed to attend to aparticular ear and a particular pitch, and to respond to the longduration tones with a button press. This procedure enabled anexamination of the brain's response to attended and unattended tones.Cannabis users performed significantly more poorly than controls, withfewer correct detections, more errors and slightly longer reactiontimes. Analysis of the ERP measures showed that cannabis users hadreduced P300 amplitudes compared to controls, reflecting dysfunctionin the allocation of attentional resources and stimulus evaluationstrategies. Further, cannabis users showed an inability to filter outirrelevant information, while controls were able to reject thisirrelevant information from further processing at an early stage.These results suggested that long-term cannabis use impairs theability to efficiently process complex information.Solowij et al (1992; 1993) conducted a second study with a largersample to examine the relationships between degree of impairment andthe frequency and duration of use. Thirty-two cannabis users recruitedfrom the general community were split into four groups of equal size(N=8) defined by frequency (light:  twice/week vs heavy:  threetimes/week) and duration (short: 3-4 years vs long:  five years) ofcannabis use. The mean number of years of use for the long durationusers was 10.1, and 3.3 for short duration users (range three to 28years). The mean frequency of use was 18 days per month for the heavygroup and six for the light group (range: once/month to daily use).Subjects were matched to a group of non-user controls (N=16) as in thefirst study, and a similar methodology was employed. Once again cannabis users performed worse than the controls, with thegreatest impairment observed in the heavy user group, therebyreplicating the earlier ERP findings. In addition, different cognitiveprocesses were differentially affected by frequency and duration ofcannabis use. The long duration user group showed significantly largerprocessing negativity to irrelevant stimuli than did short durationusers and controls, who did not differ from each other. There were nodifferences between groups defined on frequency of use. A significantcorrelation between the ERP measure and duration of cannabis useindicated that the ability to focus attention and filter outirrelevant information was progressively impaired with the number ofyears of use, but was unrelated to frequency of use. Frequency of useaffected the speed of information processing, as reflected in adelayed P300 latency in the heavy user group compared to light usersand controls. There was a significant correlation between P300 latencyand increasing frequency of use, while this measure was unrelated toduration of use. These results suggest that different mechanisms underlie theshort-term and long-lasting actions of cannabinoids. The slowing ofinformation processing suggests a chronic build up of cannabinoids,and reflected a residual effect which could be eliminated by reducingthe frequency of use. The inability to focus attention and rejectirrelevant information possibly reflected long-term changes at thecannabinoid receptor site. The consequences of these impairments maybe apparent in high levels of distractability when driving, operatingcomplex machinery, and learning in the classroom situation, andinterference with efficient memory and general cognitive functions.Solowij et al also conducted specific analyses to disentangle therelationship between duration of cannabis use and age. The results ofthese analyses indicated that impairment was greatest in youngersubjects. Further, the studies demonstrated the insensitivity ofperformance measures to cannabinoid effects, emphasising the need touse more sensitive measures to examine otherwise inaccessible, covertcognitive processes. Supportive evidence has emerged from a project funded by the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) in the U.S. (principal investigator F.Struve) that investigated persistent central nervous system sequelaeof chronic cannabis exposure. This research, which has focused uponquantitative EEG, has found evidence of larger changes in EEGfrequency, primarily in frontal-central cortex, in daily cannabisusers of up to 30 years duration compared to short-term users andnon-users (e.g. Struve et al, 1993). The results also suggest adose-response relationship between EEG changes and the totalcumulative exposure (duration in years) of daily cannabis use whichmay indicate organic changes. The major limitation of this research isthat changes in frequency of EEG spectra have not been shown to berelated to cognitive events. One study from this research group has used cognitive event-relatedpotential measures. It found smaller P2 and N2 amplitudes in long-termcannabis users (>15 years) compared to moderate users (of three to sixyears). Cannabis users overall showed significantly smaller auditoryand visual P300 amplitudes than controls, but no significant latencydifferences (Straumanis et al, 1992). Unfortunately, this study hasonly been reported in abstract form, and results have not beenexamined as a function of frequency of cannabis use. This research group has also assessed cognitive functioning byneuropsychological tests (e.g. Leavitt et al, 1991; 1992; 1993). Theseinvestigations have been well controlled. Subjects were extensivelyscreened for current or past psychiatric or medical disease or CNSinjury, and underwent extensive drug history assessments, with eightweeks of twice weekly drug screens. Groups were matched for age andsex. Daily cannabis users who had at least three years to six years ofuse were compared to a group who had used for six to 14 years, a groupwho had used on a daily basis for 15 years or more, and a non-usercontrol group. Sample sizes varied from study to study, but averaged15 per group. An extensive battery of psychological tests included measures ofsimple and complex reaction time, attention and memory span, languageand comprehension tasks, construction, verbal and visual learning andmemory, and mental abilities such as concept formation and logicalreasoning. The effects of age and education have been statisticallycontrolled for by multiple regression. Preliminary analyses have showna dose-response relationship between test performance and intensity ofcannabis use, with the best performance characterising controls,followed by the daily cannabis users, and the worst mean scoresoccurring in the very long-term group (Leavitt et al, 1991; 1992;1993; Leavitt, personal communication). Tests sensitive to mildcortical dysfunction were those most affected in the long-term usergroups. The authors acknowledge that small sample sizes dictate caution, andthat there were no data available to assess premorbid cognitivecapacity of these subjects. Nevertheless, the results suggested thatlong duration users seem to process some kinds of information moreslowly than non-users, and that the effects of long-term cannabis useare most likely to surface under conditions of moderately heavycognitive load. One crucial requirement for evaluating the performance of chronicmarijuana users is comparison with an appropriately matched group ofnon-using subjects. Although the studies described have madesubstantial progress in this regard, one concern remains that some ofthese impairments may have been present in the cannabis users prior totheir cannabis use. Block et al (1990) used scores on the Iowa Testsof Basic Skills collected in the fourth grade of grammar school as ameasure of premorbid cognitive ability. Block et al matched their userand non-user samples on this test to ensure that they were comparablein intellectual functioning before they began using marijuana. Thestudy aim was to determine whether chronic marijuana use producedspecific cognitive impairments, and if so, whether these impairmentsdepend on the frequency of use. Block and colleagues assessed: 144cannabis users, 64 of whom were light users (one to four/week for 5.5years) and 80 heavy users (five/week for 6.0 years), and comparedthem with 72 controls. Subjects were aged 18-42. Twenty-four hours ofabstinence were required prior to testing. Subjects participated in two sessions. In the first session theycompleted the 12th grade version of the Iowa Tests of EducationalDevelopment, which emphasise basic, general intellectual abilities andacademic skills and effective utilisation of previously acquiredinformation in verbal and mathematical areas. In the second session,subjects were administered computerised tests that emphasise learningand remembering new information, associative processes and semanticmemory retrieval, concept formation and psychomotor performance. Thesetasks had been previously shown to be sensitive to the acute andchronic effects of cannabis, and to relevant skills required in schooland work performance. The results showed that heavy users who werematched to controls on fourth-grade Iowa scores, showed impairment ontwo tests of verbal expression and mathematical skills when tested onthe 12th-grade Iowa test. No results have been reported to date fromthe computerised tests.  7.4.5.2 Studies in children and adolescentsA very different approach to assessing the long-term consequences ofexposure to cannabis has been taken in a well controlled longitudinalstudy of children who were exposed to cannabis in utero (Fried, 1993).The levels of exposure to cannabis in the sample were approximately asfollows: 60 per cent of the mothers used cannabis irregularly, 10 percent reported smoking two to five joints per week, and 30 per centsmoked a greater amount during each trimester of pregnancy. Prenatalexposure to cannabis was associated with high pitched cries, disturbedsleep cycles, increased tremors and exaggerated startles in responseto minimal stimulation in newborn to 30-day-old babies. The babiesshowed poorer habituation to visual stimuli, consistent with thesensitivity of the visual system to the teratogenic effects ofcannabis demonstrated in rhesus monkeys and rats. Fried hypothesisedthat exposure to cannabis may affect the rate of development of thecentral nervous system, slowing the maturation of the visual system.This hypothesis was supported by visual evoked potential studies ofthe children at four years of age, when children who had been exposedto cannabis in utero showed greater variability and longer latency ofthe evoked potential components, indicating immaturity in the system. From one to three years of age, no adverse effects of prenatalexposure were found. At two years it appeared that the children wereimpaired on tests of language comprehension, but this effect did notpersist after controlling for other factors such as ratings of homeenvironment. At four years of age, however, the children of cannabisusing mothers were significantly inferior to controls on tests ofverbal ability and memory. The explanation for the failure to detectimpairments in the preceding age group was that the degree and typesof deficits observed may only be identifiable when cognitivedevelopment has proceeded to a certain level of maturity. At five and six years of age, the children were not impaired on globaltests of cognition and language. By age six, however, there was adeficit in sustained attention on a task that differentiated betweenimpulsivity and vigilance. Fried proposed that "instruments thatprovide a general description of cognitive abilities may be incapableof identifying nuances in neurobehavior that may discriminate betweenthe marijuana-exposed and non-marijuana exposed children" (p332). Hesuggested the need for tests which examine specific cognitivecharacteristics and strategies, such as the test of sustainedattention. Fried concluded that cannabis "may affect a number ofneonatal behaviours and facets of cognitive behavior under conditionsin which complex demands are placed on nervous system functions".The effects of long-term cannabis use on adolescents have not beenadequately addressed. This issue is of greater relevance with anincrease in the prevalence of cannabis use among adolescents and youngadults in Western society. In the first study of its kind withadolescents, Schwartz et al (1989) reported the results of a smallcontrolled pilot study of persistent short-term memory impairment in10 cannabis-dependent adolescents (aged 14-16 years). Schwartz'sclinical observations of adolescents in a drug-abuse treatment programsuggested that memory deficits were a major problem, which accordingto the adolescents persisted for at least three to four weeks aftercessation of cannabis use. His sample was middle-class, NorthAmerican, matched for age, IQ and history of learning disabilitieswith 17 controls, eight of whom were drug abusers who had not beenlong-term users of cannabis, and another nine whom had never abusedany drug. The cannabis users consumed approximately 18g per week,smoking at a frequency of at least four days per week (mean 5.9) forat least four consecutive months (mean 7.6 months). Subjects with ahistory of excessive alcohol or phencyclidine use were excluded fromthe study. Cannabinoids were detected in the urines of eight of the 10users over two to nine days. Users were initially tested between two and five days after entry tothe treatment program, this length of time allowing for dissipation ofany short-term effects of cannabis intoxication on cognition andmemory. Subjects were assessed by a neuropsychological battery whichincluded the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, and six tests"to measure auditory/verbal and visual/spatial immediate andshort-term (delayed) memory and praxis (construction ability)"(p1215). After six weeks of supervised abstinence with bi-weekly urinescreens for drugs of abuse, they were administered a parallel testbattery. On the initial testing, there were statistically significantdifferences between groups on two tests: cannabis users wereselectively impaired on the Benton Visual Retention Test and theWechsler Memory Scale Prose Passages. The differences were smaller butwere still detectable six weeks later. Cannabis users committedsignificantly more errors than controls initially on the Benton VisualRetention Test for both immediate and delayed conditions, butdifferences in the six-week post-test were not significant. Usersscored lower than controls on both immediate and delayed recall in theWechsler Memory Prose Passages Test in both test sessions. The factthat there was a trend toward improvement in the scores of cannabisusers suggests that the deficits observed were related to their pastcannabis use and that functioning may return to normal following alonger period of abstinence. Schwartz's study was the first controlled study to demonstratecognitive dysfunction in cannabis-using adolescents with a relativelybrief duration of use. The implications of these results are thatyoung people may be more vulnerable to any impairments resulting fromcannabis use. Unfortunately, like many of its predecessors, Schwartz'steam made little effort to interpret the significance of theselectivity of their results. There was nothing to indicate whichspecific elements of memory formation or retrieval were disrupted. 7.4.6 DiscussionPrevious reviewers have generally concluded that there is insufficientevidence that cannabis produces long-term cognitive deficits (e.g.Wert and Raulin, 1986a; 1986b). This is a reasonable conclusion whengross deficits are considered. However, the findings from recent, moremethodologically rigorous studies provide evidence of subtle cognitiveimpairments which appear to increase with duration of cannabis use.The evidence suggests that impairment on some neuropsychological testsmay become apparent only after 10-15 years of use, but very sensitivemeasures of brain function are capable of detecting specificimpairments after five years of use.Impairments appear to be specific to the organisation and integrationof complex information, involving various mechanisms of attention andmemory processes. The similarity between the kinds of subtleimpairments associated with long-term cannabis use and frontal lobedysfunction is becoming more apparent (e.g. short-term memorydeficits, increased susceptibility to interference, lack of impairmenton general tests of intelligence or IQ). Frontal lobe function isdifficult to measure, as indicated by the fact that patients withknown frontal lobe lesions do not differ from controls on a variety ofneuropsychological tests (Stuss, 1991), so the difficulty of assessingfrontal lobe functions is not unique to research into the long-termeffects of cannabis. One of the functions of the frontal lobes is the temporal organisationof behaviour, a key process in efficient memory function,self-awareness and planning. The frontal lobe hypothesis ofimpairments due to long-term use of cannabis is consistent with thealtered perception of time demonstrated in cannabis users and withcerebral blood flow studies which demonstrate greatest alterations inthe region of the frontal lobes (see Section 7.5 brain damage).The equivocal results of previous studies may be due primarily to poormethodology and insensitive test measures. Wert and Raulin (1986b) hadrejected the possibility that tests used previously were not sensitiveenough to detect impairments, on the grounds that the same tests havedemonstrated impairment in alcoholics and heavy social drinkers.However, the cognitive deficits produced by chronic alcoholconsumption may be very different to those produced by cannabis. Themechanisms of action of the two substances are different, withcannabis acting on its own specific receptor, and Solowij et al (1993)showed that the attentional impairments detected in their long-termcannabis users were not related to their alcohol consumption.Furthermore, tests may have been selected inappropriately because theywere previously shown to be affected by acute intoxication, when theconsequences of chronic use may be very different. A priority forfuture research is the identification of specific mechanisms ofimpairment by making direct comparisons with the effects of a varietyof other substances. Recent research has aimed at identifying specific cannabis effects byusing strict exclusion criteria, and carefully matching control groupsto ensure that any deficits observed are attributable to cannabis.However, interactions between the effects of long-term cannabis useconcurrent with use of other substances need to be further explored.Subjects have also been excluded if they have had a history ofchildhood illness, learning disabilities, brain trauma or otherneurological or psychiatric illness. The effects of long-term cannabisuse on such individuals may be worthy of further investigation.Cognitive deficits may not be an inevitable consequence of cannabisuse. The long-term effects of cannabis on healthy individuals maydiffer from those in individuals with co-existing mental illness orpre-existing cognitive impairments. On the other hand, someindividuals appear to function well even in cognitively demandingoccupations despite long-term cannabis use. Wert and Raulin (1986b)suggested that some individuals may adapt and overcome some forms ofcognitive impairment by a process of relearning. When users and non-users are compared, differences may not alwaysreach statistical significance due to large individual variability,particularly when small sample sizes are used. Carlin (1986) proposedthat "studies that rely upon analysis of central tendency are likelyto overlook impairment by averaging away the differences amongsubjects who have very different patterns of disability". Individualdifferences in vulnerability to the acute effects of cannabis are wellrecognised and are likely to be a factor in determining susceptibilityto a variety of cognitive dysfunctions associated with prolonged useof cannabis. There has been no research designed to identify individual differencesin susceptibility to the adverse effects of cannabis. A susceptibilitymay be due to structural, biochemical or psychological factors, or asWert and Raulin suggested, to lack of the "cerebral reserve that mostof us call on when we experience mild cerebral damage", for example,after a night of heavy drinking. Wert and Raulin suggested thatprospective studies are the ideal way to identify those subjects whoshow real impairment in functioning by comparing pre- and post-cannabis performance scores. However, even in a retrospective designit is possible to compare the characteristics of subjects who showimpairment with those who do not, thereby identifying possible riskfactors. Insufficient consideration has been given to gender, age, IQand personality differences in the long-term consequences of cannabisuse. Almost all of the studies reviewed have been retrospective studies ofnaturally occurring groups (users vs. non-users). Although thematching of control groups has become more stringent, and attempts toobtain estimates of premorbid functioning have increased, prospectivestudies where each subject is used as his/her own control wouldeliminate the possibility of cannabis users having demonstrated poorerperformance before commencing their use of cannabis. A longitudinalstudy in which several cohorts at risk for drug abuse are followedover time would be the best way to assess the detrimental effects oflong-term cannabis use on cognition and behaviour. Given the growing prevalence of cannabis use, and proposals to reducelegal restrictions on cannabis use, it is essential that research intocognitive effects of long-term cannabis use continues. According to USsurvey data (Deahl, 1991), more than 29 million people in the UnitedStates may be using cannabis, and more than seven million of these useon a daily basis. While there is some controversy surrounding theissue, it seems likely that the potency of cannabis has increased overthe years, as more potent strains have been developed for the blackmarket. Increased THC potency combined with decreased age of first usemay result in the more marked cognitive impairments in larger numbersof individuals in the future. Future research should adhere to rigorous methodology. This shouldinclude the use of the best available techniques for detectingcannabinoids in the body to provide greater precision in theinvestigation of the effects of abstinence on performance. This wouldpermit a distinction to be made between those impairments which areresidual, and likely to resolve with abstinence over time, from thoseof a more enduring or chronic nature, which would be associated withcumulative exposure. Given that recent research has identified cognitive impairments thatare associated with cumulative exposure, it is a priority toinvestigate the extent and rate of recovery of function followingcessation of cannabis use. Furthermore, the parameters of drug userequire careful scrutiny in terms of evaluating how much cannabis mustbe smoked and for how long, before impairments are manifest indifferent kinds of individuals. One of the problems in assessing thecannabis literature is the arbitrariness with which various groups ofusers have been described as "heavy", "moderate" or "light","long-term", "moderate" or "short-term". The use of very sensitive measures of cognitive function is importantfor the detection of early signs of impairment, which may permit aharm minimisation approach to be applied to cannabis use. With furtherresearch, it may be possible to specify levels of cannabis use thatare "safe", "hazardous" and "harmful" in terms of the risk ofcognitive impairment. Further research examining the consequences ofcannabis use in comparison to other substances could provide userswith the ability to make an informed decision about whether or not touse the drug, and if they use, how much and how often to use.7.4.7 ConclusionThe weight of evidence suggests that the long-term use of cannabisdoes not result in any severe or grossly debilitating impairment ofcognitive function. However, there is clinical and experimentalevidence which suggests that long-term use of cannabis produces moresubtle cognitive impairments in specific aspects of memory, attentionand the organisation and integration of complex information. Whilethese impairments may be subtle, they could potentially affectfunctioning in daily life. The evidence suggests that increasingduration of use leads to progressively greater impairment. It is notknown to what extent such impairment may recover with prolongedabstinence.It is apparent that not all individuals are affected equally byprolonged exposure to cannabis. Individual differences insusceptibility need to be identified and examined. For those who aredysfunctional, there is a need to develop appropriate treatmentprograms which address the subtle impairments in cognition and worktoward their resolution. There has been insufficient research on theimpact of long-term cannabis use on cognitive functioning inadolescents and young adults, or on the effects of chronic use on thecognitive decline that occurs with normal aging. Gender differenceshave not been examined to date and may be important, given that suchdifferences have become apparent in differential responses to alcohol.Future research should aim to identify with greater specificity thoseaspects of cognitive functioning which are affected by long-term useof cannabis, and to examine the degree to which they are reversible.There is converging evidence that dysfunction due to chronic cannabisuse lies in the higher cognitive functions that are subserved by thefrontal lobes and which are important in organising, manipulating andintegrating a variety of information, and in structuring andsegregating events in memory. Until better measures have been developed to investigate thesubtleties of dysfunction produced by chronic cannabis use, cannabismay be viewed as posing a lesser threat to cognitive function thanother psychoactive substances such as alcohol. Nevertheless, the factremains that in spite of its illegal status, cannabis use iswidespread. We therefore have a continuing responsibility to minimisedrug-related harm by identifying potential risks, subtle though theymay be, and communicating the necessary information to the community.ReferencesAgarwal, A.K., Sethi, B.B. and Gupta, S (1975). Physical and cognitiveeffects of chronic bhang (cannabis) intake. Indian Journal ofPsychiatry, 17(1), 1-7.Block, R.I., Farnham, S., Braverman, K., Noyes, R., Jr. and Ghoneim,M.M. (1990). Long-term marijuana use and subsequent effects onlearning and cognitive functions related to school achievement:preliminary study. In J.W. Spencer and J.J. Boren (Ed.), ResidualEffects of Abused Drugs on Behavior, National Institute on Drug AbuseResearch Monograph No. 101. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Healthand Human Services.Bowman, M. and Pihl, R.O. (1973). Cannabis: Psychological effects ofchronic heavy use. A controlled study of intellectual functioning inchronic users of high potency cannabis. Psychopharmacologia (Berl.),29, 159-170.Brill, N.Q. and Christie, R.L. (1974). Marihuana use and psychosocialadaptation: Follow-up study of a collegiate population. Archives ofGeneral Psychiatry, 31, 713-719.Campbell, A.M.G., Evans, M., Thomson, J.L.G. and Williams, M.J.(1971). Cerebral atrophy in young cannabis smokers. The Lancet, 2,1219-1224.Carlin, A.S. (1986). Neuropsychological consequences of drug abuse. InI. Grant and. K.M. Adams (Eds.), Neuropsychological Assessment ofNeuropsychiatric Disorders (pp. 478-497). New York: Oxford UniversityPress.Carlin, A.S. and Trupin, E.W. (1977). The effect of long-term chronicmarijuana use on neuropsychological functioning. International Journalof the Addictions, 12(5), 617-624.Carter, W.E., Coggins, W. and Doughty, P.L. (1980). Cannabis in CostaRica: A Study of Chronic Marihuana Use. Philadelphia: Institute forthe Study of Human Issues.Cohen, S. (1976). The 94-day cannabis study. Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Sciences 282 (pp. 211-220). Cohen, S. (1982) Cannabis effects upon adolescent motivation. InNational Institute on Drug Abuse. Marijuana and Youth: ClinicalObservations on Motivation and Learning. Rockville, Maryland: NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse.Culver, C.M. and King, F.W. (1974). Neuropsychological assessment ofundergraduate marihuana and LSD users. Archives of General Psychiatry,31(5), 707-711.Deahl, M. (1991). Cannabis and memory loss. British Journal ofAddiction, 86, 249-252.Dornbush, R.L., Clare, G., Zaks, A., Crown, P., Volavka, J. and Fink,M. (1972). Twenty-one day administration of marijuana in malevolunteers. In M. F. Lewis (Ed.), Current Research in Marihuana (pp.115-127). New York: Academic Press.Entin, E.E. and Goldzung, P.J. (1973). Residual effects of marihuanause on learning and memory. Psychological Record, 23(2), 169-178.Fehr, K.O. and Kalant, H. (1983). Long-term effects of cannabis oncerebral function: A review of the clinical and experiemntalliterature. In Fehr, K.O. and Kalant, H. (Eds), Cannabis and HealthHazards (pp. 501-576). Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.Fletcher, J.M. and Satz, P. (1977). A methodological commentary on theEgyptian study of chronic hashish use. Bulletin on Narcotics, 29(2),29-34.Frank, I.M., Lessin, P.J., Tyrell, E.D., Hahn, P.M. and Szara, S.(1976) Acute and cumulative effects of marihuana smoking inhospitalized subjects: A 36 day study. In M Braude and S. Szara (Eds)Pharmacology of Marihuana, Volume 2. New York: Raven Press.Fried, P. (1993) Prenatal exposure to tobacco and marijuana: Effectsduring pregnancy, infancy, and early childhood. Clinical Obstetricsand Gynaecology, 36(2), 319-337.Gianutsos, R. and Litwack, A.R. (1976). Chronic marijauna smokers showreduced coding into long-term storage. Bulletin of the PsychonomicSociety, 7(3), 277-279.Grant, I., Rochford, J., Fleming, T. and Stunkard, A. (1973). Aneuropsychological assessment of the effects of moderate marihuanause. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 156(4), 278-280.Harshman, R.A., Crawford, H.J. and Hecht, E. (1976) Marihuana,cognitive style, and lateralized hemisphere. In S. Cohen and RStillman (Eds) The Therapeutic Potential of Marihuana. New York:Plenum Press.Herkenham, M., Lynn, A.B., Little, M.D., Johnson, M.R., Melvin, L.S.,De Costa, B.R. and Rice, K (1990). Cannabinoid receptor localizationin brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 87,1932-1936.Hochman, J.S. and Brill, N.Q. (1973). Chronic marijuana use andpsychosocial adaptation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 130(2),132-140.Kokkevi, A. and Dornbush, R. (1977). Psychological testcharacteristics of long-term hashish users. In C. Stefanis, R.Dornbush, and M. Fink (Eds), Hashish: Studies of Long-Term Use. NewYork: Raven Press.Kolansky, H. and Moore, R.T. (1971). Effects of marihuana onadolescents and young adults. Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 216(3), 486-492.Kolansky, H. and Moore, R.T. (1972). Toxic effects of chronicmarihuana use. Journal of the American Medical Association, 222(1),35-41.Leavitt, J., Webb, P., Norris, G., Struve, F., Straumanis, J.,Patrick, G., Fitz-Gerald, J. and Nixon, F. (1991). Differences incomplex reaction time between chronic heavy THC users and non-usercontrols. Poster presented at the 53rd Annual Scientific Meeting ofthe College on Problems of Drug Dependence, Palm Beach, Florida, 10-17June.Leavitt, J., Webb, P., Norris, G., Struve, F., Straumanis, J.,Fitz-Gerald, M., Nixon, F., Patrick, G. and Manno, J. (1992).Performance of chronic daily marijuana users on neuropsychologicaltests. Poster presented at the 54th Annual Scientific Meetthat any cCollege on Problems of Drug Dependence, Keystone, Colorado, 20-25June.Leavitt, J., Webb, P., Norris, G., Struve, F., Patrick, G.,Fitz-Gerald, M. and Nixon, F. (1993). Performance of long-term THCusers on tests of reaction time using Sternberg's procedure. Posterpresented at the 55th Annual Scientific Meeting of the College onProblems of Drug Dependence, Toronto, Canada, 12-17 June.Mendelson, J.H., Rossi, M.A., Meyer, R.E. (Eds). (1974). The Use ofMarihuana: A psychological and physiological inquiry. New York: PlenumPress.Mendhiratta, S.S., Wig, N.N. and Verma, S.K. (1978). Somepsychological correlates of long-term heavy cannabis users. BritishJournal of Psychiatry, 132, 482-486.Mendhiratta, S.S., Varma, V.K., Dang, R., Malhatra, A.K., Das, K., andNeha, R. (1988) Cannabis and cognitive functions. British Journal ofAddiction, 83, 749-753.Miller, L.L. and Branconnier, R.J. (1983). Cannabis: effects on memoryand the cholinergic limbic system. Psychological Bulletin, 93(3),441-456.NIDA. (1982). Marijuana and Youth: Clinical Observations on Motivationand Learning. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.Nelson, N. (1984). The National Adult Reading Test. NFER.Page, J.B., Fletcher, J. and True, W.R. (1988). Psychosociocxulturalpersepctives on chronic cannabis use: The Costa Rican follow-up.Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 20(1), 57-65.Ray, R., Prabhu, G.G., Mohan, D., Nath, L.M. and Neki, J.S. (1978).The association between chronic cannabis use and cognitive functions.Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 3(5), 365-368.Rochford, J., Grant, I. and LaVigne, G. (1977). Medical students anddrugs: Further neuropsychological and use pattern considerations.International Journal of the Addictions, 12(8), 1057-1065.Rubin, V. and Comitas, L. (1975) Ganja in Jamaica: A medicalanthropological study of chronic marihuana use. The Hague: MoutonPublishers.Satz, P., Fletcher, J.M. and Sutker, L.S. (1976). Neuropsychologic,intellectual and personality correlates of chronic marijuana use innative Costa Ricans. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 282,266-306.Schaeffer, J., Andrysiak, T. and Ungerleider, J.T. (1981). Cognitionamd long-term use of Ganja (cannabis). Science, 213(4506), 465-466.Schwartz, R.H., Gruenewald, P.J., Klitzner, M. and Fedio, P. (1989).Short-term memory impairment in cannabis-dependent adolescents.American Journal of Disorders of Childhood, 143, 1214-1219.Solowij, N., Michie, P.T. and Fox, A.M. (1991). Effects of long-termcannabis use on selective attention: An event-related potential study.Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 40, 683-688.Solowij, N., Michie, P.T. and Fox, A.M. (1992). Frequency and durationof cannabis use differentially affect brain function in a selectiveattention task. Paper presented at the 10th International AustralasianWinter Conference on Brain Research (AWCBR), Queenstown, New Zealand,16-21 August; and at the National Drug and Alcohol Research CentreFifth Anniversary Annual Symposium on the Correlates and Consequencesof Excessive Drug Use, University of New South Wales, SydneyAustralia, 4 December.Solowij, N., Michie, P.T. and Fox, A.M. (1993). Differentialimpairments of selective attention due to frequency and duration ofcannabis use. Paper presented at the International Cannabis ResearchSociety Annual Meeting, Satellite to the 55th Annual ScientificMeeting of the College on Problems of Drug Dependence, Toronto,Cannada, 10-17 June.Soueif, M.I. (1971). The use of cannabis in Egypt: A behaviouralstudy. Bulletin on Narcotics, 23(4), 17-28.Soueif, M.I. (1975). Chronic cannabis users: Further analysis ofobjective test results. Bulletin on Narcotics, 27(4), 1-26.Soueif, M.I. (1976a). Differential association between chroniccannabis use and brain function deficits. Annals of the New YorkAcadamy of Sciences, 282, 323-343.Soueif, M.I. (1976b). Some determinants of psychological deficitsassociated with chronic cannabis consumption. Bulletin on Narcotics,28(1), 25-42.Soueif, M.I. (1977). The Egyptian study of chronic cannabis use: Areply to Fletcher and Satz. Bulletin on Narcotics, 29(2), 35-43.Stefanis, C., Boulougouris, J. and Liakos, A. (1976). Clinical andpsychophysiological effects of cannabis in long-term users. In Braude,M and Szara, S. (Eds.), Pharmacology of Marihuana. New York: RavenPress, pp. 659-665.Stefanis, C., Dornbush, R. and Fink, M. (1977). Hashish: Studies ofLong-Term Use. New York: Raven Press.Straumanis, J., Struve, F. and Patrick, G. (1992). Cerebral evokedpotentials in chronic marihuana users. Poster presented at the 54thAnnual Scientific Meeting of the College on Problems of DrugDependence, Keystone, Colorado, 20-25 June. Struve, F., Straumanis, J., Patrick, G., Norris, G., Nixon, F.,Fitz-Gerald, M., Manno, J., Leavitt, J. and Webb, P. (1993).Topographic quantitative EEG sequelae of chronic cumulative THCexposure: Recent and continuing studies. Paper presented at theInternational Cannabis Research Society Annual Meeting, Satellite tothe 55th Annual Scientific Meeting of the College on Problems of DrugDependence, Toronto, Canada, 10-17 June.Stuss, D.T. (1991) Interference effects on memory function inpostleukotomy patients: An attentional perspective. In Levin, H.S.,Eisenberg, H.M. and Benton, A.L.(Eds) Frontal lobe function anddysfunction. New York: Oxford University Press, pp 157-172.Tennant, F.S. and Groesbeck, C.J. (1972). Psychiatric effects ofhashish. Archives of General Psychiatry, 27(1), 133-136.Varma, V.J., Malhotra, A.K., Dang, R., Das, K. and Nehra, R. (1988).Cannabis and cognitive functions: a prospective study. Drug andAlcohol Dependence, 21, 147-152.Weckowicz, T.E. and Janssen, D.V. (1973). Cognitive functions,personality traits, and social values in heavy marijuana smokers ansnonsmoker controls. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 81(3), 264-269.Weckowicz, T.E., Collier, G. and Spreng, L. (1977). Field dependence,cognitive functions, personality traits, and social values in heavycannabis users and nonuser controls. Psychological Reports, 41,291-302.Wert, R and Raulin, M.L. (1986a) The chronic cerebral effects ofcannabis use. I. Methodological issues and neurological findings. TheInternational Journal of the Addictions, 21(6), 605-628.Wert, R and Raulin, M.L. (1986b) The chronic cerebral effects ofcannabis use. II. Psychological findings and conclusions. TheInternational Journal of the Addictions, 21(6), 629-642.Wig, N.N. and Varma, V.K. (1977). Patterns of long-term heavy cannabisuse in North India and its effects on cognitive functions: apreliminary report. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 2(3), 211-219.7.5 Chronic cannabis use and brain damage A major concern about the recreational use of cannabis has beenwhether it may lead to functional or structural neurotoxicity, or"brain damage" in ordinary language. Fehr and Kalant (1983) definedneurotoxicity as "functional aberrations qualitatively distinct fromthe characteristic usual pattern of reversible acute and chroniceffects, and that may be caused by identified or identifiable neuronaldamage" (p27). On this definition, an enduring impairment of cognitivefunctioning may be interpreted as a manifestation of neurotoxicity.Since such impairments are discussed in the previous chapter onchronic effects on cognitive functioning, this chapter willconcentrate on direct investigations of neurological function andstructural brain damage arising from exposure to cannabinoids. Thereview begins with an examination of the evidence for behaviouralneurotoxicity from animal studies. Neurochemical, electrophysiologicaland brain substrate investigations of functionality follow, and thechapter concludes with the findings of more invasive examinations ofbrain structure and morphology in animals, and of less invasivetechniques for imaging the human brain.7.5.1 Behavioural neurotoxicity in animalsAnimal research provides the ultimate degree of control overextraneous variables; it is possible to eliminate factors known toinfluence research findings in humans, e.g. nutritional status, age,sex, previous drug history, and concurrent drug use. The results,however, are often difficult to extrapolate to humans because ofbetween-species differences in brain and behaviour and in drug dose,patterns of use, routes of administration and methods of assessment. Animal research on the effects of cannabis on brain function hastypically administered known quantities of cannabinoids to animals foran extended period of time and then examined performance on varioustasks assessing brain function, before using histological andmorphometric methods to study the brains of the exposed animals. Ingeneral, the results of studies with primates produce results thatmost closely resemble the likely effects in humans; the monkey isphysiologically similar to humans, while rats, for example, metabolisedrugs in a different way; and monkeys are able to perform complexbehavioural tasks. Nevertheless, every animal species examined to datehas been found to have cannabinoid receptors in the brain. In animalmodels, non-targeted staring into space following administration ofcannabinoids is suggestive of psychoactivity comparable to that inhumans. The most characteristic responses to cannabinoids in animalsare mild behavioural aberrations following small doses, and signs ofgross neurotoxicity manifested by tremors and convulsions followingexcessively large doses. Where small doses are given for a prolongedperiod of time, evidence of behavioural neurotoxicity has emerged (seeRosenkrantz, 1983). Chronic exposure produces lethargy, sedation anddepression in many species, and/or aggressive irritability in monkeys.A clear manifestation of neurotoxicity in rats is what has been calledthe "popcorn reaction" (Luthra, Rosenkrantz and Braude, 1976),characterised by a pattern of sudden vertical jumping in rats exposedto cannabinoids for five weeks or longer. It is also seen in younganimals exposed to cannabinoids in utero and then given a small dosechallenge at 30 days of age. Several studies of prenatal exposureindicate that the offspring of cannabis treated animals show smalldelays in various stages of post-natal development, such as eyeopening, various reflexes and open field exploration, although afterseveral weeks or months their development is indistinguishable fromnormal (e.g. Fried and Charlebois, 1979). This means that either thedevelopmental delay was not chronic, the remaining damage is toosubtle to be detected by available measures, or the "plasticity ofnervous system organisation in the newborn permitted adequatecompensation for the loss of function of any damaged cells" (Fehr andKalant, 1983, p29). Behavioural tests in rodents have included conventional and radial armmaze learning, operant behaviour involving time discriminations, openfield exploration and two-way shuttle box avoidance learning. Correctperformance on these tests is dependent on spatial orientation or onresponse inhibition, both of which are believed to depend heavily onintact hippocampal functioning. Some studies have found decreasedlearning ability on such tasks several months after long-termtreatment with cannabinoids (see Fehr and Kalant, 1983). For example,Stiglick and Kalant (1982a, 1982b) reported altered learning behaviourin rats one to six months after a three-month oral dosing regimen ofmarijuana extract or THC. They claimed that the deficits werereminiscent of behavioural changes seen after damage to thehippocampus. Long lasting impairment of learning ability andhippocampal dysfunction suggests that long-lasting damage may resultfrom exposure to cannabis. However, some studies have been carried outtoo soon after last drug administration to exclude the possibilitythat the observed effects are residual effects, that is, due to thecontinued action of accumulated cannabinoids. Memory function in monkeys has often been assessed by delayedmatching-to-sample tasks. In a recent study (Slikker et al, 1992),rhesus monkeys were trained for one year to perform five operant tasksbefore one year of chronic administration of cannabis commenced. Onegroup was exposed daily to the smoke of one standard joint, another onweekends only, and control groups received sham smoke exposure (N=15or 16 per group). Performance on the tasks indicated the induction ofan "amotivational syndrome" during chronic exposure to cannabis, asmanifested in a decrease in motivation to respond, regardless ofwhether the monkeys were exposed daily or only on weekends. This ledthe authors to suggest that motivational problems can occur atrelatively low or recreational levels of use (in fact the effect wasmaximal with intermittent exposure). Task performance was grosslyimpaired for more than a week following last exposure, althoughperformance returned to baseline levels two to three months aftercessation of use. Thus, the effects of chronic exposure were slowlyreversible with no long-term behavioural effects, and the authorsconcluded that persistent exposure to compounds that are very slowlycleared from the brain could account for their results. Thishypothesis is consistent with the long half life of THC in the body(see Section 4.7 on metabolism).One of the problems with these studies is that animals are often onlyexposed for a relatively short period of time, for example, one yearor less. Slikker and colleagues acknowledge that it remains to bedetermined whether longer or greater exposures would cause more severeor additional behavioural effects. It may be that chronic dysfunctionbecomes manifest only after many years of exposure. Nevertheless, itis of concern that behavioural impairments have been shown to last forseveral months after exposure, but reassuring that they have generallyresolved over time. A further difficulty with animal studies is a consequence ofdifferences between animals and humans in route of cannabinoidadministration. In humans, the most common route of exposure to THC isvia the inhalation of marijuana smoke, whereas most animals studieshave relied upon the oral administration or injection of THC becauseof the difficulty in efficiently delivering smoke to animals and theconcern about the complications introduced by carbon monoxidetoxicity. While it may well be impossible to evaluate thepharmacological and toxicological consequences of exposure to thehundreds of compounds in cannabis simultaneously, it is arguablyinappropriate to assess the long-term consequences of human cannabissmoking by administering THC alone. Hundreds of additional compoundsare produced by pyrolysis when marijuana is smoked, which maycontribute either to acute effects or to long-term toxicity. Futurestudies need to address these issues for comparability to human usage.Appropriate controls, including those which mimic the carbon monoxideexposure experienced during the smoking of marijuana may be necessary.7.5.2 NeurochemistryThe discovery of the cannabinoid receptor and its endogenous ligandanandamide revolutionised previous conceptions of the mode of actionof the cannabinoids. However, much further research is required beforethe interactions between ingested cannabis, anandamide and thecannabinoid receptor are fully understood. Nor should the anandamidepathways be seen as responsible for all of the central effects of thepsychoactive cannabinoids. There is good evidence that cannabinoidsaffect the concentration, turnover, or release of endogenoussubstances (see Pertwee, 1988). Much research has been devoted toexamining the interactions between cannabinoids and severalneurotransmitter receptor systems (e.g. norepinephrine, dopamine,5-hydroxytryptamine, acetylcholine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA),histamine, opioid peptides, and prostaglandins). The results suggestthat all these substances have some role in the neuropharmacology ofcannabinoids, although little is known about the precise nature ofthis involvement. Cannabinoids may alter the activities ofneurochemical systems in the central nervous system by altering thesynaptic concentrations of these mediators through an effect on theirsynthesis, release, or metabolism, and/or by modulatingmediator-receptor interactions. There have been numerous reports ofneurotransmitter perturbations in vitro and after short-termadministration (see Martin, 1986; Pertwee, 1988).Domino (1981) demonstrated in cats that large doses of THC elevatebrain acetylcholine and reduce its turnover by producing a decrease inacetylcholine release from the neocortex. At large doses, THC maydepress the brain stem activating system. With lower doses, brainacetylcholine utilisation was reduced primarily only in thehippocampus. Some of the potential undesirable side effects ofcannabinoids may be related to a decrease in acetylcholine release andturnover. Domino also reported that THC decreased EEG activation andinduced slow wave activity: high voltage slow waves in neocortical EEGwere produced in frontal regions and tended to be exaggerated by smalldoses but reduced by larger doses. These findings support the generalobservation made in a variety of studies, that low doses of THCstimulate, while high doses depress the noradrenergic and dopaminergicsystem. Bloom (1984) reported that cannabinoids increase the synthesis andturnover of dopamine and norepinephrine in rat and mouse brain, whileproducing little or no change in endogenous levels of catecholamines.However, THC and other cannabinoids were reported to alter functionalaspects of catecholaminergic neurotransmission. THC was found toincrease the utilisation of the catecholamine neurotransmitters, toalter the active uptake of biogenic amine neurotransmitters and theirprecursors into synaptosomes, and to alter transmitter release fromsynaptosomes. Further, THC was reported to alter the activity ofenzymes involved in the synthesis and degradation of thecatecholamines. THC and other cannabinoids can selectively alter thebinding of ligands to several different membrane-boundneurotransmitter receptors.Relatively few studies have examined whether long-term exposure tocannabinoids results in lasting changes in brain neurotransmitter andneuromodulator levels. An early study examined cerebral and cerebellarneurochemical changes accompanying behavioural manifestations ofneurotoxicity (involuntary vertical jumping) in rats exposed tomarijuana smoke for up to 87 days (Luthra, Rosenkrantz and Braude,1976). Sex differences emerged in the neurochemical consequences ofchronic exposure: in females, AChE showed a cyclic increase andcerebellar enzyme activity declined. For both sexes cerebellar RNAincreased, but at different times for each sex, and at 87 daysremained elevated only in females. Some of these neurochemical changespersisted during a 20-day recovery period, but the authors predictedthe return to normality after a much longer recovery period.Cannabinoids administered prenatally not only impaired developmentalprocesses in rats, but produced significant decrements in RNA, DNA andprotein concentrations and reductions in amine concentrations(dopamine, norepinephrine) in mice, which could be important in therole of protein and nucleic acids in learning and memory (see Fehr andKalant, 1983). Bloom (1984) reported that chronic exposure tocannabinoids has been shown to lead to increased activity of tyrosinein rat brain. However, recent evidence suggests that there are few, if any,irreversible effects of THC on known brain chemistry. Ali andcolleagues (1989) administered various doses of THC to rats for 90days and then assessed several brain neurotransmitter systems 24 hoursor two months after the last drug dose. Examination of dopamine,serotonin, acetylcholine, GABA, benzodiazepine and opioidneurotransmitter systems revealed that no significant changesoccurred. A larger study with both rats and monkeys examined receptorbinding of the above neurotransmitters and the tissue levels ofmonoamines and their metabolites (Ali et al, 1991). No significantirreversible changes were demonstrated in the rats chronically treatedwith THC. Monkeys exposed to a chronic treatment of marijuana smokefor one year and then sacrificed after a seven-month recovery periodwere found to have no changes in neurotransmitter concentration incaudate, frontal cortex, hypothalamus, or brainstem regions. Theauthors concluded that there are no significant irreversiblealterations in major neuromodulator pathways in the rat and monkeybrain following long-term exposure to the active compounds inmarijuana. Slikker et al (1992), reporting on the same series of studies, notedthat there were virtually no differences between placebo, low dose orhigh dose groups of monkeys in blood chemistry values. The generalhealth of the monkeys was unaffected, but the exposure served as achronic physiological stressor, evidenced by increases in urinarycortisol levels which were not subject to tolerance (although plasmacortisol levels did not differ). Urinary cortisol elevation has notbeen demonstrated in other studies with monkeys. Slikker et alreported a 50 per cent reduction in circulating testosterone levels inthe high dosed group, with a dramatic (albeit non-significant) reboundone to four weeks after cessation of treatment. It is worth notingthat these monkeys were three years of age at the commencement of thestudy and would have experienced hormonal changes over the course ofentering adolescence during the study.A recent pilot study compared monoamine levels in cerebrospinal fluid(CSF) in a small sample of human cannabis users and age andsex-matched normal controls (Musselman et al, 1993). The justificationfor the study was that THC administered to animals has been shown toproduce increases in serotonin and decreases in dopamine activity. Nodifferences were found between the user and non-user groups in the CSFconcentration of HVA, 5HIAA, MHPG, ACTH and CRH. The authors proposeda number of explanations for these results: (1) cannabis use has nochronic effect on levels of brain monoamines; (2) those who usecannabis have abnormal levels of brain monoamines which are normalisedover long periods of time by cannabis use; or (3) those who usecannabis have normal levels of brain monoamines which are transientlyaltered with cannabis use and then return to normal. However, there isinsufficient data from this study to permit a choice between thesehypotheses to be made. The frequency and duration of cannabis use, andthe time since last use in the user group could not be determined. Allusers had denied using cannabis, having been drawn from a largernormative sample and identified as cannabis users by the detection ofsubstantial levels of cannabinoids in urine screens. Furthermore, the"normal" controls were assumed to be non-users on the basis of theirdrug free urines, a far from adequate source of evidence for oragainst cannabis use. Thus, the small sample size and faultymethodology preclude any conclusions to be drawn from this study aboutpossible alterations in monoamine levels in cannabis users.7.5.3 Electrophysiological effectsCannabis is clearly capable of causing marked changes in brainelectrophysiology as determined by electroencephalographic (EEG)recordings. Long-term residual abnormalities in EEG tracings fromcortex and hippocampus have been shown in cats (Barratt & Adams, 1972;Domino, 1981; Hockman et al, 1971), rats (see Fehr and Kalant, 1983)and monkeys (Heath et al, 1980) exposed to cannabinoids. Withdrawaleffects are also apparent in the EEG (see Fehr and Kalant, 1983), withepileptiform and spike-like activity most often seen. Shannon and Fried (1972) related EEG changes in rat to thedistribution of bound and unbound radioactive THC. Disposition of thetracer was primarily in the extra-pyramidal motor system and somelimbic structures, and 0.8 per cent of the total injected drug whichwas weakly bound in the brain accounted for the EEG changes. Inmonkeys, serious subcortical EEG anomalies were observed in thoseexposed to marijuana smoke for six months (Heath et al, 1980). Theseptal region, hippocampus and amygdala were most profoundly affected,showing bursts of high amplitude spindles and slow wave activity. Suchearly studies often lacked critical quantitative analysis. Thedefinition of abnormal spike-like waveforms in EEG were not made torigorous criteria,and EEG frequency was not assessed quantitatively. More recent studies have examined the effects of THC on extracellularaction potentials recorded from the dentate gyrus of the rathippocampus (Campbell et al, 1986a; 1986b). THC produced a suppressionof cell firing patterns and a decrease in the amplitude ofsensory-evoked potentials, also impairing performance on a tonediscrimination task. The evoked-potential changes recovered rapidly(within four hours), but the spontaneous and tone-evoked cellularactivity remained significantly depressed, indicating an abnormalstate of hippocampal/limbic system operation. The authors proposedthat such changes accounted for decreased learning, memory functionand general cognitive performance following exposure to cannabis. Thelong-lasting effects of prolonged cannabis administration on animalelectrophysiology has not been investigated to any degree ofspecificity.The waking or sleep EEG is increasingly recognised as a particularlysensitive tool for evaluating the effects of drugs, especially drugsthat affect the CNS, since EEG signals are sensitive to variablesaffecting the brain's neurophysiological substrate. The recording ofthe EEG is one of the few reasonably direct, non-intrusive methods ofmonitoring CNS activity in man. However, alterations in EEG activityare difficult to interpret in a functional sense. Struve andStraumanis (1990) provide a review of the human research dating from1945 on the EEG and evoked potential studies of acute and chroniceffects of cannabis use. While the data have often been contradictory,the most typical human alterations in EEG patterns include an increasein alpha activity and a slowing of alpha waves with decreased peakfrequency of the alpha rhythm, and a decrease in beta activity (Fink,1976; Fink et al, 1976). In general, this is consistent with a stateof drowsiness. Desynchronisation, variable changes in theta activity,abnormal sleep EEG profiles and abnormal evoked responses have alsobeen reported (see Fehr and Kalant, 1983). Clinical reports haveassociated cannabis with triggering seizures in epileptics (Feeney,1979) and experimental studies have shown THC to trigger abnormalspike waveforms in the hippocampus, whereas cannabidiol has anopposite effect. Yet there is suggestive evidence that cannabis may beuseful in the treatment of convulsions. Feeney (1979) discusses theseparadoxical effects.A number of studies have investigated EEG in chronic cannabis users.The early cross-cultural studies were flawed in many respects (seeSection 7.4 on cognitive functioning) and also failed to usedquantitative techniques in analysing EEG spectra. No EEG abnormalitieswere found in the resting EEG of chronic users from Greek, Jamaican orCosta Rican populations compared to controls (Karacan et al, 1976;Rubin and Comitas, 1975; Stefanis, 1976). In all of these studies,only subjects who were in good health and who were functioningadequately in the community, were selected, thereby systematicallyeliminating subjects who may have been adversely affected by cannabisuse and who may therefore have shown residual EEG changes. Theevidence from many studies has been contradictory: users have beenfound to show either higher or lower percentages of alpha-componentsthan non-users, and to have higher or lower visual evoked responseamplitudes (Richmon et al, 1974). Subjects in a 94-day cannabisadministration study (Cohen, 1976) showed lasting EEG changes. Theabnormalities were more marked in subjects who had taken heavierdoses, but it was observed that even in abstinence, cannabis users hadmore EEG irregularities than non-using controls. It was not determinedfor how long after cessation of use the EEG changes persisted. It hasalso been reported that chronic users develop tolerance to some of theacute EEG changes caused by cannabis (Feinberg et al, 1976). Thequestion as to why chronic cannabis users can continue to displaychanges in EEG when tolerance is known to develop to such alterationsremains unanswered.In a series of well controlled ongoing studies, Struve and colleagues(1991, 1993) have been using quantitative techniques to investigatepersistent EEG changes in long-term cannabis users, characterised by a"hyperfrontality of alpha". Significant increases in absolute power,relative power and interhemispheric coherence of EEG alpha activityover the bilateral frontal-central cortex in daily THC users comparedto non-users were demonstrated and replicated several times. Thequantitative EEGs of subjects with excessively long cumulative THCexposures (>15 years) appear to be characterised by increases infrontal-central theta activity in addition to the hyperfrontality ofalpha found in THC users in general (or those with much shorterdurations of use). Ultra-long-term users have shown significantelevations of theta absolute power over frontal-central cortexcompared to short-term users and controls, and significant elevationsin relative power of frontal-central theta in comparison to short-termusers. Over most cortical regions, ultra-long-term users hadsignificantly higher levels of theta interhemispheric coherence thanshort-term users or controls. Thus, excessively long duration of THCexposure (15-30 years) appears to be associated with additionaltopographic quantitative EEG features not seen with subjects using THCfor short to moderately long time periods. These findings have led to the suspicion that there may be a gradientof quantitative EEG change associated with progressive increases inthe total cumulative exposure (duration in years) of daily THC use.Infrequent, sporadic or occasional THC use does not seem to beassociated with persistent quantitative EEG change. As daily THC usebegins and continues, the topographic quantitative EEG becomescharacterised by the hyperfrontality of alpha. While it is not knownat what point during cumulative exposure it occurs, at some stagesubstantial durations of daily THC use become associated with adownward shift in maximal EEG spectral power from the mid alpha rangeto the upper theta/low alpha range. Excessively long durationcumulative exposure of 15-30 years may be associated with increases ofabsolute power, relative power and coherence of theta activity overfrontal-central cortex. One conjecture is that the EEG shift towardtheta frequencies, if confirmed, may suggest organic change. Thesedata are supplemented by neuropsychological test performance featuresseparating long-term users from moderate users and non-users, howeverthe relationship between neuropsychological test performance and EEGchanges has not been investigated.While the EEG provides little interpretable information about brainfunction, brain event-related potential measures are directelectrophysiological markers of cognitive processes. Studies byHerning et al (1979) demonstrated that THC administered orally tovolunteers alters event-related potentials according to dose, durationof administration, and complexity of the task. Event-related potentialstudies of chronic cannabis users in the unintoxicated state haveprovided evidence for long-lasting functional brain impairment andsubtle cognitive deficits (see Section 7.4 on cognitive functioning).7.5.4  Cerebral blood flow studiesBrain cerebral blood flow (CBF) is closely related to brain function.The use of CBF may help to identify brain regions responsible for thebehavioural changes associated with drug intoxication. Since, however,psychoactive drugs may induce CBF changes through mechanisms otherthan alteration in brain function (e.g. by increasing carbon monoxidelevels, changing blood gases or vasoactive properties, affecting bloodviscosity, autonomic activation or inhibition of intraparenchymalinnervation, acting on vasoactive neuropeptides), any conclusionsdrawn from drug-induced CBF changes must be treated with caution.Mathew and Wilson (1992) report several studies of cannabis effects oncerebral blood flow. Acutely, cannabis administration to inexperiencedusers produced global CBF decreases, while acute intoxicationincreased CBF in both hemispheres, at frontal and the left temporalregions, in experienced users. There was an inverse relationshipbetween anxiety and CBF. The authors attributed the decrease in CBF innaive subjects to their increased anxiety after cannabisadministration, while the increased CBF in experienced users wasattributed to the behavioural effects of cannabis. A further studyshowed that the largest increases in CBF occurred 30 minutes aftersmoking. The authors concluded that cannabis causes a dose relatedincrease in global CBF, but also appears to have regional effects,with a greater increase in the frontal region and in particular in theright hemisphere. CBF increases were correlated with the "high",plasma THC levels and pulse rate, loss of time sense,depersonalisation, anxiety and somatisation scores (positively withfrontal flow and inversely with parietal flow).The authors claimed their results suggested that altered brainfunction was mainly, if not exclusively, responsible for the CBFchanges. Carbon monoxide increased after both cannabis and placebo butdid not correlate with CBF. Cannabis induced "red eye" lasted forseveral hours, but the CBF increases declined significantly within twohours of smoking. Nevertheless, the possibility remains that the CBFchanges reflected drug-induced vascular (cerebral) change. Continuedreduction in cerebral blood velocity was demonstrated followingcannabis administration, and reports of dizziness but with normalblood pressure suggested that cannabis may impair cerebralautoregulation.The time course of CBF changes resembled that of mood changes moreclosely than plasma THC levels. Global CBF was closely related tolevels of arousal mediated by the reticular activating system. Higharousal states generally show CBF increases while low arousal statesshow CBF decreases. Of all cortical regions, the frontal lobe has themost intimate connections with the thalamus which mediates arousal,and CBF increases after cannabis use were most pronounced in frontallobe regions. The right hemisphere is known to mediate emotions, andthe most marked changes after cannabis were seen there. Time sense anddepersonalisation, which are associated with the temporal lobe, wereseverely affected, but there were no significant correlations betweenthese scores and temporal flow. Perhaps CBF techniques are notsensitive enough in terms of spatial resolution to detect sucheffects. The parietal lobes are associated with perception andcognition. Cannabis reduces perceptual acuity, but during intoxicationsubjects report increased awareness of tactile, visual and auditorystimuli. Maybe their altered time sense and depersonalisation arerelated to such altered awareness.There have been a few investigations of chronic effects of cannabis onCBF. Tunving et al, (1986) demonstrated globally reduced restinglevels of CBF in chronic heavy users of 10 years compared to non-usercontrols, but no regional flow differences were observed. CBFincreased by 12 per cent between nine and 60 days later, indicatingreduced CBF in heavy users immediately after cessation of cannabisuse, with a return to normal levels with abstinence. This study wasflawed in that some subjects were given benzodiazepines (which areknown to lower CBF) prior to the first measurement. Mathew andcolleagues (1986) assessed chronic users of at least six months (mean83 months) after two weeks of abstinence. No differences in CBF levelswere found between users and non-user controls. The number of studiesavailable on the effects of cannabis on CBF are relatively small. Useof techniques with better spatial resolution and the ability toquantify subcortical flow, such as positron emission tomography (PET),would yield more useful findings.7.5.5 Positron emission tomography (PET) studiesPositron emission tomography (PET) is a nuclear imaging techniquewhich allows the concentration of a positron-labelled tracer to beimaged in the human brain. PET can measure the time course andregional distribution of positron-labelled compounds in the livinghuman brain. Most PET studies have utilised an analog of glucose tomeasure regional brain glucose metabolism, since nervous tissue usesglucose as its main source of energy. Measurement of glucosemetabolism reflects brain function, since activation of a given brainarea is indicated by an increase in glucose consumption. PET may beused to assess the effects of acute drug administration by usingregional brain glucose metabolism to determine the areas of the brainwhich are activated by a given drug. Assessment of brain glucosemetabolism has been useful in identifying patterns of braindysfunction in patients with psychiatric and neurological diseases. Itis a direct and sensitive technique for identifying brain pathology,since it can detect abnormalities in the functioning of brain regionsin the absence of structural changes, such as is likely to occur withthe neurotoxic effects of chronic drug use. It is accordingly moresensitive than either computer-assisted tomography (CAT) scans ormagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in detecting early pathologicalchanges in the brain.Only one study to date has used the PET technique to investigate theeffects of cannabis use. Volkow et al (1991) reported preliminary datafrom an investigation comparing the acute effects of cannabis in threenormal subjects (who had used cannabis no more than once or twice peryear) and in three chronic users (who had used at least twice a weekfor at least 10 years). The regions of interest were the prefrontalcortex, the left and right dorsolateral, temporal, and somatosensoryparietal cortices, the occipital cortex, basal ganglia, thalamus andcerebellum. A measure of global brain metabolism was obtained usingthe average for the five central brain slices, and relative measuresfor each region were obtained using the ratios of region/global brainmetabolism. Due to the small number of subjects, descriptive ratherthan inferential statistical procedures were used for comparison. Therelation between changes in metabolism due to cannabis and thesubjective sense of intoxication was tested with a regressionanalysis. In the normal subjects, administration of cannabis led to an increasein metabolic activity in the prefrontal cortex and cerebellum; thelargest relative increase was in the cerebellum and the largestrelative decrease was in the occipital cortex. The degree of increasein metabolism in the cerebellar cortex was highly correlated with thesubjective sense of intoxication. The cannabis users reported lesssubjective effects than the normal controls and showed less changes inregional brain metabolism, reflecting tolerance to the actions ofcannabis. However, the authors did not report comparisons of baselinelevels of activity in the users and controls, perhaps due to thelimitations of the small sample size. Such a comparison would haveenabled some evaluation of the consequences of long-term cannabis useon resting levels of glucose metabolism. The increases in regionalmetabolism are in accord with the increases in cerebral blood flowreported by Mathew and Wilson (1992). The regional pattern of responseto cannabis in this study is consistent with the localisation ofcannabinoid receptors in brain. A further application of PET would beto label cannabinoids themselves: labelling of cannabis with apositron emitter has been achieved and preliminary biodistributionstudies have been carried out in mice and in the baboon (Charalambouset al, 1991; Marciniak et al, 1991). The use of PET in future humanstudies is promising.7.5.6 Brain morphology7.5.6.1 Animal studiesEarly attempts to investigate the effects of chronic cannabinoidexposure on brain morphology in animals failed to demonstrate anyeffect on brain weight or histology under the light microscope.Electron microscopic examination, however, has revealed alterations inseptal, hippocampal and amygdaloid morphology in monkeys after chronictreatment with THC or cannabis. A series of studies from the samelaboratory (Harper et al, 1977; Myers and Heath, 1979; Heath et al,1980 discussed below) reported widening of the synaptic cleft,clumping of synaptic vesicles in axon terminals, and an increase inintranuclear inclusions in the septum, hippocampus and amygdala. Thesefindings incited a great deal of controversy, and the studies werecriticised for possible technical flaws (Institute of Medicine, 1982),with claims that such alterations are not easily quantifiable. Harper et al (1977) examined the brains of three rhesus monkeys sixmonths after exposure to marijuana, THC or placebo, and twonon-exposed control monkeys. In the treated group, one monkey wasexposed to marijuana smoke three times each day, five days per week;another was injected with THC once each day and the third was exposedto placebo smoke conditions. The latter two had electrode implants forEEG recording and had shown persistent EEG abnormalities followingtheir exposure to cannabis. Morphological differences were notobserved by light microscopy, but electron microscopy revealed awidening of the synaptic cleft in the marijuana and THC treatedanimals, with no abnormalities detected in the placebo or controlmonkeys. Further, "clumping" of synaptic vesicles was observed in pre-and post-synaptic regions in the cannabinoid treated monkeys, andopaque granular material was present within the synaptic cleft. Theauthors concluded that chronic heavy use of cannabis alters theultrastructure of the synapse, and proposed that the observed EEGabnormalities may have been related to these changes.Myers and Heath (1979) examined the septal region of the same twocannabinoid treated monkeys, and found the volume density of theorganised rough endoplasmic reticulum to be significantly lower thanthat of the controls, and fragmentation and disorganisation of therough endoplasmic reticulum patterns, free ribosomal clusters in thecytoplasm, and swelling of the cisternal membranes was observed. Theauthors noted that similar lesions have been observed followingadministration of various toxins or after axonal damage, reflectingdisruptions in protein synthesis. Heath et al (1980) extended the above findings by examining a largersample of rhesus monkeys (N=21) to determine the effects of marijuanaon brain function and ultrastructure. Some animals were exposed tosmoke of active marijuana, some were injected with THC and some wereexposed to inactive marijuana smoke. After two to three months ofexposure, those monkeys that were given moderate or heavy exposure tomarijuana smoke developed chronic EEG changes at deep brain sites,which were most marked in the septal, hippocampal and amygdaloidregions. These changes persisted throughout the six to eight monthexposure period, as well as the postexposure observation period ofbetween one and eight months. Brain ultrastructural alterations werecharacterised by changes at the synapse, destruction of roughendoplasmic reticulum and development of nuclear inclusion bodies. Thebrains of the placebo and control monkeys showed no ultrastructuralchanges. The authors claimed that at the doses used, which werecomparable to human usage, permanent alterations in brain function andultrastructure were observed in these monkeys.Brain atrophy is a major non-specific organic alteration which must bepreceded by more subtle cellular and molecular changes. Rumbaugh et al(1980) observed six human cases of cerebral atrophy in young malesubstance abusers of primarily alcohol and amphetamines. They thenconducted an experimental study of six rhesus monkeys treatedchronically with various doses of cannabis extracts orally for eightmonths and compared them to groups that were treated with barbituratesor amphetamines, or untreated. No signs of cerebral atrophy weredemonstrated in the cannabis exposed group, and light microscopyrevealed no histological abnormalities in four of the animals, but"equivocal" results for the other two. Brains were not examined underthe electron microscope. The amphetamine treated group showed thegreatest histological, cerebrovascular and atrophic changes.More recently, McGahan et al (1984) used high resolution computerisedtomography scans in three groups of four rhesus monkeys. One was acontrol group, a second was given 2.4mg/kg of oral THC per day for twoto 10 months, and a third group received a similar daily dose over afive-year period. The dosage was considered the equivalent of smokingone joint a day. The groups receiving THC were studied one year afterdiscontinuing the drug. There was a statistically significantenlargement of the frontal horns and the bicaudate distance in thebrains of the five-year treated monkeys as compared to the control andshort-term THC groups. This finding suggests that the head of thecaudate nucleus and the frontal areas of the brain can atrophy afterlong-term administration of THC in doses relevant to human exposure.A number of rat studies have found similar results to those in rhesusmonkeys described above. Investigators have reported that after highdose cannabinoid administration, there is a decrease in the meanvolume of rat hippocampal neurons and their nuclei, and that after lowdose administration, there is a shortening of hippocampal dendriticspines. Scallet and coworkers (1987) used quantitativeneuropathological techniques to examine the brains of rats seven toeight months after 90-day oral administration of THC. The anatomicalintegrity of the CA3 area of rat hippocampus was examined using lightand electron microscopy. High doses of THC resulted in strikingultrastructural alterations, with a significant reduction inhippocampal neuronal and cytoplasmic volume, detached axodendriticelements, disrupted membranes, increased extracellular space and areduction in the number of synapses per unit volume (i.e. decreasedsynaptic density). These structural changes were present up to sevenmonths following treatment. Lower doses of THC produced a reduction inthe dendritic length of hippocampal pyramidal neurons two months afterthe last dose, and a reduction in GABA receptor binding in thehippocampus, although the ultrastructural appearance and synapticdensity appeared normal. The authors suggested that such hippocampalchanges may constitute a morphological basis for the persistentbehavioural effects demonstrated following chronic exposure to THC inrats, effects which resemble those of hippocampal brain lesions. Thesefindings are in accord with those of Heath et al (1980) with rhesusmonkeys, and the doses administered correspond to daily use ofapproximately six joints in humans.A study by Landfield et al (1988) showed that chronic exposure to THCreduced the number of nucleoli per unit length of the CA1 pyramidalcell somal layer in the rat hippocampus. The brains of rats treatedfive times per week for four or eight months with 4-10mg/kg injectedsubcutaneously were examined by light and electron microscopy.Significant THC-induced changes were found in hippocampal structure;pyramidal neuronal cell density decreased and there was an increase inglial reactivity, reflected by cytoplasmic inclusions similar to thatseen during normal aging or following experimentally induced brainlesions. However, no effects were observed on ultrastructuralvariables such as synaptic density. Adrenal-pituitary activityincreased, resulting in elevated ACTH and corticosterone elevationsduring acute stress. The authors claimed that the observed hippocampalmorphometric changes produced by THC exposure were similar toglucocorticoid-dependent changes that develop in rat hippocampusduring normal aging. They proposed that, given the chemical structuralsimilarity between cannabinoids and steroids, chronic exposure to THCmay alter hippocampal anatomical structure by interacting with adrenalsteroid activity. More recently, Eldridge et al (1992) reported thatdelta-8-THC bound with the glucocorticoid receptors in the rathippocampus, and was displaced by corticosterone or delta-9-THC. Aglucocorticoid agonist action of delta-9-THC injections wasdemonstrated. Injection of corticosterone increased hippocampalcannabinoid receptor binding. These interactions suggest thatcannabinoids may accelerate brain aging.It should be noted that where THC has been administered to monkeys forsix months, this represents only 2 per cent of their life span and maynot have been long enough to detect the gradual effects that couldarise from interactions with steroid systems (and affect the agingprocess). In contrast, eight months administration to rats representsapproximately 30 per cent of their life span. The differences in theultrastructural findings of Landfield's and Scallet's studies may bedue to the largely different doses administered; the 8mg/kg ofLandfield's study was not sufficient to produce any marked behaviouraleffects. Further, the two studies examined slightly differenthippocampal areas (CA1 or CA3).Most recently, Slikker and colleagues (1992) reported the results oftheir neurohistochemical and electronmicroscopic evaluation of therhesus monkeys whose dosing regime, behavioural and histochemical datawere reported above. They failed to replicate earlier findings: noeffects of drug exposure were found on the total area of hippocampus,or any of its subfields; there were no differences in hippocampalvolume, neuronal size, number, length or degree of branching of CA3pyramidal cell dendrites. Nor were there effects on synaptic length orwidth, but there were trends toward increased synaptic density (thenumber of synapses per cubic mm), increased soma size, and decreasedbasilar dendrite number in the CA3 region with marijuana treatment.Slikker et al (1992) were able to demonstrate an effect of enrichedenvironments upon neuroanatomy: daily performance of operant tasksincreased the total area of hippocampus and particularly the CA3stratum oriens, producing longer, more highly branched dendrites andless synaptic density, while the reverse occurred in the animalsdeprived of the daily operant tasks. The extent of drug interactionwith these changes was not clear and may explain some of theinconsistencies between this study and those described above. Clearly,the question of whether prolonged exposure to cannabis results instructural brain damage has not been fully resolved.The development of tolerance following chronic administration ofpsychoactive compounds is often mediated by a down-regulation ofreceptors. Thus, chronic exposure to THC could result in a decreasednumber of cannabinoid receptors in the brain. Such receptordown-regulation and reduced binding has recently been demonstrated inrats (Oviedo, Glowa and Herkenham, 1993). However, previously Westlakeet al (1991) found that cannabinoid receptor properties were notirreversibly altered in rat brain 60 days following 90-dayadministration of THC, nor in monkey brain seven months after one yearof exposure to marijuana smoke. It was argued that these recoveryperiods were sufficient to allow the full recovery of any receptorsthat would have been lost during treatment. Nevertheless, studies havenot yet confirmed the parameters of any alterations in cannabinoidreceptor number and function that may result from chronic exposure tocannabinoids, and the extent of reversibility following longerexposures has not been determined.7.5.6.2 Human studiesThere is very little evidence from human studies of structural braindamage. In their controversial paper, Campbell et al (1971) were thefirst to present evidence suggesting that structural/morphologicalbrain damage was associated with cannabis use. They used airencephalography to measure cerebral ventricular size, and claimed tohave demonstrated evidence of cerebral atrophy in ten young males whohad used cannabis for three to 11 years, and who complained ofneurological symptoms, including headaches, memory dysfunction andother cognitive impairment. Compared to controls, the cannabis usersshowed significantly enlarged lateral and third ventricular areas.Although this study was widely publicised in the media because of itsserious implications, it was heavily criticised on methodologicalgrounds. Most subjects had also used significant quantities of LSD andamphetamines, and the measurement technique was claimed to beinaccurate, particularly since there were great difficulties inassessing ventricular size and volume to any degree of accuracy (e.g.Bull, 1971; Susser, 1972; Brewer, 1972). Moreover, the findings couldnot be replicated. Stefanis (1976) reported that echoencephalographicmeasurements of the third ventricle in 14 chronic hashish users and 21non-users did not support Campbell et al's pneumoencephalographicfindings of ventricular dilation.The introduction of more accurate and non-invasive techniques, in theform of computerised tomographic (CT) scans, (also known ascomputer-assisted tomographic (CAT) scans), permitted better studiesof possible cerebral atrophy in chronic cannabis users (Co et al,1977; Kuehnle et al, 1977). Co et al (1977), for example, compared 12cannabis users recruited from the general community, with 34 non-drugusing controls, all within the ages of 20-30. The cannabis users hadused cannabis for at least five years at the level of at least fivejoints per day, and most had also consumed significant quantities of avariety of other drugs, particularly LSD. Kuehnle et al's (1977)subjects were 19 heavy users aged 21-27 years, also recruited from thegeneral community who had used on average between 25 and 62 joints permonth in the preceding year, although their duration of use was notreported. CT scans were obtained presumably at the end of a 31-daystudy, which included 21 days of ad libitum smoking of marijuana(generally five joints per day), and were compared against a separatenormative sample. No evidence for cerebral atrophy in terms ofventricular size and subarachnoid space was found in either study.Although these studies could also be criticised for their researchdesign (e.g. inappropriate control groups, and the fact that cannabisusers had used other drugs), these flaws would only have biased thestudies in the direction of detecting significant differences betweengroups, yet none were found. The results were interpreted as arefutation of Campbell's findings, and supporting the absence ofcortical atrophy demonstrated by Rumbaugh et al's (1980) CAT scans ofmonkeys. A further study (Hannerz and Hindmarsh, 1983) investigated 12subjects who had smoked on average 1g of cannabis daily for betweensix and 20 years, by thorough clinical neurological examination and CTscans. As in the studies above, no cannabis related abnormalities werefound on any assessment measure. 7.5.7   DiscussionSurprisingly few studies of neurotoxicity have been published, and theresults have been equivocal. There is convincing evidence that chronicadministration of large doses of THC leads to residual changes inrodent behaviours which are believed to depend upon hippocampalfunction. There is evidence for long-term changes in hippocampalultrastructure and morphology in rodents and monkeys. Animalneurobehavioural toxicity is characterised by residual impairment inlearning, EEG and biochemical alterations, impaired motivation andimpaired ability to exhibit appropriate adaptive behaviour. Althoughextrapolation to man is not possible, the results of theseexperimental studies have demonstrated cannabinoid toxicity at dosescomparable to those consumed by humans using cannabis several times aday. There is sufficient evidence from human research to suggest thatthe cannabinoids act on the hippocampal region, producing behaviouralchanges similar to those caused by traumatic injury to that region.The cognitive, behavioural and functional responses to long-termcannabis consumption in animals and man appear to be the mostconsistent manifestation of its potential neurotoxicity. The extent ofdamage appears to be more pronounced at two critical stages of centralnervous system development: in neonates when exposed to cannabisduring intrauterine life; and in adolescence, during puberty whenneuroendocrine, cognitive and affective functions and structures ofthe brain are in the process of integration. As discussed in Section7.4 on cognitive functioning, research needs to investigate thepossibility that more severe consequences may occur in adolescentsexposed to cannabinoids. Human research has defined a pattern of acuteCNS changes following cannabis administration; there is convincingevidence for long-lasting changes in brain function after long-termheavy use; whether or not these changes are permanent has not beenestablished. Human studies of brain morphology have yielded generally negativeresults, failing to find gross signs of "brain damage" after chronicexposure to cannabis. Nevertheless, the results of many human studiesare indicative of more subtle brain dysfunction. It may be thatexisting methods of brain imaging are not sensitive enough toestablish subcellular alterations produced in the CNS. Manypsychoactive substances exert their action through molecularbiochemical mechanisms which do not distort gross cell architecture.The most convincing evidence on brain damage would come frompostmortem studies, but this type of information has not beenavailable.In 1983, Fehr and Kalant concluded that "The state of the evidence atthe present time does not permit one either to conclude that cannabisproduces structural brain damage or to rule it out" (p602). Nahas(1984) wrote "The brain is the organ of the mind. Can one repetitivelydisturb the mental function without impairing brain mechanisms? Thebrain, like all other organs of the human body, has very largefunctional reserves which allow it to resist and adapt to stressfulabnormal demands. It seems that chronic use of cannabis derivativesslowly erodes these reserves" (p299). In 1986, Wert and Raulin (1986)proposed, that on the available evidence "there are no grossstructural or neurological deficits in marijuana-using subjects,although subtle neurological features may be present. However, thetype of deficit most likely to occur would be a subtle, functionaldeficit which could be assessed more easily with either psychologicalor neuropsychological assessment techniques." (p624). In 1993, littlefurther evidence has emerged to challenge or refute these earlierconclusions. This conclusion was anticipated by the Parisian physician Moreau asearly as 1845 when he observed:  ...unquestionably there are modifications (I do not dare use the word"lesion") in the organ which is in charge of mental functions. Butthese modifications are not those one would generally expect. Theywill always escape the investigations of the researchers seekingalleged or imagined structural changes. One must not look forparticular, abnormal changes in either the gross anatomical or thefine histological structure of the brain; but one must look for anyalterations of its sensibility, that is to say, for an irregular,enhanced, diminished or distorted activity of the specific mechanismsupon which depends the performance of mental functions. (Moreau (deTours), 1845).ReferencesAli, S.F., Newport, G.D., Scallet, A.C., Gee, K.W., Paule, M.G.,Brown, R.M. and Slikker, W., Jr. (1989) Effects of chronicdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) administration on neurotransmitterconcentrations and receptor binding in the rat brain. Neurotoxicology,10, 491-500.Ali, S.F., Newport, G.D., Scallet, A.C., Paule, M.G., Bailey, J.R. andSlikker, W., Jr. (1991) Chronic marijuana smoke exposure in the rhesusmonkey. IV: Neurochemical effects and comparison to acute and chronicexposure to delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in rats. PharmacologyBiochemistry and Behavior, 40(3), 677-682.Barrat, E.S. and Adams, P.M. (1972) The effects of chronic marijuanaadministration on brain functioning in cats. Clinical Toxicology,5(1), 36.Bloom, A.S. (1984) Effects of cannabinoids on neurotransmitterreceptors in the brain. In Agurell, S., Dewey, W.L. and Willette, R.E.(Eds), The Cannabinoids: Chemical, Pharmacological and TherapeuticAspects (pp. 575-589). New York: Academic Press.Brewer, C. (1972) Cerebral atrophy in young cannabis smokers. Lancet,(January 15), 143.Bull, J. (1971) Cerebral atrophy in young cannabis smokers. Lancet,(December 25), 1420.Campbell, A.M.G., Evans, M., Thomson, J.L.G. and Williams, M.J. (1971)Cerebral atrophy in young cannabis smokers. Lancet, 2, 1219-1224.Campbell, K.A., Foster, T.C., Hampson, R.E. and Deadwyler, S.A.(1986a) Effects of 9-tetrahydrocannabinol on sensory-evokeddischarges of granule cells in the dentate gyrus of behaving rats. TheJournal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 239(3),941-945.Campbell, K.A., Foster, T.C., Hampson, R.E. and Deadwyler, S.A.(1986b) 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol differentially affects sensory-evokedpotentials in the rat dentate gyrus. The Journal of Pharmacology andExperimental Therapeutics, 239(3), 936-940.Charalambous, A., Marciniak, G., Shiue, C.-Y., Dewey, S.L., Schlyer,D.J., Wolf, A.P. and Makriyannis, A. (1991) PET studies in the primatebrain and biodistribution in mice using (-)-5'-18F-8-THC.Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 40(3), 503-507.Co, B.T., Goodwin, D.W., Gado, M., Mikhael, M. and Hill, S.Y. (1977)Absence of cerebral atrophy in chronic cannabis users: Evaluation bycomputerized transaxial tomography. Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 237(12), 1229-1230.Cohen, S. (1976) The 94-day cannabis study. Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Sciences, 282 (R.L. Dornbush, A.M. Freedman and M. Fink(Eds) Chronic Cannabis Use), 211-220.Domino, E.F. (1981) Cannabinoids and the cholinergic system. Journalof Clinical Pharmacology, 21, 249s-255s.Feeney, D.M. (1979) Marihuana and epilepsy: Paradoxical anticonvulsantand convulsant effects. In G.G. Nahas and W.D.M. Paton (Eds),Marihuana: Biological Effects. Analysis, metabolism, cellularresponses, reproduction and brain (pp. 643-657). Oxford: PergamonPress.Fehr, K.O. and Kalant, H. (Eds) (1983) Cannabis and Health Hazards.Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.Feinberg, I., Jones, R., Walker, J., Cavness, C. and Floyd, T. (1976)Effects of marijuana extract and tetrahydrocannabinol onelectroencephalographic sleep patterns. Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 19(6), 782-794.Fink, M. (1976) Effects of acute and chronic inhalation of hashish,marijuana, and 9-tetrahydrocannabinol on brain electrical activity inman: Evidence for tissue tolerance. Annals of the New York Academy ofSciences, 282 (R.L. Dornbush, A.M. Freedman and M. Fink (Eds) ChronicCannabis Use), 387-398.Fink, M., Volavka, J., Panayiotopoulos, C.P. and Stefanis, C. (1976)Quantitative EEG studies of marijuana, 9-tetrahydrocannabinol, andhashish in man. In M Braude and Szara, S. (Eds), Pharmacology ofMarihuana (pp. 383-391). New York: Raven Press.Fried, P.A. and Charlebois, A.T. (1979) Canning of theCollege on Ppregnancy: First and second generation effects in rats. PhysiologicalPsychology, 7, 307-310.Hannerz, J. and Hindmarsh, T. (1983) Neurological andneuroradiological examination of chronic cannabis smokers. Annals ofNeurology, 13(2), 207-210.Harper, J.W., Heath, R.G. and Myers, W.A. (1977) Effects of cannabissativa on ultrastructure of the synapse in monkey brain. Journal ofNeuroscience Research, 3(2), 87-93.Heath, R.G., Fitzjarrell, A.T., Fontana, C.J. and Garey, R.E. (1980)Cannabis sativa: effects on brain function and ultrastructure inrhesus monkeys. Biological Psychiatry, 15(5), 657-690.Herning, R.I., Jones, R.T. and Peltzman, D.J. (1979) Changes in humanevent-related potentials with prolonged delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol(THC) use. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 47,556-570.Hockman, C.H., Perrin, R.G. and Kalant, H. (1971)Electroencephalographic and behavioral alterations produced by1-tetrahydrocannabinol. Science, 172, 968-970.Institute of Medicine. (1982) Marijuana and Health. Washington, DC:National Academy Press.Karacan, I., Fernandez-Salas, A., Coggins, W.J., Carter, W.E.,Wiliams, R.L., Thornby, J.I., Salis, P.J., Okawa, M. and Villaume,J.P. (1976) Sleep electroencephalographic -electrooculographiccharacteristics of chronic marijuana users. Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Sciences, 282 (R.L. Dornbush, A.M. Freedman and M. Fink(Eds) Chronic Cannabis Use), 348-374.Kuehnle, J., Mendelson, J.H. and David, K.R. (1977) Computedtomographic examination of heavy marijuana users. Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 237(1231-1232), Landfield, P.W., Cadwallader, L.B. and Vinsant, S. (1988) Quantitativechanges in hippocampal structure following long-term exposure to9-tetrahydrocannabinol: possible mediation by glucocorticoid systems.Brain Research, 443, 47-62.Luthra, Y.K., Rosenkrantz, H. and Braude, M (1976) Cerebral andcerebellar neurochemical changes and behavioral manifestations in ratschronically exposed to marijuana smoke. Toxicology and AppliedPharmacology, 35, 455-465.Marciniak, G., Charalambous, A., Shiue, C.-Y., Dewey, S.L., Schlyer,D.J., Makriyannis, A. and Wolf, A.P. (1991) 18F-Labeledtetrahydrocannabinol: synthesis; and PET studies in a baboon. Journalof Laboratory and Comparative Radiophysiology, 30, 413-415. Martin, B.R. (1986) Cellular effects of cannabinoids. PharmacologicalReviews, 38(1), 45-74.Mathew, R.J., Tant, S. and Berger, C. (1986) Regional cerebral bloodflow in marijuana smokers. British Journal of Addiction, 81, 567-571.Mathew, R.J. and Wilson, W.H. (1992) The effects of marijuana oncerebral blood flow and metabolism. In L. Murphy and A. Bartke (Ed.)Marijuana/Cannabinoids: Neurobiology and neurophysiology (pp.337-386). Boca Raton, Fl.: CRC Press.McGahan, J.P., Dublin, A.B. and Sassenrath, E. (1984) Long-termdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol treatment: Computed tomography of thebrains of rhesus monkeys. AJDC, 138, 1109-1112.Moreau (de Tours), J.J. (1845) Du Hachisch et de l'Alienation Mentale:Etudes Psychologiques. Paris: Libraire de Fortin, Masson. (Englishedition: New York: Raven Press 1972).Musselman, D.L., Haden, C., Caudle, J., Lewine, R.R.J. and Risch, S(1993) Cerebrospinal fluid study of cannabinoid users and normalcontrols. Presented at the 55th Annual Scientific Meeting of theCollege on Problems of Drug Dependence, Toronto, Canada, June 12-17.Myers, W.A. and Heath, R.G. (1979) Cannabis sativa: Ultrastructuralchanges in organelles of neurons in brain septal region of monkeys.Journal of Neuroscience Research, 4(1), 9-17.Nahas, G.G. (Ed) (1984) Marihuana in Science and Medicine. New York:Raven Press.Oviedo, A., Glowa, J. and Herkenham, M. (1993) Chronic cannabinoidadministration alters cannabinoid receptor binding in rat brain: aquantitative autoradiographic study. Brain Research, 616, 293-302.Pertwee, R.G. (1988) The central neuropharmacology of psychotropiccannabinoids. Pharmacol Ther, 36, 189-261.Richmon, J., Murawski, B., Matsumiya, Y., Duffy, F.H. and Lombroso,C.T. (1974) Long term effects of chronic marihuana smoking.Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 36(2), 223-224.Rosenkrantz, H. (1983) Cannabis, marihuana, and cannabinoidtoxicological manifestations in man and animals. In K.O. Fehr and H.Kalant (Eds), Cannabis and Health Hazards: Proceedings of an ARF/WHOScientific Meeting on Adverse Health and Behavioral Consequences ofCannabis Use (pp. 91-175). Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation.Rubin, V. and Comitas, L. (1975) Ganja in Jamaica: A medicalanthropological study of chronic marihuana use. The Hague: MoutonPublishers.Rumbaugh, C.L., Fang, HH., Wilson, G.H., Higgins, R.E. and Mestek,M.F. (1980) Cerebral CT findings in drug abuse: Clinical andexperimental observations. Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography,4(3), 330-334.Scallett, A.C., Uemura, E., Andrews, A., Ali, S.F., McMillan, D.E.,Paule, M.G., Brown, R.M. and Slikker, W., Jr. (1987) Morphometricstudies of the rat hippocampus following chronicdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Brain Research, 436, 193-198.Shannon, M.E. and Fried, P.A. (1972) The macro- and microdistributionand polymorphic electroencephalographic effects of9-tetrahydrocannabinol in the rat. Psychopharmacologia (Berl.), 27,141-156.Slikker, W., Jr., Paule, M.G., Ali, S.F., Scallet, A and Bailey, J.R.(1992) Behavioral, neurochemical, and neurohistological effects ofchronic marijuana smoke exposure in the nonhuman primate. In L. Murphyand A. Bartke (Ed.), Marijuana/Cannabinoids: Neurobiology andNeurophysiology (pp. 219-273). Boca Raton, Fl.: CRC Press.Stefanis, C. (1976) Biological aspects of cannabis use. In R Petersen(Ed.), The International Challenge of Drug Abuse (pp. 149-178).Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.Stiglick, A. and Kalant, H. (1982a) Learning impairment in theradial-arm maze following prolonged cannabis treatment in rats.Psychopharmacology, 77(2), 117-123.Stiglick, A. and Kalant, H. (1982b) Residual effects of prolongedcannabis administration on exploration and DRL performance in rats.Psychopharmacology, 77(2), 124-128.Struve, F.A. and Straumanis, J.J. (1990) Electroencephalographic andevoked potential methods in human marihuana research: Historicalreview and future trends. Drug Development Research, 20, 369-388.Struve, F., Straumanis, J., Patrick, G., Norris, G., Leavitt, J. andWebb, P. (1991). Topographic quantitative EEG findings in subjectswith 18+ years of cumulative daily THC exposure. 53rd ScientificMeeting of the College on Problems of Drug Dependence, Palm Beach,Florida USA, June.Struve, F., Straumanis, J., Patrick, G., Norris, G., Nixon, F.,Fitz-Gerald, M., Manno, J., Leavitt, J. and Webb, P. (1993)Topographic quantitative EEG sequelae of chronic cumulative THCexposure: recent and continuing studies. 55th Annual ScientificMeeting of the College on Problems of Drug Dependence, Toronto,Canada, June 10-17. Susser, M. (1972) Cerebral atrophy in young cannabis smokers. Lancet,(January 1), 41-42.Tunving, K., Thulin, O., Risberg, J. and Warkentin, S. (1986) Regionalcerebral blood flow in long-term heavy cannabis use. PsychiatryResearch, 17, 15-21.Volkow, N.D., Gillespi, H., Mullani, N., Tancredi, L., Hollister, L.,Ivanovic, M., and Grant, C. (1991) Use of positron emission tomographyto investigate the action of marihuana in the human brain. In G. Nahasand C. Latour (Eds), Physiopathology of Illicit Drugs: Cannabis,Cocaine, Opiates (pp. 3-11). Oxford: Pergamon Press.Wert, R and Raulin, M.L. (1986) The chronic cerebral effects ofcannabis use. I. Methodological issues and neurological findings. TheInternational Journal of the Addictions, 21(6), 605-628.Westlake, T.M., Howlett, A.C., Ali, S.F., Paule, M.G. and Scallett, W.Jr. (1991) Chronic exposure to delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol fails toirreversibly alter brain cannabinoid receptors. Brain Research, 544,145-149.7.6 Does cannabis use cause psychotic disorders? There is a prima facie case for believing that cannabis use may incertain circumstances be a contributory cause of major psychologicaldisorders such as psychotic disorders, i.e. illnesses in whichsymptoms of hallucinations, delusions and impaired reality testing arepredominant features. First, THC is a psychoactive substance whichproduces some of the symptoms found in psychotic disorders, namely,euphoria, distorted time perception, cognitive and memory impairments(Brill and Nahas, 1984; Halikas et al, 1971; Thornicroft, 1990).Second, under controlled laboratory conditions with normal volunteers,THC has been shown at high doses to produce psychotic symptoms whichinclude visual and auditory hallucinations, delusional ideas, thoughtdisorder, and symptoms of hypomania (Georgotas and Zeidenberg, 1979;National Academy of Science, 1982). Third, a putative "cannabispsychosis" has been identified by clinical observers in regions of theworld with a long history of chronic, heavy cannabis use, e.g. India,Egypt, and the Carribean (Brill and Nahas, 1984; Ghodse, 1986). 7.6.1 The nature of the relationshipHow might cannabis use causally contribute to the development ofpsychosis? The following are the major mechanisms that have beensuggested by proponents of a relationship between cannabis use andsevere psychological disorder (Thornicroft, 1990). 7.6.1.1 Is there a 'cannabis psychosis'?The first possibility is that acute or chronic cannabis use mayproduce a "cannabis psychosis". Four possible variants of thishypothesis can be distinguished. The first hypothesis is that theacute use of large doses of cannabis may induce a "toxic" or organicpsychosis with prominent symptoms of confusion and hallucination,which remit with abstinence from cannabis. The second hypothesis isthat cannabis use may produce an acute functional psychosis, similarin its clinical presentation to paranoid schizophrenia, and lackingthe organic features of a toxic psychosis which remits afterabstinence from cannabis. A third hypothesis is that chronic cannabisuse may produce a chronic psychosis, i.e. a psychotic disorder whichpersists beyond the period of intoxication. The fourth hypothesis (avariant of the third) is that chronic cannabis use may induce anorganic psychosis which only partially remits with abstinence, leavingin its train a residual deficit state with symptoms that are analogousto the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, or a mild chronic brainsyndrome. This has also been described as "an amotivational syndrome"which is characterised by withdrawal, lack of interest in others,impaired performance and lack of motivation to perform one's socialresponsibilities. 7.6.1.2 Does cannabis use precipitate a latent psychosis?Cannabis use could conceivably precipitate a latent psychosis, i.e.bring forward an episode of schizophrenia or manic depressivepsychosis in a vulnerable or predisposed individual. This could occureither as a result of a specific pharmacological effect of THC (orother constituents of cannabis preparations), or as the result ofstressful experiences while intoxicated, such as a panic attack or aparanoid reaction to the acute effects of cannabis (Edwards, 1976).Schizophrenia is the disorder about which concern has been most oftenexpressed in the case of cannabis use.A related hypothesis would be that cannabis use exacerbates thesymptoms of a functional psychosis such as schizophrenia or manicdepressive psychosis. This could occur if cannabis use precipitated arelapse in the same way that it has been hypothesised to precipitatethe onset of a latent psychosis. Alternatively, the pharmacologicaleffects of cannabis might impair the effectiveness of the neurolepticdrugs used to treat major psychoses.7.6.2 Methodological issues Until recently, our ability to test these hypotheses has been hamperedby a lack of sophistication in research design (Mueser et al, 1990;Thornicroft, 1990; Turner and Tsuang, 1990). First, the possiblemechanisms for a causal relationship between cannabis use andpsychosis have not always been clearly distinguished, and so have notoften informed the design of research studies purporting to test them.Second, studies of the relationships between cannabis use andpsychological disorder have often been uncontrolled. Only rarely havethey compared cannabis use in psychotic patients and controls, orcompared the clinical characteristics and course of psychotic patientswho have and have not used cannabis. Third, the extent of cannabis andother drug use, and its relationship to the onset of psychoticsymptoms, has often been poorly documented. There has been a heavyreliance upon self-reported use, and few attempts have been made todistinguish between use, abuse and dependence (Mueser et al, 1990).Fourth, the diagnosis of a psychotic disorder, or of psychoticsymptoms, has only rarely used standardised diagnostic criteria suchDSM-III-R or ICD-9. Fifth, many studies have used small samples,reducing the chances of detecting any association between cannabis useand psychotic disorder. As a consequence of these deficiencies, manystudies have failed to provide convincing evidence of even anassociation between cannabis use and psychotic symptoms or psychoticsyndromes. Even when an association between cannabis use and psychosis has beendemonstrated, it has proved difficult to distinguish betweenalternative explanations of it. There has been a readiness to assumethat the data supports the hypothesis that cannabis use is acontributory cause of psychosis (whether that is a specific "cannabispsychosis" or a functional psychosis such as schizophrenia). Onlyrecently have other hypotheses been acknowledged, and attempts made totest them (e.g. Dixon et al, 1990, 1991; Turner and Tsuang, 1990). There are a number of ways in which cannabis use could be associatedwith psychotic disorders without being a contributory cause of suchdisorders. One possibility is that the psychosis is a contributorycause of cannabis use, and that cannabis is used to self-medicatedepression, anxiety, negative psychotic symptoms, or the side effectsof neuroleptic drugs. Another possibility is that drug use amongschizophrenic individuals is a consequence of pre-existing personalitycharacteristics which predispose them to use illicit drugs and todevelop schizophrenia. A third possibility is that heavy cannabis usemay be a marker of the use of amphetamine and cocaine for which thereis strong evidence for causing acute paranoid psychoses (Angrist,1983; Bell, 1973; Connell, 1959). In the review that follows, the best available clinical andepidemiological studies bearing on these issues is reviewed. Althoughwe have preferred to cite controlled studies, we have not excluded allthe early uncontrolled studies which have been most often cited.Attempts will also be made to distinguish the very differentnon-causal explanations of the apparent association between cannabisuse and psychosis.7.6.3 'Cannabis psychoses'7.6.3.1 Toxic psychosisMuch of the literature on cannabis psychoses consists of case studies(e.g. Carney, Bacelle and Robinson, 1984; Drummond, 1986; Edwards,1983; Weil, 1970), case series (e.g. Bernardson and Gunne, 1972; Cohenand Johnson, 1988; Kolansky and Moore, 1971; Onyango, 1986) andreviews of such reports (e.g. Tunving, 1985) which often suffer from acircularity in their argument (Thornicroft, 1990). Typically a groupof patients have been identified as having a toxic "cannabispsychosis" (with little information given on how they came to be soidentified) and their behaviour and clinical history are thenpresented as evidence for the existence of the diagnostic entity theywere meant to be testing. The better examples of these reports haveattempted to justify their inclusion of cases within this diagnosis,and have attempted to assess the contribution of predisposition anddrug use to the development of the psychosis. Chopra and Smith (1974) have presented one of the largest case seriesof a toxic "cannabis psychosis". They described the characteristics of200 East Indian patients who were admitted to a psychiatric hospitalin Calcutta between 1963 and 1968 with "psychotic symptoms followingthe use of cannabis preparations" (p24). Their cases resembled casesof acute organic brain disorder in that their major symptoms includedconfusion and amnesia. The most common symptoms "were sudden onset ofconfusion, generally associated with delusions, hallucinations(usually visual) and emotional lability ... amnesia, disorientation,depersonalisation and paranoid symptoms" (p24). Most psychoses werepreceded by the ingestion of a large dose of cannabis which producedintoxication and amnesia for the period between ingestion andhospitalisation.Patients were classified into three groups on the basis of theirhistory of previous psychiatric disorder. The first consisted of athird of patients who had no previous personality problems orpsychiatric disorder, whose only constant feature was "recent use ofcannabis preparations as the apparent precipitant of the psychoticepisode" (p25). They exhibited symptoms of excitement, confusion,disorientation, delusions, visual hallucinations, depersonalisation,emotional instability and delirium. These symptoms were usually ofshort duration, varying between a few hours and several days, and allthese patients returned to their normal state after remission. The second group consisted of 61 per cent of patients who did not havea prior history of psychosis but had a history of schizoid,sociopathic, and unstable personalities. Their clinical picture wasmuch like that of the first group, and they also had a highprobability of remission within a few days of admission. The thirdgroup consisted of 10 patients with a prior history of psychosis (mostoften schizophrenia) who rarely experienced a short remission andusually required continued hospitalisation and treatment. Chopra and Smith argued that their case series provided evidence forthe existence of the clinical entity of "cannabis psychosis". Althoughthey conceded that excessive drug use could be a sign of pre-existingpsychopathology, they argued that this was an unlikely explanation oftheir findings, because at least a third of their cases had no priorpsychiatric history, the symptoms reported were remarkably uniformregardless of prior psychiatric history, and there was evidence of adose-time relationship in that those who used the most potent cannabispreparations experienced psychotic reactions after the shortest periodof use.The findings of Chopra and Smith have received some support from caseseries published in other countries (e.g. Bernardson and Gunne, 1972;Onyango, 1986; Tennant and Groesbeck, 1972). Bernardson and Gunne(1972) reported on 46 cases of putative cannabis psychosis admitted toSwedish psychiatric hospitals between 1966 and 1970. These wereprimary cannabis users who had no history of psychosis prior to theircannabis use, and who presented with a clinical picture of paranoiddelusions, motor restlessness, auditory and visual hallucinations,hypomania, aggression, anxiety and clouded consciousness. Theirsymptoms usually remitted within five weeks of admission, and thosewho returned to cannabis use after discharge were most likely torelapse. Tennant and Groesbeck (1972) report on psychoses they had treatedamong US servicemen stationed in Germany between 1968 and 1971. Duringthis period, potent hashish was cheap and readily available and widelyused, with 46 per cent of servicemen reporting that they had usedhashish, and 16 per cent reporting using it three or more times perweek. They reported 18 cases of a short-term panic reaction or toxicpsychosis developing after a single high dose of hashish, and 85 casesof toxic psychoses developing after the simultaneous consumption ofcannabis and other drugs. The toxic psychoses usually resolved withinthree days on neuroleptic medication. Onyango (1986) reported one of the few case series which usedbiochemical measures of recent cannabis use to identify possible casesof toxic cannabis psychosis among young adults who presented to aLondon psychiatric hospital with psychotic symptoms. He screened theurines of 25 such admissions and found that, although half reportedhaving used cannabis at some time, only four had cannabinoidmetabolites in their urines at the time of presentation. In threecases the patients had a prior history of psychosis, theirphenomenology was unremarkable, and they did not respond rapidly totreatment. Only one case seemed to fit the picture of a cannabispsychosis. He had no prior history of psychosis, and a history ofchronic, heavy cannabis use prior to admission. He presented withhallucinations, delusions, and labile, elated mood which respondedrapidly to haloperidol, and he had no further episodes during atwo-year follow-up.All considered, there is a reasonable case for believing that largedoses of potent cannabis products can produce a toxic psychoticillness in persons who do not have a personal history of psychoticillness (Edwards, 1976; Negrete, 1983; Thomas, 1993). Such psychosesare characterised by symptoms of confusion and amnesia, paranoiddelusions, and auditory and visual hallucinations, and they have arelatively benign course in that they typically remit within a week ofabstinence (Chaudry et al, 1991; Thomas, 1993). They seem most likelyto occur in populations which use high doses of THC, and probablyoccur rarely otherwise (Smith, 1968). Given the poor standards ofresearch design and lack of adequate controls in all but a few ofthese studies, and the failure to use standardised diagnosticcriteria, it would be premature to claim that the existence of a toxic"cannabis psychosis" has been established beyond reasonable doubt.7.6.3.2 An acute functional psychosis Other investigators have argued that heavy cannabis use may produce anacute functional psychosis. That is, it produces an illness which doesnot reflect an organic state produced by drug intoxication, but rathera psychotic illness that resembles schizophrenia. Thacore and Shukla(1976), for example, reported a case control study comparing caseswith a putatively functional cannabis psychosis with controlsdiagnosed as having paranoid schizophrenia. Their 25 cases of cannabispsychosis had a paranoid psychosis resembling schizophrenia, in which"a clear temporal relationship between the prolonged use of cannabis[longer than five years in all but one case] and the development ofpsychosis has been observed on more than two occasions" (p384). Their25 age and sex-matched controls were individuals with paranoidschizophrenia who had no history of cannabis use. The comparison revealed that the patients with a cannabis psychosisdisplayed more odd and bizarre behaviour, violence, panic affect, andinsight and less evidence of thought disorder. They also respondedswiftly to neuroleptic drugs and recovered completely. According toThacore and Shukla, this functional psychotic disorder could bedistinguished from the toxic "cannabis psychosis" reported by Chopraand Smith (1974), because there was no evidence of confusion andamnesia, and the major presenting symptoms were delusions ofpersecution, and auditory and visual hallucinations occurring in astate of clear consciousness. Rottanburg et al (1982) provide one of the most convincing researchstudies in favour of the hypothesis that cannabis can produce an acutefunctional psychosis. They conducted a case-control study in whichpsychotic patients with cannabinoids in their urines were comparedwith psychotic patients who did not have cannabinoids in their urines.Both groups were assessed shortly after admission, and seven dayslater, by psychiatrists who used a standardised psychiatric interviewschedule (PSE) and who were blind as to presence or absence ofcannabinoids in the patients' urine. Every third admission of a Cape coloured man during a period of a year(n=117) were screened for cannabinoids, alcohol and other toxins.Sixty per cent (N=70) had urines that were positive for cannabinoids,and 36 cases had levels which suggested heavy cannabis use prior toadmission. Sixteen patients left hospital before the study wascompleted, leaving a group of 20 cases with psychoses and cannabinoidsonly in their urines. They were compared with 20 psychotic controls,matched for age and clinical diagnosis, whose urines were negative forcannabinoids and other drugs and toxins. The results showed that psychotic patients with cannabinoids in theirurine had more symptoms of hypomania and agitation, and less auditoryhallucinations, flattening of affect, incoherent speech and hysteriathan controls. They also showed strong improvements in symptoms by theend of a week, as against no change in the controls despite receivingcomparable amounts of anti-psychotic drugs. They concluded that "heavycannabis intake is associated with a rapidly resolving psychoticillness characterised by marked hypomanic features" (p1366). Imade and Ebie (1991) conducted a retrospective comparison of thesymptoms reported by 70 patients with putatively cannabis-inducedpsychosis, 163 patients with schizophrenia, and 39 patients withmania. No details were provided on how these diagnoses were made, andthe ratings of symptoms were made retrospectively from case records bypsychiatrists who were not blind as to the patients' diagnoses. Alarge number of statistical comparisons produced a number ofstatistically significant differences in individual symptoms betweenthe three patient groups, although they did not differ in symptoms ofviolence, panic and bizarre behaviour. Imade and Ebie argued thatthere were no symptoms that were unique to cannabis psychosis, andthat there was no consistency of clinical picture that enabled them todistinguish a "cannabis psychosis" from schizophrenia. This negativestudy is unconvincing. The symptom ratings were made retrospectivelyfrom clinical records of unknown quality, and the patients' diagnoseswere not made using standardised diagnostic criteria. There was noinformation on how "cannabis psychosis" was diagnosed, or on theclinical course of the psychoses. The authors also failed to useappropriate statistical methods to test the claim that cannabispsychosis can be distinguished from schizophrenia.A number of cohort studies have been conducted on the prevalence ofpsychotic symptoms in chronic cannabis users and controls. Beaubruhnand Knight (1973) conducted a small study comparing the psychiatrichistory and symptoms of 30 chronic daily Jamaican cannabis users (witha history of at least seven years use) with that of 30 non-cannabisusing controls matched on social class, income, age and sex. Bothcases and controls were assessed by personal psychiatric interview andpersonality questionnaires during a six day hospitalisation. Therewere few statistically significant differences between the two groups,only a higher rate of family history of psychiatric disorder and ofhallucinatory experiences in the cannabis users. Only one user and onenon-user reported a personal history of psychiatric disorder. Similar results have been reported by Stefanis et al (1976) in a studyof 47 chronic cannabis users in Greece and 40 controls matched forage, family origin, residence at birth and upbringing. They found ahigher incidence of personality disorders among their cannabis users,but no statistically significant difference in the rates ofpsychiatric disorder diagnosed by a personal interview with apsychiatrist. Three cases of schizophrenia were diagnosed in thecannabis using group, but a connection with cannabis use wasdiscounted on the ground that two of the three had a family history ofschizophrenia.The small number of cases and the relative rarity of psychosis makesthese studies unconvincing. The authors interpreted their results fartoo strongly, by inferring that a failure to find a difference inrates of psychiatric disorder in sample sizes of 30 and 47 indicatedthat there was no difference in prevalence between chronic cannabisusers and controls. In Beaubruhn and Knight's study (1973), forexample, the failure to detect a difference in the rate of psychosisbetween 30 cannabis users and 30 controls does not rule out a 17 foldhigher rate of psychiatric disorder among cannabis users (as shown bythe upper limit of a 95 per cent confidence interval around the oddsratio).All considered, the case for believing that cannabis use can produce afunctional paranoid illness is much less compelling than that for atoxic psychosis (Thomas, 1993; Thornicroft, 1990). The researchdesigns for studies of this diagnosis have more often included controlgroups, but proponents of this hypothesis have not presented evidencethat satisfactorily distinguishes it from other functional psychoses(Thornicroft, 1990). If there is a toxic cannabis psychosis, then a strong case has notbeen made for distinguishing it from the putatively functionalcannabis psychosis. Thacore and Shukla (1976) emphasised the historyof chronic heavy cannabis use among their cases of functional cannabispsychoses, and the absence of the confusion and amnesia reported inpersons with the toxic psychosis. The differentiation in terms of chronicity of drug use isunconvincing. Some of the cases of the toxic cannabis psychosisdescribed by Chopra and Smith (1974), for example, had a long historyof heavy cannabis use. The hypothesised difference in symptoms is moredifficult to evaluate. Because few of the studies used standardisedassessments of symptoms, the absence of reports of confusion andamnesia in the functional cases may indicate differences in diagnosticpractice. There are also strong similarities between the putativelytoxic and functional psychoses, namely, the occurrence of delusions,and auditory and visual hallucinations, and a relatively benigncourse, typically remitting within a week. There is some recent support for the distinction between toxic andfunctional cannabis-induced psychoses. Tsuang et al, (1982) comparedthe demographic and clinical characteristics, and family histories offour groups of patients: those with drug abuse who had experienced apsychotic illness (DAP), those with diagnoses of drug abuse alone(DA), those with schizophrenia (SC), and those with diagnoses ofatypical schizophrenia (AS). They subdivided the patients with drugabuse and psychosis into those with shorter and longer duration ofsymptoms. They found that the DAP patients were more likely to haveabused hallucinogens and cannabis, and less likely to have abusedsedative-hypnotics and opiates, than DA patients. The DAP patientsalso had an earlier onset of illness, and better premorbidpersonalities than the SC patients. Comparisons of the DAP patients with short and long duration ofillness produced some interesting results. The patients with shortduration disorders had better premorbid personalties, fewer psychoticsymptoms, and fewer core schizophrenic symptoms, such as poor insight,shallow and inappropriate affect, thought disorder, delusions andSchneiderian "first rank symptoms". They were more likely to havepresented with "organic" symptoms such as confusion, disorientation,visual hallucinations, and amnesia than the patients with longduration disorders. By definition, the shorter duration patients hadshorter periods of admission; they also had shorter duration of drugtreatment, and more were discharged without being referred for furthertreatment. The prevalence of family histories of schizophrenia amongthe longer duration DAP patients was similar to that of the SC, whilethe shorter duration DAP patients had no such family history. On the basis of their comparisons, Tsuang et al argued that the shortduration disorders were drug-induced toxic psychoses, while the longerduration disorders reflected functional psychoses precipitated by druguse in predisposed individuals. If these findings are accepted, thesimplest explanation of the allegedly functional "cannabis psychoses"is that they are functional psychoses occurring in heavy cannabisusers. 7.6.3.3 Chronic psychoses If cannabis can produce an acute organic psychosis, the possibilitymust be considered that chronic cannabis use may produce a chronicpsychosis in much the same way as chronic alcohol heavy use canproduce a chronic organic brain syndrome. As Ghodse (1986) hassuggested, it is "theoretically possible in a situation of easyavailability of cannabis, that regular, heavy users may sufferrepeated, short episodes of psychosis and effectively `maintain'themselves in a chronic, psychotic state" (p477). Although this is a possibility, there is no good evidence that chroniccannabis use causes a psychotic illness which persists afterabstinence from cannabis (Thomas, 1993). This possibility is difficultto study because of the near impossibility of distinguishing a chroniccannabis psychosis from a functional psychosis such as schizophreniain which there is concurrent cannabis use (Negrete, 1983). Certainlythe findings of Tsuang et al (1982) suggest that the strongpresumption must be that individuals with a history of drug abuse anda psychotic illness have a functional psychosis which has beenprecipitated or exacerbated by drug use. Follow-up studies of patientswith acute cannabis psychoses, if they could be reliably identified,would be the best way of throwing some light on this issue. 7.6.3.4 A residual stateA number of investigators have described a state among chronic, heavycannabis users in which the users' focus of interest narrows, theybecome apathetic, withdrawn, lethargic, and unmotivated, and they haveimpaired memory, concentration and judgment (Brill and Nahas, 1984;McGlothin and West, 1968). This has been described as an"amotivational state", which some have attributed to an organicsyndrome caused by the effects of chronic cannabis intoxication, fromwhich there is incomplete recovery after prolonged abstinence (Tennantand Groesbeck, 1972). The major clinical evidence in favour of such a hypothesis consists ofcase series among contemporary chronic cannabis users (e.g. Kolanskyand Moore, 1971; Millman and Sbriglio, 1986), and historical reportsof the syndrome among chronic, heavy users in countries such as Egypt,Greece, and the Carribean, where there has been a tradition of chronicheavy cannabis use among the lower socioeconomic groups (Brill andNahas, 1984). These reports are often poorly documented anduncontrolled, and do not permit the effects of chronic drug use to beeasily disentangled from those of poverty and low socioeconomicstatus, or pre-existing personality disorders (Edwards, 1976; Millmanand Sbriglio, 1986; Negrete, 1983).A small number of controlled studies of heavy chronic users in othercultures have largely failed to substantiate the clinical observations(Millman and Sbriglio, 1986), although there are enough reports ofregular users complaining of loss of ambition and impaired school andoccupational performance (e.g. Hendin et al, 1987), and of ex-usersgiving this as a reason for stopping (Jones, 1984), to keep thepossibility alive. The small number of laboratory studies of long-termheavy use have produced mixed evidence (Edwards, 1976). Georgotas andZeidenberg (1979), for example, reported that five healthy malemarijuana users on a dose regimen of 210mg of THC per day for a monthappeared "moderately depressed, apathetic, at times dull and alienatedfrom their environment and with impaired concentration" (p430). Othershave failed to observe such effects (e.g. Mendelson et al, 1974). Thestatus of the amotivational syndrome consequently remains uncertain(see pp102-105). 7.6.4 Cannabis and schizophrenia7.6.4.1 PrecipitationThe possibility that heavy, chronic cannabis use may precipitateschizophrenia was raised by Tennant and Groesbeck (1972) in theirstudy of the consequences of chronic heavy hashish use among Americanservicemen in Germany between 1968 and 1971. They reported 112 casesof "persistent schizophrenic reactions following prolonged hashishuse" (p134), and they presented evidence that there had been a fourfold increase in the incidence of schizophrenia among Americanservicemen during the period in which hashish use became endemic. Aswith all ecological evidence, a causal relationship is only one of thepossible explanations of the apparently concurrent increase in theprevalence of hashish use and schizophrenia among American servicemenin Germany. The attribution of the increase to hashish use alone wasalso complicated by fact that many of their cases of schizophreniaalso used hallucinogens, amphetamines, and alcohol. The precipitation hypothesis has received some support from a seriesof case-control studies of cannabis and other psychoactive drug useamong schizophrenic patients (Schneier and Siris, 1987). The usualfinding has been that schizophrenic patients have higher rates of useof psychomimetic drugs such as amphetamines, cocaine, andhallucinogens than other patients (Dixon et al, 1990; Schneier andSiris, 1987; Weller et al, 1988) or normal controls (Breakey et al,1974; Rolfe et al, 1993). The results for cannabis use have been moremixed, with some finding a higher prevalence of use or abuse (e.g.Mathers et al, 1991) and others not having done so (Dixon et al, 1990;Mueser et al, 1990; Schneier and Siris, 1987). There is also good epidemiological evidence for an association betweenschizophrenia and drug abuse and dependence in the EpidemiologicalCatchment Area (ECA) study. In this study (Anthony and Helzer, 1991)there was an increased risk of schizophrenia among men and women witha diagnosis of any form of drug abuse and dependence: the excess riskof schizophrenia was 6.2 for men and 6.4 for women. Although separateestimates were not provided for cannabis abuse and dependence, itseems reasonable to assume that the same sort of relationship applied.Bland, Norman and Orn, (1987) have obtained a similar finding in apopulation survey of the prevalence of psychiatric disorder inEdmonton Alberta, using the same ECA interview schedule and diagnosticcriteria. They found that the odds of receiving a diagnosis of drugabuse and dependence were 11.9 times higher among persons withschizophrenia. Many researchers have favoured a causal interpretation of theincreased prevalence of psychoactive drug use among schizophrenics,that is, they have concluded that cannabis and other drug useprecipitates schizophrenic disorders in persons who may not otherwisehave experienced them. In support of this hypothesis are the commonfindings that drug abusing schizophrenic patients have an earlier ageof onset of psychotic symptoms (with their drug use typicallypreceding the onset of symptoms), a better premorbid adjustment, fewernegative symptoms (e.g. withdrawal, anhedonia, lethargy), and a betterresponse to treatment and outcome than schizophrenic patients who donot use drugs (Allebeck et al, 1993; Dixon et al, 1990; Schneier andSiris, 1987). There are other interpretations of these findings, however. Arndt etal (1992), for example, have suggested that the association betweencannabis use and an early onset of schizophrenia in persons with agood premorbid personality and outcome is spurious. According to Arndtet al, schizophrenics with a better premorbid personality were simplymore likely to be exposed to illicit drug use among peers than thosewith a withdrawn and socially inept premorbid personality, and becauseof this prior exposure to drugs, they were also more likely to usedrugs to cope with the symptoms of an emerging psychosis. On thisaccount, cannabis and other illicit drug use is a correlate of a goodprognosis in schizophrenia, and pathological drug use is a response tothe unrelated emergence of psychotic symptoms. A further possibility is that cannabis and other illicit drug use is aconsequence of schizophrenia. That is, such illicit drug use is a formof self-medication to deal with some of the unpleasant symptoms ofschizophrenia, such as depression, anxiety, lethargy, and anhedonia,and the side effects of the neuroleptic drugs used to treat it (Dixonet al, 1990). There is some support for this hypothesis in the work ofDixon et al (1990), who surveyed 83 patients with schizophrenia orschizophreniform psychoses about the effects of various illicit drugson their mood and symptoms. Their patients reported that cannabisreduced anxiety and depression, and increased a sense of calm, at thecost of some increase in suspiciousness, and with mixed effects onhallucinations and energy. Prospective evidence. The most convincing evidence of an associationbetween cannabis use and the precipitation of schizophrenia has beenprovided by a prospective study of cannabis use and schizophrenia inSwedish conscripts undertaken by Andreasson et al (1987). Theseinvestigators used data from a 15-year prospective study of 50,465Swedish conscripts to investigate the relationship betweenself-reported cannabis use at age 18 and the risk of receiving adiagnosis of schizophrenia in the subsequent 15 years, as indicated byinclusion in the Swedish psychiatric case register. Substantial datawere collected on the conscripts (such as family circumstances,personal psychiatric disorder and other drug use) and statisticalmethods were used to examine the effect of these potentiallyconfounding variables on the association between cannabis andschizophrenia. Their results showed that the relative risk of receiving a diagnosisof schizophrenia was 2.4 times higher [95 per cent confidence interval1.8, 3.3] for those who had ever tried cannabis compared to those whohad not. There was also a dose-response relationship between the riskof a diagnosis of schizophrenia and the number of times that theconscript had tried cannabis by age 18. The crude relative risk ofdeveloping schizophrenia was 1.3 times higher [95 per cent confidenceinterval 0.8, 2.3] for those who had used cannabis one to ten times,3.0 times higher [95 per cent confidence interval 1.6, 5.5] for thosewho had used cannabis between one and 50 times, and 6.0 times higher[95 per cent confidence interval 4.0, 8.9] for those who had usedcannabis more than fifty times (compared in each case to those who hadnot used cannabis). The size of the risk was substantially reduced by statisticaladjustment for variables that were independently related to the riskof developing schizophrenia (namely, having a psychiatric diagnosis atconscription, and having parents who had divorced). Nevertheless, therelationship between cannabis use and schizophrenia remainedstatistically significant and still showed a dose responserelationship. The risk of a diagnosis of schizophrenia for those whohad smoked cannabis from one to ten times was 1.5 times that of thosewho had never used, and the relative risk for those who had used 10 ormore times was 2.3 times that for those who had never used [95 percent confidence interval 1.0, 5.3].Andreasson et al (1987) carefully scrutinised the validity of theirdata on cannabis use and the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Theyacknowledged that cannabis use was likely to have been under-reportedbecause the information was not confidential, but they argued this wasmost likely to have under-estimated the relative risk of developingschizophrenia among users and non-users. Self-reported cannabis use atage 18 showed a strong dose-response relationship to the risk ofreceiving a diagnosis of drug abuse in the subsequent 15 years. Datafrom a small validity study indicated that 80 per cent of thosediagnosed as schizophrenic in the case register met the DSM-IIIcriteria for schizophrenia (which include a minimum duration of sixmonths).Andreasson et al (1987) and Allebeck (1991) argued for a causalinterpretation of the association, conjecturing that cannabis useprecipitated schizophrenia in vulnerable individuals. They rejected asimplausible the hypothesis that cannabis consumption was a consequenceof emerging schizophrenia. The cannabis users who developedschizophrenia had better premorbid personalities, a more abrupt onset,and more positive symptoms than the non-users who developedschizophrenia (Andreasson et al, 1989). Although over half of theheavy cannabis users (58 per cent) had a psychiatric diagnosis at thetime of conscription, there was still a dose-response relationshipbetween cannabis use and schizophrenia among those conscripts who didnot have such a history. They stressed that cannabis use "onlyaccounts for a minority of all cases" (p1485) since most of the 274conscripts who developed schizophrenia had not used cannabis, and only21 of them were heavy cannabis users. No single study ever settles an issue. Even a prospective study aswell designed, and as carefully interpreted as that of Andreasson etal has been criticised (Johnson, Smith and Taylor, 1988; Negrete,1989). Among these criticisms are the following, which raise a numberof alternative explanations to the causal one proposed by Andreassonand his colleagues. First, there was a large temporal gap between self-reported cannabisuse at age 18-20 and the development of schizophrenia over the next 15years or so (Johnson, Smith and Taylor, 1988; Negrete, 1989). Becausethe diagnosis was based upon a case register, there was no informationon whether the individuals continued to use cannabis up until the timethat their schizophrenia was diagnosed. Andreasson et al (1987)anticipated and dealt with this criticism by showing thatself-reported cannabis use at age 18 was strongly related to the riskof subsequently attracting a diagnosis of drug abuse. This suggeststhat cannabis use at age 18 was predictive of continued drug use, andthe more so the more frequently it had been used by age 18. A second possibility is that the excess rate of "schizophrenia" amongthe heavy cannabis users was due to acute cannabis-induced toxicpsychoses which were mistakenly diagnosed as schizophrenia (Johnson etal, 1988; Negrete, 1989). Andreasson et al (1989) attempted to addressthis criticism by a study of the validity of the schizophreniadiagnoses in 21 conscripts in the case register (8 of whom had usedcannabis and 13 of whom had not). This study indicated that 80 percent of these cases met the DSM-III requirement that the symptoms hadbeen present for at least six months, to exclude transient psychoticsymptoms. This sample size (21 case) was small, however, and theconfidence interval around a 20 per cent rate of misdiagnosis ofschizophrenia is between 3 per cent and 37 per cent. Even if the rateof misdiagnosis was only 20 per cent, this could, if it varied betweencannabis and non-cannabis users, be large enough to explain therelationship they observed.A third, more serious concern about the causal interpretation of therelationship between cannabis use and schizophrenia is that therelationship may be a consequence of the use of other illicitpsychoactive drugs. Longitudinal studies of illicit drug use indicatethat intensity of cannabis use in late adolescence predicts the lateruse of other illicit drugs. These drugs include amphetamine andcocaine (Johnson, 1988; Kandel and Faust, 1975) which can produce anacute paranoid psychosis (Angrist, 1983; Bell, 1973; Connell, 1959;Gawin and Ellinwood, 1988; Grinspoon and Hedblom, 1975). There is alsogood evidence that amphetamine was the major illicit drug of abuse inSweden during the study period (Inghe, 1969; Goldberg, 1968 a, b),which suggests that intervening amphetamine use may have produced thecorrelation between cannabis use and schizophrenia. Andreasson et al's(1989) study reported that only two of their eight schizophreniccannabis users had also been abusers of amphetamines prior to thediagnosis of their schizophrenia, but with a sample size as small asthis, the true rate (indicated by a 95 per cent confidence interval)could be anywhere between 0 per cent and 55 per cent.A fourth concern is that Andreasson et al (1987) have not ruled outthe possibility that cannabis use at age 18 was a symptom of emergingschizophrenia. Statistical adjustment for a psychiatric diagnosis atconscription did not eliminate the relationship between cannabis useand schizophrenia, but it substantially reduced the size of therelative risk, because over half of the heavy users of cannabis hadreceived a psychiatric diagnosis by age 18. Andreasson et al arguedthat this hypothesis was implausible because the dose responserelationship between cannabis use and the risk of a schizophreniadiagnosis held up among those who did not have a psychiatric history.The persuasiveness of this argument depends upon how credible thescreening for psychiatric diagnosis was at the time of conscription,and in particular, how confident we can be that a failure to identifya psychiatric disorder at conscription means that no disorder waspresent. This is difficult to evaluate.The fifth and final criticism relates to the validity of self-reportedcannabis use at conscription. Andreasson et al (1987) acknowledgedthat there was likely to be under-reporting of cannabis use becausethis information was not collected anonymously, but they argued thatthis was most likely to lead to an under-estimation of therelationship between cannabis use and the risk of schizophrenia. Thiswill only be true, however, if the schizophrenic andnon-schizophrenics conscripts were equally likely to under-report. If,however, pre-schizophrenic subjects were more candid about their druguse, the apparent relationship between cannabis use and schizophreniawould be due to response bias (Negrete, 1989). Although a possibility,this seems unlikely in view of the strong dose-response relationshipwith frequency of cannabis use, and the large size of the unadjustedrelative risk of schizophrenia among heavy users.When all these criticisms are considered, the Andreasson et al (1987)study still provides strong evidence of an association betweencannabis use and schizophrenia which is not completely explained byprior psychiatric history. Uncertainty remains about the causalsignificance of the association because it is unclear to what extentthe relationship is a result of drug-induced psychoses being mistakenfor schizophrenia, and to what extent it is attributable toamphetamine rather than cannabis use.Even if the relationship is causal, its public health significanceneeds to be kept in perspective. Although they did not reportcalculations of attributable risk, an estimate based upon the relativerisk adjusted for psychiatric disorder (Feinstein, 1985) indicatesthat even if their association is causal, at most 7 per cent of casesof schizophrenia would be attributable to cannabis use. That is, onthe prevalence rate of cannabis use reported by Andreasson et al,cannabis use would have explained 7 per cent (at most) of cases ofschizophrenia occurring in Sweden during the period of study. Eventhis small potential contribution to an increased incidence ofschizophrenia seems difficult to accept, since there is goodindependent evidence that the incidence of schizophrenia, andparticularly of early onset, acute cases, declined during the 1970s,the period when the prevalence of cannabis use increased among youngadults in Western Europe and North America (Der et al, 1990). 7.6.4.2 Exacerbation of schizophrenia There is reason to be concerned about the effects of cannabis onpsychotic symptoms among individuals with schizophrenia. Cannabis ispsychoactive drug that is probably psychotomimetic in high doses, andits use seems to be relatively common among schizophrenic patients, asindicated above. There is also anecdotal clinical evidence thatschizophrenic patients who use cannabis and other drugs experienceexacerbations of symptoms (Weil, 1970), and have a worse clinicalcourse, with more frequent psychotic episodes, than those who do not(Knudsen and Vilmar, 1984; Perkins et al, 1986; Turner and Tsuang,1990). However, there have been very few controlled studies of therelationship between cannabis use and the clinical outcome ofschizophrenia. Negrete et al (1986) conducted a retrospective studyusing clinical records of symptoms and treatment seeking among 137schizophrenic patients with a disorder of at least six monthsduration, and three visits to their psychiatric service during theprevious six months. The proportion of cannabis users among theirpatients was the same as in the Canadian population, but heavy userswere over-represented, and the proportion of former users who hadstopped using was higher than in the general population. Negrete et al(1986) compared the prevalence of hallucinations, delusions andhospitalisations among the active users (N=25), the past users (n=51),and those who had never used cannabis (N=61). The crude comparisonshowed higher rates of continuous hallucinations and delusions, and ofhospitalisations among active users. This pattern of results persistedafter statistical control for differences in age and sex between thethree user groups. Negrete et al argued that cannabis use exacerbated schizophrenicsymptoms. They rejected the alternative hypothesis that patients witha poorer prognosis were more likely to use cannabis, because theyfound that past cannabis users experienced fewer symptoms, andreported a high rate of adverse effects when using (91 per cent). Theyalso discounted the possibility that these were toxic psychoses,because in all cases the minimum duration of symptoms had been sixmonths. They left open the mechanism by which cannabis use exacerbatedschizophrenic symptoms, suggesting three possibilities: that cannabisdisorganises psychological functioning; that it causes a toxicpsychosis that accentuates schizophrenic symptomatology; or that itinterferes with the therapeutic action of anti-psychotic medication.More recently, Cleghorn et al (1991) have provided supportiveevidence. They compared the symptom profiles of schizophrenic patientswith histories of substance abuse of varying severity (none, moderate,and severe), among whom cannabis was the most heavily used drug.Comparisons with a subset of the patients who were maintained onneuroleptic drugs revealed that the drug abusers had a higherprevalence of hallucinations, delusions and positive symptoms. These studies provide a slender basis upon which to draw conclusionsabout the effects of cannabis use on schizophrenic symptoms. One canonly agree with the conclusion of Turner and Tsuang (1990) that "theimpact of substance abuse on the course and outcome of schizophreniaremains largely undefined" (p93), and that it will remain so untillarge prospective studies in general population and clinical samplesrecommended by Turner and Tsuang (1990) have been conducted. Untilsuch research has been undertaken, prudence would demand thatschizophrenic patients, and others at risk of schizophrenia by virtueof family history, personality, or marginal social functioning, shouldbe strongly discouraged from using cannabis and other psychoactivedrugs, especially the psychostimulants amphetamine and cocaine.7.6.5   ConclusionsThere is reasonable evidence that heavy cannabis use, and perhapsacute use in susceptible individuals, can produce an acute psychosisin which confusion, amnesia, delusions, hallucinations, anxiety,agitation and hypomanic symptoms predominate. The evidence for a toxiccannabis psychosis comes from laboratory studies of the effects of THCon normal volunteers and clinical observations of psychotic symptomsin heavy cannabis users, which seem to comprise a toxic psychoticsyndrome and which remit rapidly following abstinence from cannabis.There is also an argument by analogy with the fact that heavy chronicamphetamine use has been shown to induce a paranoid psychosis(Angrist, 1983).There is little support for the hypothesis that cannabis use can causea chronic psychosis which persists beyond the period of intoxication.Such a possibility is difficult to study because of the likely rarityof such psychoses, and the near impossibility of distinguishing themfrom individuals with schizophrenia and manic depressive psychoses whoalso abuse cannabis (Negrete, 1983). The occurrence of a chronic residual state, or "amotivationalsyndrome", in chronic heavy cannabis users is not well supported byresearch evidence. At best, a prima facie case has been made byclinical observations, that withdrawal, lethargy, and apathy occuramong a minority of chronic, heavy users. This syndrome has proveddifficult to study in the laboratory, difficult to distinguish fromthe effects of chronic intoxication (Negrete, 1988), and it so farbeen impossible to rule out confounding effects of pre-existingdisease, malnutrition, personality disorder, and lifestyle.There is strongly suggestive evidence that chronic cannabis use mayprecipitate a latent psychosis in vulnerable individuals. This isstill strongly suggestive rather than established beyond reasonabledoubt, because in the best study conducted to date (Andreasson et al,1987) the use of cannabis was not documented at the time of diagnosis,there was a possibility that cannabis use was confounded byamphetamine use, and there remains a question about the ability of thestudy to reliably distinguish between schizophrenia and acute cannabisor other drug-induced psychoses. Even if the relationship between cannabis use and schizophrenia is acausal one, its public health significance should not be overstated.It is most likely to indicate that cannabis use can precipitateschizophrenia in vulnerable individuals, since the estimatedattributable risk of cannabis use is small, and the incidence ofschizophrenia has declined during the period in which cannabis use hasincreased among young adults. The substantial prevalence of cannabis use among young adults inWestern societies makes the relationships between cannabis use andpsychosis deserving of further research. What are required arecase-control studies of people with schizophrenia and normals, andcase-control studies of psychotic individuals who do and do not have adocumented history of recent heavy cannabis use. Mueser et al (1990)provide detailed suggestions for the types of controls that ought tobe incorporated in such studies. If the results of the case controlstudies warrant it, prospective studies should be done. Longitudinalstudies like that undertaken by Andreason et al (1987) would be mostdesirable, but can probably only be undertaken in exceptionalcircumstances. Turner and Tsuang (1990) provide detailed suggestionsfor prospective studies which would clarify the contribution ofcannabis and other drug use to the precipitation and exacerbation ofschizophrenia and other psychoses.  ReferencesAllebeck, P. (1991) Cannabis and schizophrenia: is there a causalassociation? In G.G. Nahas and C. Latour (Eds) Physiopathology ofIllicit Drugs: Cannabis, Cocaine, Opiates Oxford: Pergamon Press.Allebeck, P., Adamsson, C., Engstrom, A. and Rydberg, U. (1993)Cannabis and schizophrenia: a longitudinal study of cases treated inStockholm county. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 88, 21-24.Andreasson, S., Allebeck, P, and Rydberg, U. (1989) Schizophrenia inusers and nonusers of cannabis. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 79,505-510.Andreasson, S., Allebeck, P, Engstrom, A. and Rydberg, U. (1987)Cannabis and schizophrenia: A longitudinal study of Swedishconscripts. Lancet, 2, 1483-1486.Angrist, B. (1983) Psychoses induced by central nervous systemstimulants and related drugs. In I. Creese (ed) Stimulants:Neurochemical, Behavioral and Clinical Perspectives. New York: RavenPress.Anthony, J and Helzer, J.E. (1991) Syndromes of drug abuse anddependence. In L.N. Robins and D.A. Regier (eds) Psychiatric Disordersin America. New York: Free Press, MacMillan.Arndt, S., Tyrrell, G., Flaum, M. and Andreasen, N (1992) Comorbidityof substance abuse and schizophrenia: the role of premorbidadjustment. Psychological Medicine, 22, 379-388.Beaubruhn, M.  and Knight, F. (1973) Psychiatric assessment of 30chronic users of cannabis and 30 matched controls. American Journal ofPsychiatry, 130, 309-311.Bell, D. (1973) The experimental reproduction of amphetaminepsychosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 29, 35-40.Bernardson, G. and Gunne, L.M. (1972) Forty-six cases of psychosis incannabis abusers. International Journal of Addictions, 7, 9-16.Bland, R.C., Newman, S and Orn, H. (1987) Schizophrenia: lifetimeco-morbidity in a community sample. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,75, 383-391.Breakey, W.R., Goodell, H., Lorenz, P and McHugh, P.R. (1974)Hallucinogenic drugs as precipitants of schizophrenia. PsychologicalMedicine, 4, 255-261.Brill, H. and Nahas, G.G. (1984) Cannabis intoxication and mentalillness. In G.G. Nahas Marihuana in Science and Medicine. New York:Raven Press.Carney, M.W.P., Bacelle, L., and Robinson, B. (1984) Psychosis aftercannabis use. British Medical Journal, 288, 1047.Chaudry, H.R., Moss, H.B., Bashir, A. and Suliman, T. (1991) Cannabispsychosis following bhang ingestion. British Journal of Addiction, 86,1075-1081.Chopra, G.S. and Smith, J.W. (1974) Psychotic reactions followingcannabis use in East Indians. Archives of General Psychiatry, 30,24-27.Cleghorn, J.M., Kaplan, R.D., Szechtman, B., Szechtman, H., Brown,G.M. and Franco, S. (1991) Substance abuse and schizophrenia: effecton symptoms but not on neurocognitive function. Journal of ClinicalPsychiatry, 52, 26-30.Cohen, S. and Johnson, K. (1988) Psychosis from alcohol or drug abuse.British Medical Journal, 297, 1270-1271.Connell, P.H. (1959) Amphetamine Psychosis. Maudlsey Monograph Number5, Institute of Psychiatry, London: Oxford University Press. Der, G., Gupta, S. and Murray, R.M. (1990) Is schizophreniadisappearing? Lancet, 1, 513-516.Dixon, L., Haas, G., Wedien, P.J., Sweeney, J. and Frances, A.J.(1990) Acute effects of drug abuse in schizophrenic patients: clinicalobservations and patients' self-reports. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 16,69-79.Dixon, L., Haas, G., Wedien, P.J., Sweeney, J. and Frances, A.J.(1991) Drug abuse in schizophrenic patients: clinical correlates andreasons for use. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 224-230.Drummond, L. (1986) Cannabis psychosis: a case report. British Journalof Addiction, 81, 139-140.Edwards, G. (1976) Cannabis and the psychiatric position. In J.D.P.Graham (ed) Cannabis and Health. London: Academic Press.Edwards, G.(1983)  Psychopathology of a drug experience. BritishJournal of Psychiatry, 143, 509-512.Feinstein, A.R. (1985) Clinical Epidemiology. Philadelphia: W.B.Saunders.Gawin, F.H. and Ellinwood, E.H. (1988) Cocaine and other stimulants:Actions, abuse and treatment. New England Journal of Medicine, 318,1173-1182.Georgotas, A. and Zeidenberg, P. (1979) Observations on the effects offour weeks of heavy marijuana smoking on group interaction andindividual behavior. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 20, 427-432.Ghodse, A.H.(1986) Cannabis psychosis. British Journal of Addiction,81, 473-478. Goldberg, L. (1968a) Drug abuse in Sweden. Part I. Bulletin OnNarcotics, 20, (1) 1-31. (a)Goldberg, L. (1968b) Drug abuse in Sweden. Part II. Bulletin OnNarcotics, 20, (2) 9-36. (b)Grinspoon, L. and Hedblom, P. (1975) The Speed Culture: AmphetamineAbuse in America. Cambridge, Massachussets: Harvard University Press.Halikas, J.A., Goodwin, D.W. and Guze, S.B. (1971) Marihuana effects:a survey of reguabis administered duringpregnancy: FirstAssociation, 217, 692-694.Hendin, H., Haas, A.P., Singer, P., Eller, M. and Ulman, R. (1987)Living High: Daily Marijuana Use Among Adults. New York: HumanSciences Press.Imade, A.G.T. and Ebie, J (1991) A retrospective study of symptompatterns of cannabis-induced psychosis. Acta PsychiatricaScandinavica, 83, 134-136.Inghe, G. (1969) The present state of abuse and addiction to stimulantdrugs in Sweden.  (pp 187-214) In F. Sjoqvist and M. Tottie (eds)Abuse of Central Stimulants. New York: Raven Press.Johnson, B.A., Smith, B.L. and Taylor, P. (1988) Cannabis andschizophrenia. Lancet, 1, 592-593.Johnson, V. (1988) A longitudinal assessment of predominant patternsof drug use among adolescents and young adults. In G. Chesher, P.Consroe, and  R. Musty (eds) Marijuana: An International ResearchReport. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.Jones, R.T. (1984) Marijuana: Health and treatment issues. PsychiatricClinics of North America, 7, 703-712.Kandel, D. and Faust, R. (1975) Sequence and stages in patterns ofadolescent drug use. Archives of General Psychiatry, 32, 923-932.Kolansky, H. and Moore, W.T. (1971) Effects  of marihuana onadolescents and young adults. Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 216, 486-492.Knudsen, P. and Vilmar, T. (1984) Cannabis and neuroleptic agents inschizophrenia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 69, 162-174.Mathers, D.C., Ghodse, A.H., Caan, A.W., and Scott, S.A. (1991)Cannabis use in a large sample of acute psychiatric admissions.British Journal of Addiction, 86, 779-784.McGlothin, W.H. and West, L.J. (1968) The marijuana problem: Anoverview. American Journal of Psychiatry, 125, 370-378.Mendelson, J.H., Rossi, M.A., Meyer, R.E. (Eds). (1974). The Use ofMarihuana: A psychological and physiological inquiry. New York: PlenumPress.Millman, R.B. and Sbriglio, R. (1986) Patterns of use andpsychopathology in chronic marijuana users. Psychiatric Clinics ofNorth America, 9, 533-545.Mueser, K.T., Yarnold, P.R., Levinson, D.F., Singh, H. Bellack, A.S.,Kee, K., Morrison, R.L. and Yadalam, K.G. (1990) Prevalence ofsubstance abuse in schizophrenia: demographic and clinical correlates.Schizophrenia Bulletin, 16, 31-56.National Academy of Science, Institute of Medicine. (1982) Marijuanaand Health. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.Negrete, J (1983) Psychiatric aspects of cannabis use. In K.O. Fehrand H. Kalant (eds) Cannabis and Health Hazards. Toronto: AddictionResearch Foundation.Negrete, J (1988) What's happened to the cannabis debate? BritishJournal of Addiction, 83, 359-372.Negrete, J (1989) Cannabis and schizophrenia. British Journal ofAddiction, 84, 349-351. Negrete, J.C., Knapp, W.P., Douglas, D. and Smith, W.B. (1986)Cannabis affects the severity of schizophrenic symptoms: results of aclinical survey. Psychological Medicine, 16, 515-520.Onyango, R.S. (1986) Cannabis psychosis in young psychiatricinpatients. British Journal of Addiction, 81, 419-423. Perkins, K.A., Simpson, J and Tsuang, M.T. (1986) Ten-year follow-upof drug abusers with acute or chronic psychosis. Hospital andCommunity Psychiatry, 37, 481-484.Rolfe, M., Tang, C.M., Sabally, S., Todd, J.E., Sam, E.B. and HatibN'Jie, A.B. (1993) Psychosis and cannabis abuse in Gambia: Acase-control study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1993, 163, 798-801.Rottanburg, D., Robins, A.H., Ben-Arie, O., Teggin, A. and Elk, R.(1982) Cannabis-associated psychosis with hypomanic features. Lancet,2, 1364-1366.Schneier, F.R. and Siris, S.G. (1987) A review of psychoactivesubstance use and abuse in schizophrenia: patterns of drug choice.Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 175, 641-652.Smith, D.E. (1968) Acute and chronic toxicity of marijuana. Journal ofPsychedelic Drugs, 2, 37-47.Stefanis, C., Boulougouris, J. and Liakos, A. (1976) Clinical andpsychophysiological effects of cannabis in long-term users. In MBraude and S. Szara (eds) The Pharmacology of Marihuana. New York:Raven Press.Tennant, F.S. and Groesbeck, C.J. (1972) Psychiatric effects ofhashish. Archives of General Psychiatry, 27, 133-136. Thacore, V.R. and Shukla, S.R.P. (1976) Cannabis psychosis andparanoid schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 33, 383-386.Thomas, H. (1993) Psychiatric symptoms in cannabis users. BritishJournal of Psychiatry, 163, 141-149.Thornicroft, G. (1990) Cannabis and psychosis: Is thereepidemiological evidence for association. British Journal ofPsychiatry, 157, 25-33.Tsuang, M.T., Simpson, J and Kronfol, Z. (1982) Subtypes of drug abusewith psychosis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 39, 141-147.Tunving, K. (1985) Psychiatric effects of cannabis use. ActaPsychiatrica Scandinavica, 73, 209-217.Turner, W.M. and Tsuang, M.T. (1990) Impact of substance abuse on thecourse and outcome of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 16,87-372. Weil, A. (1970) Adverse reactions to marihuana. New England Journal ofMedicine, 282, 997-1000.Weller, M.P.I., Ang, P.C., Latimer-Sayer, D.T. and Zachary, A. (1988)Drug abuse and mental illness. Lancet, 1, 977. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-13IA087-000627-B016-241http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051815 text/html 64068HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:18:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:01:38 GMTContent-length: 63850 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use:chapter 8 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis usechapter 8 National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 8. The therapeutic effects of cannabinoids8.1 Historical backgroundCannabis has had a long history of medical and therapeutic use inIndia and the Middle East (Grinspoon and Bakalar, 1993; Mechoulam,1986; Nahas, 1984) where it has been variously used as an analgesic,anti-convulsant, anti-spasmodic, anti-emetic, and hypnotic. Cannabiswas introduced to British medicine in the mid-nineteenth century byO'Shaugnessy (1842) who had gained clinical experience with the drugwhile an Army surgeon in India (Mechoulam, 1986; Nahas, 1984). Herecommended its use for the relief of pain, muscle spasms, andconvulsions occurring in tetanus, rabies, rheumatism and epilepsy(Nahas, 1984). Partly as the result of his advocacy, cannabis came tobe widely used as an analgesic, anti-convulsant and anti-spasmodicthroughout the middle part of the 19th century in Britain and the USA.The medical use of cannabis declined around the turn of the presentcentury. Because the active constituents of cannabis were not isolateduntil the second half of the twentieth century, cannabis continued tobe used in the form of natural preparations which varied in purityand, hence in effectiveness. The use of cannabis was largelysupplanted by other pharmaceutically purer drugs, which could be givenin standardised doses to produce more dependable effects. Theseincluded the opiates, aspirin, chloral hydrate, and the barbiturates(Mechoulam, 1986; Nahas, 1984). In the early part of the century, themedical use of such crude cannabis preparations was furtherdiscouraged by laws which treated cannabis as a "narcotic" drug andseverely restricted its availability. It finally disappeared from theAmerican pharmacopoeia in the early 1940s after the passage of theMarijuana Tax Act (Grinspoon and Bakalar, 1993), although it continuedto be used in Australia into the 1960s (Casswell, 1992).THC, the major psychoactive ingredient of cannabis, was not isolateduntil 1964 (Goani and Mechoulam, 1964), shortly before cannabisachieved widespread popularity as a recreational drug among Americanyouth. Its widespread recreational use, and its symbolic associationwith a rejection of traditional social values, undoubtedly hinderedpharmaceutical research into its therapeutic uses. Consequently, therediscovery of some of its traditional therapeutic uses was largelyserendipitous, as was the discovery of some newer uses. For example,its value as an anti-emetic agent in the treatment of nausea caused bycancer chemotherapy seems to have been rediscovered by young adultswho had used cannabis recreationally prior to undergoing chemotherapyfor leukemia (Grinspoon, 1990). From the mid-1970s some clinical research on the therapeutic value ofcannabis and cannabinoids was undertaken. On the whole, however, thisresearch has been very thin and uneven, and, consequently, many of theclaims for the therapeutic efficacy of cannabinoids rely heavily, and,in the case of rare medical conditions, solely upon anecdotalevidence, that is, the testimonies of individuals who claim to havederived medical benefit from its use (e.g. Grinspoon and Bakalar,1993; Randall, 1990), and small numbers of cases reported byphysicians (e.g. Consroe et al, 1975; Meinck et al, 1989). Evidence will be reviewed for the best-supported therapeutic uses ofcannabinoids. The review begins with the evidence on the effectivenessof cannabinoids as anti-emetic drugs for nausea caused by cancerchemotherapy, and as agents to control intra-ocular pressure inglaucoma. Briefer reviews are provided of the evidence in favour ofother putative therapeutic uses of cannabinoids which are less wellsupported by clinical evidence, chief among which are its uses as ananti-convulsant, an anti-spasmodic, and an analgesic agent. The valueand limitations of the largely anecdotal evidence of efficacy in theselatter conditions will also be briefly considered. The review willinclude a discussion of the controversy in the United States about"marijuana rescheduling" which has coloured much recent discussion ofthe issue. This controversy concerns the vexatious issue of whethersmoked cannabis should be available for medical use in addition tosynthetic cannabinoids such as THC. 8.2 Cannabinoids as anti-emetic agentsProfound nausea and vomiting can be such serious complications ofchemotherapy and radiotherapy for cancer that patients may discontinuepotentially life-saving treatment (Institute of Medicine, 1982).Although various types of drugs (e.g. the phenothiazines) have beenshown to be effective in controlling nausea and vomiting in cancerpatients, substantial minorities of patients do not benefit from thesedrugs. The seriousness of the problem of chemotherapy-induced nausea,and the incomplete success of existing treatments, promptedoncologists in the late 1970s and early 1980s to take a particularinterest in the anti-emetic properties of cannabinoids (Institute ofMedicine, 1982). 8.2.1 Clinical trialsOne of the earliest trials of the effectiveness of THC as ananti-emetic was prompted by patient reports that smoking marijuanarelieved nausea and vomiting (Sallan et al, 1975). In this study, 22patients (10 males and 12 females, average age 30 years) with avariety of neoplasms were studied. In 20 patients, the nausea andvomiting had proven resistant to existing anti-emetic drugs. Arandomised placebo-controlled trial with crossover was used, in whichpatients were randomly assigned to receive oral THC (10mg per m2) andplacebo in one of four different orders (THC-placebo-THC; THC-placebo-placebo; placebo-THC-placebo; placebo-THC-THC). Outcome wasassessed by grading patients' self-reports of nausea and vomitingafter THC and placebo into three categories: complete response ifthere was vomiting after placebo but not after THC; partial responseif there was a greater than 50 per cent reduction in nausea andvomiting after THC compared to placebo; and no response if there was aless than 50 per cent reduction in nausea and vomiting.Ten patients completed all three courses of THC and placebo andvomited on at least one trial. After excluding one trial because of avariation in the chemotherapy dose, there were 29 trails available foranalysis, 14 of placebo and 15 of THC. All 14 placebo trials resultedin no response, while in the 15 THC trials there were five completeresponses, seven partial responses, and three no responses. Thisdifference was statistically significant when full and partialresponses were combined. Most patients (13/16) reported a "high" afterreceiving THC, an experience which was correlated with the anti-emeticeffect. The most common side-effect was somnolence which curtailedactivities for two to six hours in a third of patients. Only twopatients experienced any symptoms of toxicity, (both after receiving20mg doses of THC), namely, visual distortions and hallucinations anddepression lasting several hours. Sallan et al reported "preliminary"observations from several patients that smoking marijuana produced anequivalent anti-emetic effect to oral THC.A trial by Chang et al (1979) largely supported the findings of Sallanet al. In this study 15 patients with osteogenic sarcoma (10 males andfive females, average age 24 years) served as their own controls inthe course of monthly high dose methotrexate therapy. They wereassigned to receive three THC and three placebo trials in randomisedorder during six treatment sessions. THC (10mg per m2 of body area)and placebo were administered orally five times at three hourlyintervals, beginning two hours before chemotherapy. If the patientsvomited, the remaining doses of either THC or placebo wereadministered by smoking a cigarette using a standardised smokingtechnique. The effect of THC and placebo were assessed by nursingstaff who rated various endpoints (e.g. number of vomiting andretching episodes, volume of emesis, degree and duration of nausea)without being aware of which treatment patients had received. Patientresponse was graded into three categories: excellent (greater then 80per cent reduction after THC by comparison with placebo in each ofthese endpoints); fair (greater than 30 per cent and less than 80 percent reduction), and no response (less than 30 per cent reduction).The results showed that eight patients had an excellent response, sixa fair response, and one had no response. On all endpoints THCproduced a statistically significant reduction in nausea and vomitingby comparison with placebo. There was also a dose-responserelationship between blood levels of THC and the incidence of nauseaand patient reports of feeling "high". Generally, higher THC bloodlevels were achieved when marijuana was smoked than when THC was takenorally. There were few side effects reported, with sedation being themost common (12/15 patients). Four patients experienced five dysphoricreactions in the course of 281 THC drug doses (2 per cent), none ofwhich lasted more than 30 minutes, and all of which were successfullymanaged with simple reassurance.In a second phase of the study, four patients who had an excellentresponse to THC in the first phase were retested under double-blindconditions using two placebo trials in the next 10 treatments. A smallnumber of patients who had a fair response were also studied using anincreased dose of THC. All patients showed a reduction in the averageanti-emetic benefit of THC, decreasing from excellent to fair in thecase of previous excellent responders, and from fair to no response inthe case of the fair responders. Chang et al hypothesised that thedecline in effect reflected either the development of tolerance to theeffects of THC, or the development of conditioned nausea and vomitingthat was resistant to the anti-emetic effects of THC. Since these early studies, a large number of controlled clinicalstudies have been conducted which compared the effectiveness of THCwith either a placebo or with other anti-emetic drugs (see Carey etal, 1983; Poster et al, 1981; Levitt, 1986 for reviews). The resultsof this literature have sometimes been unfairly described as"confused" (e.g. Carey et al, 1983; Nahas, 1984). This descriptionbetrays an unreasonably high expectation of the consistency of resultsfrom studies which have generally used small samples of heterogenouspatients who have received various forms of chemotherapy. It alsoignores the fact that the cross-over studies comparing the anti-emeticeffects of THC with placebo have generally reported greateranti-emetic effects for THC than placebo (Poster et al, 1981); thesingle exception to this finding was a study which had a sample sizeof only eight patients. Comparisons of the effectiveness of oral THC with that of existinganti-emetic agents have been less consistent than the results ofcomparisons with placebo. Nonetheless, the results have generallyindicated that THC is at least equivalent in effectiveness to thewidely used anti-emetic drug prochlorperazine (Carey et al, 1983;Levitt, 1986). The inconsistencies in this case arise because somestudies have shown THC to be superior, probably because of thepractice in some trials of enlisting patients whose nausea hadpreviously proven resistant to prochlorperazine (Carey et al, 1983). The equivalence of THC and prochlorperazine has been supported by theresults of one of the largest and best conducted studies (Ungerleideret al, 1982). In this study 214 patients with a variety of forms ofcancer (carcinomas, sarcomas, lymphomas and leukemias) were recruitedif they had already undergone chemotherapy and experienced nausea andvomiting, or they were to receive a form of chemotherapy which had ahigh emetic potential. Patients were randomly assigned to receive apaired trial of either oral THC followed by prochlorperazine or viceversa. The dose of THC was dependent on body surface area (7.5mg ifless than 1.4m2, 10mg for 1.4 to 1.8m2, and 12.5mg for greater than1.8m2). Separate analyses were conducted on three groups of patients:patients who received their cancer chemotherapy on a single day someweeks apart (N=98); patients who received their chemotherapy on adaily basis over several successive days (N=41); and patients whodiscontinued the trial after a single episode of either THC orprochlorperazine. Outcomes were patient self-ratings of nausea andvomiting, and a variety of mood states and behaviours.The results showed that there "were no statistically significantdifferences in the anti-nausea/anti-emetic effect of THC andprochlorperazine" (p640) in any of the three patient groups, eventhough there were differences between patients in the single- andmultiple-day chemotherapy regimens in the time course of the nausea.There were differences in mood and behaviour between the THC andprochlorperazine trials, with patients reporting greater impairment ofconcentration and less social interaction after receiving THC. Therewere also more side effects from THC than prochlorperazine, withsedation, sleepiness and mental clouding being the most common. Therewas no difference in the frequency of panic attacks between the twodrugs. Despite these differences in side effects there was a smallpatient preference in favour of THC as an anti-emetic, with 41 percent experiencing less nausea on THC, 31 per cent experiencing lessnausea on prochlorperazine, and 29 per cent reporting no difference ineffectiveness. The effectiveness of THC was not related to age orprior experience with marijuana, but it was related to the experienceof side effects, with patients experiencing them reporting lessnausea.Given the wide variety of patients who have been studied in terms ofage and type of cancer, the wide variety of chemotherapeutic agentsthat have been used to treat their cancers, and the variety ofdifferent anti-emetics with which THC has been compared, the fact thatfindings of these studies are generally positive for THC is moreimpressive than the apparent differences in outcome. The positiveresults from the controlled trials also seem to be borne out byclinical experience with cannabinoids in managing cancer patients. Arecent survey of a large sample of American oncologists, for example,found that 44 per cent of oncologists had recommended marijuana to atleast one cancer patient, and 64 per cent of these physicians reportedthat it was successful controlling nausea in at least half of theirpatients. Overall, just under half of the oncologists in the sample(44 per cent) believed that cannabinoids could be safely used in thetreatment of nausea caused by chemotherapy and radiotherapy (Dobin andKleiman, 1991). A similar proportion (48 per cent) reported that theywould prescribe marijuana for their patients if it was legal.The general conclusion on the available literature is that THC issuperior to placebo, and equivalent in effectiveness to otherwidely-used anti-emetic drugs, in its capacity to reduce the nauseaand vomiting caused by some chemotherapy regimens in some cancerpatients. There are a number of issues that remain to be resolved indeciding upon the clinical role of cannabinoids as anti-emetic agentsin cancer chemotherapy. These issues include: the types of nauseaagainst which it may be most effective, and hence the types ofpatients for which they are most appropriately prescribed; the degreeof patient tolerance of the psychotropic side effects of THC and othercannabinoids; the potential seriousness of possible THC inducedimmunosuppression in patients who are already immunologicallycompromised; the most effective dosing schedules for THC as ananti-emetic; the potential use of THC in combination with otheranti-emetic drugs; and the extent to which the motivation for the useof THC may have been reduced by the availability of newer anti-emeticdrugs that are more effective than prochlorperazine (the mainanti-emetic drug in the 1980s). 8.2.2 Which patients?Which patients with what types of nausea are the most suitable fortreatment with cannabinoids as anti-emetics? Patients with variousforms of cancer have been the most extensively investigated patientgroup, but the numbers of different types of cancer have been toosmall to allow convincing analyses of differences in patient response.The same point can be made about types of chemotherapy regimens; theyhave varied widely in these studies, and have often not been reported,but there has been no systematic analysis of the effectiveness ofcannabinoids in controlling emesis produced by different agents. It isuncertain to what extent the cannabinoids may be effective againstnausea from other causes. The mechanisms that produce nausea are notwell understood but there are believed to be one or more protectivemechanisms located in the brain stem that can be triggered by avariety of emetic agents. This raises the possibility thatcannabinoids may be therapeutically useful against nausea from avariety of causes. 8.2.3   Side effectsThe psychoactive effects of cannabis which are prized by recreationalusers - euphoria, relaxation, drowsiness - are not always welcomed byolder patients, most of whom are cannabis-naive. In some studies asubstantial minority of such patients have discontinued the use of THCbecause of the unwelcome dysphoria and somnolence (Levitt et al,1986). This has not been a universal experience, so further researchis required to discover to what extent this has been the result ofunnecessarily large doses, or poor patient preparation for theseeffects, and failure to adequately manage them by reassurance. Whatdoes seem to be the case is that the experience of some psychologicaleffects of THC, including the "high", is necessary for the occurrenceof a clinically significant anti-emetic effect. This fact has led tothe search, so far unsuccessful, for cannabinoid derivatives of THCwhich possess its anti-emetic properties but not its psychoactiveones. The recent discovery of the cannabinoid ligand and receptor, andreceptor subtypes (see pp7-8) has encouraged researchers to believethat this may be an achievable goal (Iversen, 1993).A potentially more serious side effect of therapeutic THC is itspossible immunosuppressive effect. Any such effect would limit its useas an anti-emetic in the treatment of cancer, since cancer patientsexperience immune suppression as a side effect of their treatment.There are several reasons why this may be less serious an issue thatit seems at first glance. First, there are doubts about the existenceof any immunosuppressive effect of cannabinoids (see Section 6.2 onthe immune system, pp62-68), and the effect is small in those studieswhich report one. Second, the clinical significance of any sucheffects is doubtful in the use of THC in cancer chemotherapy. Such usewould be intermittent, and relatively short-term, and the possiblegain in increased life expectancy from being able to complete a courseof cancer chemotherapy is such that most patients would be prepared totake the risk, in the same way that they chose to undergo the highlytoxic chemotherapy in the first place. 8.2.4   Unresolved clinical issuesIf THC has a place in the management of nausea from cancer treatment(Poster et al, 1981), and perhaps other causes, a number of clinicalissues remain to be resolved (Levitt, 1986). Foremost among these isthe best way in which to administer the drug. Should it be given wellin advance of treatment at low doses to ensure a stable blood level,or should it be given in larger doses shortly before chemotherapy orradiotherapy? This issue has not been systematically studied (Levitt,1986).An additional question is whether there is any clinical benefit to bederived from combining THC with existing anti-emetic agents. There issuggestive evidence that there might be, since the mechanisms ofaction, while not well understood, appear to be different, raising thepossibility that there may be positive synergistic effects from thecombination of THC and other anti-emetics. One single-blind study ofthe combination of dronabinol and prochlorperazine, for example,suggested that the combination of these drugs may have a superioranti-nausea effect to either drug used alone (Plasse et al, 1991).Clearly, more research is warranted on this issue, especially as itmay enable cannabinoids to be used as anti-emetics at lower doses withfewer unwanted psychotropic effects. It seems surprising that the desirability of undertaking research ondosing and combined use of cannabinoids was highlighted by Poster etal in 1981 and by the Institute of Medicine in 1982. Yet very littleresearch has been done, and THC has not been routinely incorporatedinto the management of nausea caused by cancer chemotherapy. One ofthe likely reasons has been the American controversy about therescheduling of marijuana under the Controlled Substances Act, whichsome argue has discouraged clinical research on cannabinoids (seebelow). Another reason has been that the motivation for furtherresearch on the anti-emetic properties of THC has been removed by therecent development of newer anti-emetic drugs which are superior toprochlorperazine (Iversen, 1993), the "gold standard" drug when themajor controlled trials were conducted on cannabis in the 1970s and1980s. In the absence of trials comparing THC with these newer drugs,its comparative efficacy is unknown, although given its approximateequivalence to prochlorperazine it is likely to be inferior to thenewer drugs.8.3 Cannabinoids as anti-glaucoma agentsGlaucoma is the leading cause of blindness in the United States,affecting two million people and producing 300,000 new cases each year(Adler and Geller, 1986). It is a condition "which is generallycharacterised by an increase in intraocular pressure ... thatprogressively impairs vision and may lead to absolute blindness"(Adler and Geller, 1986, p54). Although its causes are not understood,it is believed to involve an obstruction to the outflow of the aqueoushumour in the eye leading to a gradual increase in intraocularpressure (IOP) which, if untreated, may damage the optic nerve,resulting in blindness. Its incidence increases over the age of 35,especially among individuals who are myopic (i.e. short-sighted).Although various drugs are available which reduce IOP, all possessunwanted side-effects and patients may become tolerant to theirtherapeutic effects. The effects of cannabis in reducing IOP were discoveredserendipitously by researchers and patients in the early and middle1970s. Hepler and his colleagues (1971, 1976) observed a substantialdecrease in IOP while researching the effects of cannabis intoxicationon pupil dilation. They demonstrated that both cannabis and oral THCproduced substantial reductions in IOP in both normal volunteers andpatients with glaucoma (Hepler and Petrus, 1976; Hepler et al, 1976).Subsequent research identified THC as the agent responsible forproducing this effect (Adler and Geller, 1986). Around the same time, patients with glaucoma who had used cannabisrecreationally also discovered its therapeutic effects. One suchpatient, Robert Randall, used cannabis daily to control his glaucoma.When arrested for possession and cultivation of cannabis, hesuccessfully used the defence of "medical necessity" arguing, with thesupport of his physicians, that he would go blind if he stopped hiscannabis use. He subsequently was given legal access to cannabis formedical purposes (Randall Affidavit, in Randall, 1988). Although there have been a number of case reports of the successfuluse of cannabis in the management of glaucoma (e.g. Grinspoon andBakalar, 1993; Randall, 1990), there have not been any controlledclinical studies of its effectiveness and safety in the long-termmanagement of glaucoma. Informed clinical opinion has been that THC isan effective anti-glaucoma agent when used acutely, but there aredoubts about its effectiveness with chronic use because of thedevelopment of tolerance to its effects on IOP (Jones et al, 1981).Ophthalmologists who are opposed to the clinical use of THC point to anumber of major disadvantages. First, because THC is notwater-soluble, it cannot, unlike other anti-glaucoma agents, beapplied topically to the eye to ensure that enough is absorbed toproduce a clinically significant reduction in IOP. Second, as aconsequence, THC must be absorbed systemically in order to produce atherapeutic effect on IOP, which means that patients must experiencethe psychoactive effects of THC in order to derive its therapeuticbenefits against glaucoma. Third, because glaucoma is a chroniccondition, THC or cannabis would need to be taken in substantial doseson a daily basis over long periods of time, if not for the remainderof adult life. There has been an understandable concern about thehealth risks of chronic daily cannabis use (e.g. Hepler, 1990;American Academy of Ophthalmology, 1990). The position adopted by the American Academy of Ophthalmology has beento insist that cannabis has no accepted medical use in the managementof glaucoma, and cannot have such medical use until a large controlledtrial has been conducted into its safety and effectiveness in dailychronic use. There has been no evidence that the Academy has anyinterest in, or has given any encouragement to, the conduct of such atrial. Consequently, its position is that THC and other cannabinoidsshould not be used be in the management of glaucoma. A contrary position has been taken by Randall, who has argued thatpatients should be allowed to make the choice between the uncertainhealth risks of chronic cannabis use and the more certain risks tosight of poorly controlled glaucoma:        "People with life- and sense-threatening diseases are routinelyconfronted by stark choices ... [between] the devastating consequencesof a debilitating, progressive disease ... [and] often highly damagingbiological and mental consequences of the toxic chemicals required tocheck the progression of disease. .. Viewed in this medical context,marihuana is more benign and far less damaging that the synthetictoxins routinely prescribed by physicians" (cited in Grinspoon andBakalar, 1993, p153)8.4 Cannabinoids and neurological disorders8.4.1 Anti-convulsantHistorically one of the commonest medical uses of cannabispreparations has been as an anti-convulsant. O'Shaughnessy (1842), forexample, recommended the use of cannabis to control seizures inepilepsy, tetanus and rabies (Nahas, 1984). Animal studies haveprovided some support for this use in showing that THC has dualeffects on convulsions, i.e. they can produce convulsions insusceptible animals, and suppress the maximum severity of convulsionsfrom a variety of causes, while cannabidiol (CBD) appears to be apotent anti-convulsant (Chesher and Jackson, 1974; Consroe and Snider,1986; Institute of Medicine, 1982).Despite this animal evidence, there is very limited evidence on thetherapeutic effects of cannabinoids in humans with epilepsy. There area small number of case studies of individuals with epilepsy in whichthe recreational use of cannabis appeared to enhance theanti-convulsant effects of more traditional anti-convulsant medication(e.g. Consroe et al, 1975; Grinspoon and Bakalar, 1993). There is asingle randomised placebo controlled study of the administration ofCBD in 15 patients with epilepsy that was not well controlled byconventional anti-convulsants. Four of the eight patients who receivedCBD in addition to their usual anti-convulsant drugs were free ofseizures throughout the study period, and three were improved. Bycontrast, only one out of seven patients in the placebo conditionshowed any clinical improvement (Cunha et al, 1980). Despite thissuggestive evidence of efficacy in epilepsy, CBD has not been widelyused in clinical management. Perhaps this is not surprising given theabsence of evidence of its efficacy, the existence of other effectiveanti-convulsant drugs, and concerns about the safety of chronic use inthe management of a chronic disease. It is perhaps more surprisingthat there has been no further research on the anti-convulsantproperties of CBD, especially as it has no psychoactive side effects(Nahas, 1984).8.4.2 Anti-spasmodicCannabinoids have been used in an empirical way in the management ofsome patients with movement disorders, a variety of syndromes thathave in common a deficit in non-pyramidal motor control function,which is expressed in usually one or more of the non-epileptic,abnormal involuntary movements, such as those found in Parkinson'sdisease, Huntington's disease, multiple sclerosis, and spasticity.Although a number of drugs may be of benefit in the management ofthese conditions, they are not always effective, and may producetroublesome side-effects (Consroe and Snider, 1986). There has been some animal evidence which indicates that THC and itsanalogues produce a broad spectrum of neurological effects, whichinclude alterations in motor function, and changes in muscle tone andreflexes. The acute motor effects in normal humans - ataxia,tremulousness and subjective weakness - also suggest a potential fortherapeutic effects in some movement disorders (Consroe and Snider,1986). The evidence that cannabinoids have therapeutic effects in patientswith movement disorders is largely anecdotal. Grinspoon and Bakalar(1993), for example, present four case histories of individuals withmultiple sclerosis whose condition improved while they smokedmarijuana, and deteriorated after they stopped smoking. Meinck et al(1989) report a case history of a young man with multiple sclerosiswith severe limb and gait ataxia who complained of erectile impotence.After smoking marijuana his gait improved sufficiently to be able towalk unaided, and he was able to achieve and sustain an erection. Whencannabis was withdrawn under medical supervision, the patient's motorfunction deteriorated to the point where he was unable to walk withoutassistance. There has been one controlled study by Clifford (1983) who examinedthe effects of THC on tremor in eight patients (four male and fourfemale) with advanced multiple sclerosis who had ataxia and tremor.Five patients reported subjective benefit from THC and there wasobjective evidence of benefit in two of these cases. Single-blindplacebo challenge in these cases produced evidence that their clinicalcondition deteriorated when given placebo and improved with thereinstatement of THC. Grinspoon and Bakalar (1993) described several case histories ofindividuals with paraplegia and quadriplegia who reported thatcannabis use helped to reduce muscle spasm. The experiences of theseindividuals were supported by similar reports obtained from a surveyof 43 individuals with spinal cord injuries, 22 of whom reported thatthey used cannabis to control their muscle spasm. The only controlled trial of a cannabinoid in a movement disorder hasbeen an evaluation of the effects of CBD on severity of chorea inpatients with advanced Huntington's disease (Consroe et al, 1991).This study was prompted by the authors' observation that CBD hadimproved the condition of an individual with Huntington's disease(Sandyck et al, 1988). In this study 19 Huntington's patients wereenrolled in a double-blind controlled trial in which they received sixweeks administration of CBD or placebo in a cross-over design. Theoutcome was the severity of chorea, as assessed by blind clinicalratings, patient self-report, and a variety of measures of motorfunction. Although the study had sufficient statistical power todetect a relatively small clinical benefit, there was no evidence ofimprovement in chorea on any of the clinical, self-report or motormeasures. In the light of Consroe et al's failure to replicate theearlier favourable single case, further controlled trials arewarranted before any of the cannabinoids can be routinely used intreating movement disorders. 8.5 Cannabinoids as anti-asthmatic agents Smoked cannabis, and to a lesser extent oral THC, have an acutebronchodilatory effect in both normal persons and persons with asthma(Tashkin et al, 1975; Tashkin et al, 1976). Tashkin et al (1975), forexample, compared the bronchodilator effect of smoked cannabis withthat of a standard clinical dose of the bronchodilator isoproterenolin relieving experimentally induced asthma in asthmatic patients. Theyfound that smoking a 2 per cent-THC cannabis cigarette produced abronchodilator nearly equivalent to that of a clinical dose ofisoproterenol. Despite this early suggestion of a therapeutic effect in asthma,cannabinoids have not been used therapeutically, nor have they beenextensively investigated as anti-asthmatic agents other than byTashkin and his colleagues (Tashkin, 1993). A major obstacle totherapeutic use has been the route of administration. Oral THCproduces a smaller bronchodilator effect after a substantial delay,and when used as an inhalant produces irritation and reflexbronchoconstriction. Hence, smoking marijuana has been the mostdependable way of delivering a clinically effective dose of THC. Thereis an understandable concern among clinical researchers that smokingis an unsuitable mode of administering any drug, and an especiallyinappropriate way to administer a drug to patients with asthma,because it would inevitably involve the delivery of other noxiouschemicals that would nullify its therapeutic value in the short term,and carry an increased risk of other respiratory disease and possiblycancer in the long term (Tashkin, 1993). The unwanted psychotropiceffects from marijuana smoking have also been a barrier to its use asan anti-asthmatic drug. Some investigators (e.g. Graham, 1986) havenonetheless argued that the suitability of THC as a spray should befurther investigated because of the possible hazards of the chronicuse of the more widely-used beta-blocker antagonists. The recentdiscovery of the cannabinoid receptor and ligand may prompt are-examination of this question. 8.6 Cannabinoids as analgesicsThere is some animal evidence that THC has an analgesic effect whichoperates via a different mechanism from that of the opioid drugs(Segal, 1986). There is a small amount of human experimental studieswhich have reported mixed evidence of an analgesic effect (Nahas,1984). There has been little clinical evidence beyond historical usefor various forms of chronic pain, including migraine, dysmenorrhoea,and neuralgia, and the small number of case histories of its use inchronic pain, dysmenorrhoea, labour pain, and migraine reported byGrinspoon and Bakalar (1993).Only one double-blind controlled cross-over study has been reported.This study compared the analgesic effect of THC and codeine inpatients with cancer pain (Noyes et al, 1975). The findings suggestedthat 20mg of THC was of equivalent analgesic effect to 120mg ofcodeine. However, neither drug produced substantial analgesia in thesepatients, and the majority of patients found the psychotropic effectsof 20mg of THC sufficiently aversive that they discontinued its use.Clearly, much more basic pharmacological and animal investigation isrequired before cannabinoids or their derivatives have any clinicaluse as analgesics. Nevertheless, such investigations may be worthpursuing because of the dependence potential of the more potent opioidanalgesics, and the likelihood that any cannabinoid mediated analgesiceffect operates by a different mechanism to that of the opioids.8.7 Other possible therapeutic uses A variety of other therapeutic uses have been suggested, although fewhave been investigated in any depth. In the late 1940s, for example,there were some investigations of the therapeutic uses of theeuphoriant properties of cannabis, as a possible anti-depressant agentin the form of synhexil, a synthetic cannabis analogue. The results inone uncontrolled study were positive, but these were not replicated inlater studies using lower doses (Nahas, 1984; Grinspoon and Bakalar,1993). None of these suggestions have been further investigated,probably because of the potential for THC to produce dysphoric andother unwanted psychotropic side effects.8.8 Cannabis and AIDSOne of the areas of greatest contemporary interest in the therapeuticuses of cannabinoids and cannabis has been their possible roles as ananti-nausea agent, an appetite stimulant and an analgesic in patientswith AIDS (Randall, 1989). The development of this interest seems tohave replicated the earlier discovery of the anti-emetic effects ofcannabis in young cancer patients in the 1970s. AIDS patients oftenexperience nausea and weight loss, either while receiving cytotoxicdrugs to suppress HIV, or as a direct effect of the AIDS spectrumdiseases. Many patients have been recreational cannabis users, and sohave reported that the smoking of marijuana produces a diminution intheir nausea, an increased appetite, reduced pain, and generalimprovements in well being. AIDS advocacy groups have accordinglyargued that marijuana should be made legally available to AIDSpatients (e.g. Randall, 1991).So far the bulk of evidence for these therapeutic claims has beenprovided by case reports (see Randall, 1989). There has been one smalluncontrolled study of 10 symptomatic AIDS patients which suggestedthat dronabinol (synthetic THC) may be effective in reducing nauseaand stimulating appetite (Plasse et al, 1991). The evidence of itsanti-emetic properties in cancer patients seems to support itspotential application in AIDS treatment, and is deserving of furtherinvestigation.A potential concern with the use of cannabinoids in HIV positiveindividuals and AIDS patients is the possible immunosuppressiveeffects of cannabinoids. Although, as argued above, this effect islikely to be small and of limited concern when used intermittently incancer patients, it is of potentially greater significance in AIDSpatients, since cannabis would be used regularly by patients with amajor immune system disorder. Even a small impairment in immunity mayhave major consequences for HIV and AIDS affected individuals. Recentepidemiological evidence does something to allay this concern. A largeprospective cohort study of HIV/AIDS in homosexual and bisexual menrecently failed to find any relationship between cannabis use, or anyother psychoactive drug use, and the rate at which HIV positive mendeveloped clinical AIDS (Kaslow et al, 1989). Nonetheless, the issueof immunosuppression needs to be explicitly investigated in anyresearch which is undertaken into the therapeutic uses of cannabinoidsin the treatment of AIDS. 8.9 The limitations of anecdotal evidenceMuch of the case for the therapeutic uses of cannabinoids as otherthan anti-emetic agents depends upon anecdotal evidence from casehistories. Such evidence has justifiably come to be distrusted asevidence of therapeutic effectiveness in clinical medicine, especiallyin the case of chronic conditions which have a fluctuating course ofremission and exacerbation. In such diseases, it is difficult toexclude alternative explanations of any apparent relationship betweenthe use of a drug (e.g. THC) and an improvement in a patient'scondition. Among the alternative explanations that are most difficultto exclude in a single case or even a succession of single cases issimple coincidence: that is, there may be no relationship between theuse of the drug and improvement; the apparent relationship between thetwo may have arisen because the use of the drug preceded animprovement in the patient's condition that would have occurred in itsabsence. This is especially likely to occur in a chronic conditionwith a fluctuating course. In addition, the well-known placebo effectwhich is observed in many conditions may explain the apparent benefitsof a drug or other treatment. It is for these reasons that this reviewhas relied upon evidence from controlled clinical trials in appraisingthe therapeutic uses of cannabinoids. Grinspoon and Bakalar (1993) have attempted to defend anecdotalevidence of therapeutic efficacy of cannabinoids. They argue that adouble standard has been used in the appraisal of the safety andefficacy of cannabinoids: anecdotal evidence of harm has been readilyaccepted while anecdotal evidence of benefit has been discounted.Although at first glance "double standards" may seem to describe thebehaviour of the regulatory authorities, it is defensible to usedifferent standards of proof when evaluating the benefits and thecosts of therapeutic drugs. It is reasonable to err on the side ofcaution by requiring stronger evidence of benefit from putativelytherapeutic drugs in order to ensure that the possible risks incurredby their therapeutic use do not outweigh their benefits. Moreover,this behaviour is not peculiar to the therapeutic appraisal ofcannabinoids; it is standard practice in the therapeutic appraisal ofall drugs. Medical practitioners are encouraged to report caseshistories of possible adverse effects of prescribed drugs. Suchreports are treated as a noisy but necessary way of detecting rare butserious side effects of drugs that have not been detected in clinicaltrials or animal studies. 8.10 The politics of therapeutic cannabinoid useA puzzle in the field of cannabinoid therapeutics is that despite thepositive appraisal of the therapeutic potential of cannabinoids asanti-emetics and anti-glaucoma agents, they have not been widely used.Nor has the detailed type of clinical pharmacological research beenundertaken on optimal methods of clinical use in those areas where thecannabinoids do have therapeutic potential (e.g. as anti-emetics).Part of the reason for this is that research on the therapeutic use ofthese compounds has become a casualty of the debate in the UnitedStates about the legal status of cannabis. This emerges from aninspection of the arguments recently advanced for and against anapplication to the United States Drug Enforcement Agency to change thestatus of marijuana under the Controlled Substances Act, 1970 from aschedule I drug which has no accepted medical use to a schedule IIdrug which has an accepted medical use (see Randall, 1988, 1989,1990).The proponents of rescheduling (National Organisation for the Reformof Marijuana Laws, Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics, and CannabisCorporation of America) have argued that marijuana should be availablefor medical use, as smoking is the most effective mode of deliveringTHC for some therapeutic purposes. The opponents of rescheduling (DrugEnforcement Agency, International Chiefs of Police, The NationalFederation of Parents for a Drug Free Youth) have countered thatmarijuana has no therapeutic use, since its few uses are better met,either by other more effective drugs which do not have thepsychoactive effects of THC, or by the oral delivery of syntheticcannabinoids. They have been supported by medical researchers andpractitioners who argue for the therapeutic superiority ofpharmaceutically pure drugs which can be given in defined doses (e.g.Levitt, 1986; Mechoulam, 1988; Nahas, 1984). Medical researchers who have supported the rescheduling of marijuana(e.g. Grinspoon and Bakalar, 1993; Merritt, 1988; Mikuriya, 1990;Morgan, 1990; Weil, 1988) have argued that smoked cannabis is superiorto oral synthetic cannabinoids in effectiveness and has a lower riskof producing unwanted psychoactive side-effects. Apart from theunsuitability of oral medication for patients who are vomiting, theirmain arguments in favour of smoking as a route of THC administrationare similar to the reasons recreational users often give forpreferring smoking to the oral use of cannabis. The greaterbioavailability of THC via smoking produces a more dependabletherapeutic effect, which is more easily controlled because users havea greater ability to titrate their dose, and hence, to maximise thedesired effects while minimising the unpleasant effects. An additionalargument sometimes used is that there may be other cannabinoidspresent in the crude plant product which modulate the undesired sideeffects, including the unpleasant dysphoric effects of THC (Grinspoonand Bakalar, 1993). There is also suggestive evidence that smokedcannabis is as effective as oral THC, and may be preferred by patientsbecause of the greater control they have over dose (Chang et al,1979). Opponents of marijuana rescheduling argue that the undesirablepsychoactive side effects of THC disqualify it from widespread medicaluse, whatever the route of administration. Most also believe thatsmoking is a medically unacceptable route of administration of THCbecause it is unsuitable for very young and very old patients, thereis a risk of infection with micro-organisms which may contaminate theplant material, and there is the danger that chronic smoke inhalationmay produce or exacerbate bronchitis, and expose the user tocarcinogens (e.g. Levitt, 1986; Mechoulam, 1988; Nahas, 1984). The proponents of rescheduling respond that none of these arecompelling reasons for rejecting smoked marijuana for therapeuticpurposes until more potent and specific therapeutic cannabinoids havebeen identified and synthesised. Smoking, they point out, would not bea compulsory method of administration; only an option for thosepatients who preferred it, as would the use of cannabinoids ifpatients did not like their psychoactive effects. The contamination ofmicro-organisms reported with blackmarket cannabis can be overcome,they argue, by standardising dose and using an anti-microbialtreatment, as has been done by National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)in preparing cannabis cigarettes for research (Randall, 1988). Therisks of bronchitis and respiratory tract cancers, it is argued, aresmall with the intermittent and time-limited smoking of cannabis thatwould occur in the course of cancer chemotherapy. In any case,proponents of rescheduling argue, it is probably a risk that manypatients with a life-threatening illness may be prepared to run, asshown by their preparedness to take highly toxic and carcinogenicanti-cancer agents. Weil (1988) has argued that some opponents have used double standardsin appraising the risks of marijuana smoking. According to Weil, themost common psychoactive effects of marijuana (euphoria, somnolenceand dysphoria) are minor, non-life-threatening and self-limitingeffects that can be easily managed, and are of much less severity thanthe side effects of many other widely-used therapeutic drugs. Medicalwitnesses for the government, he claims, "do not contrast marijuana'ssupposed adverse effects with the known adverse effects of drugsroutinely prescribed for the treatment of conditions like cancer,glaucoma and multiple sclerosis. Instead, ... [they] compare marijuanato some abstract, unobtainable standard of perfection" (p437).Merritt (1988) has made a similar point in criticising the argumentsraised against the therapeutic use of marijuana to manage glaucoma: "... each drug family used in glaucoma therapy is capable of producinga lethal response, even when properly prescribed and used .. [p470][but] these drugs are all deemed "safe" for use in glaucoma therapy ..because their adverse consequences are considered less threatening tothe patient than blindness" (p472). Yet marijuana is excluded fromtherapeutic use because of a possible risk of cancer from long-termdaily smoking. "I cannot see", observes Merritt, "how an alleged caseof marijuana-induced lung cancer which results in death issignificantly different in result from an acute adverse reaction to amyotic drug which results in respiratory failure, except, of course,that the patient with cancer is likely to outlive the patient who isunable to draw in a breath of air" (p474).Although the debate about the rescheduling of marijuana has beenostensibly about the safety and efficacy of marijuana use, it has beendriven by the debate about the legal status of recreational marijuanause. For example, some of the groups advocating the therapeutic use ofcannabis have also been proponents of cannabis legalisation (e.g.NORML), thereby fuelling the fears of opponents of cannabis use thatsuccess in the campaign for marihuana rescheduling will be the thinedge of a wedge to legalise cannabis. Other proponents of legalisation(e.g. Grinspoon and Bakalar, 1993) have turned this reasoning around,by arguing for the legalisation of cannabis as a way of makingcannabis available for therapeutic purposes.On the other side of the argument are those opponents of marijuana usewho fear that the admission that marijuana, or any of itsconstituents, may have a therapeutic use will send the "wrong message"to youth. This has led to the denial that cannabinoids have anytherapeutic effects, and to attempts to stifle all scientific inquiryinto any such effects. For example, Mr Bernstein representing theNational Federation of Parents for a Drug Free Youth had the followingto say in his summing up against Rescheduling marijuana before JudgeYoung (1989):"If marijuana were to be rescheduled to Schedule II, what kind ofmessage are we sending to a nation that is engaged in a battle forit's very survival because of epidemic drug abuse? ... will not themessage be that marijuana is good for cancer, good for glaucoma, goodfor spasticity and a host of other illnesses? Now to all of this whoare the most vulnerable? The answer is, of course, our young people.Their reaction will be that if it is good for all of these things, itcan't be bad for me. We then have another youngster trying marijuana,the gateway drug and probably starting down the road that leads tonowhere but destruction" (in Randall, 1989, p395). It is unfortunate that a connection has been forged between thedebates about the legal status of cannabis as a recreational drug andthe use of cannabinoids for therapeutic use. Any such connection isspurious, since there is a world of difference between the use ofcontrolled doses of a purified drug under medical supervision and therecreational use of crude preparations of a drug. In a rational world,clinical decisions about whether to use pure cannabinoid drugs shouldnot be abrogated because crude forms of the drug may be abused bythose who use it recreationally. As a community we do not allow thistype of thinking to deny us the use of opiates for analgesia. Norshould it be used to deny access to any therapeutic uses ofcannabinoids derivatives that may be revealed by pharmacologicalresearch. 8.11 ConclusionsThe following provisional conclusions can be drawn on the availableevidence. First, there is good evidence for the therapeutic potentialof THC as an anti-emetic agent. Although uncertainty exists about themost optimal method of dosing and the advantages and disadvantages ofdifferent routes of administration, there is sufficient evidence tojustify it being made available in pure synthetic form to cancerpatients. In the light of the recent development of more effectiveanti-emetic agents, it remains to be seen how widely used thecannabinoids will be. Second, there is reasonable evidence for thepotential efficacy of THC in the treatment of glaucoma, especially incases which have proved resistant to existing anti-glaucoma agents.Further research is clearly required, but this should not prevent itsuse under medical supervision in poorly controlled cases, providedpatients make informed decisions about its use in the light ofinformation about the possible health risks of long-term use. Third,there is sufficient suggestive evidence of the potential usefulness ofvarious cannabinoids as analgesic, anti-asthmatic, anti-spasmodic, andanti-convulsant agents to warrant further basic pharmacological andexperimental investigation, and perhaps clinical research into theireffectiveness. Despite the basic and clinical research work which was undertaken inlate 1970s and early 1980s, the cannabinoids have not been widely usedtherapeutically, nor have further investigations been conducted alongthe lines suggested in the positive evaluations made by the Instituteof Medicine (1982). This seems largely attributable to the fact thatclinical research on the therapeutic use of cannabinoids has beendiscouraged by regulation and a lack of funding in the United States,where most cannabis research has been conducted. The discouragement oftherapeutic research, in turn, derives from the fact that THC, themost therapeutically effective cannabinoid, has the psychoactiveeffects sought by recreational users. In opposing the therapeutic usesof cannabinoids, some researchers have used double standards inappraising efficacy and safety, setting unreasonably high standards inassessing the evidence on the comparative therapeutic safety andefficacy of cannabinoids and existing agents. The application of thesame demanding standards to existing agents for the candidatediseases, and more generally, to existing psychoactive drugs that arewidely used in medical practice, would denude the pharmacopoeia. Therecent discovery of the cannabinoid receptor may help to overcome someof the resistance to research into the therapeutic uses ofcannabinoids, by holding out the prospect that the psychoactiveeffects of the cannabinoids can be disengaged from their othertherapeutically desirable effects.ReferencesAdler, M.W. and Geller, E.B. (1986) Ocular effects of cannabinoids. InR. Mechoulam (ed) Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents. Boca Raton,Florida: CRC Press.American Academy of Ophthalmology. (1990) "The use of marijuana in thetreatment of glaucoma", June 21, 1987, reproduced In R Randall (ed)Cancer Treatment and Marijuana Therapy. Washington, DC: Galen Press.Carey, M.P., Burish, T.G. and Brenner, D.E. (1983)Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in cancer chemotherapy: research problemsand issues. Annals of Internal Medicine, 99, 106-114.Casswell, A. (1992) Marijuana as medicine. Medical Journal ofAustralia, 156, 497-498.Chang, A.E., Shiling, D.J., Stillman, R.C., Goldberg, N.H., Seipp,C.A., Barofsky, I., Simon, R.M. and Rosenberg, S.A. (1979)Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic in cancer patientsreceiving high-dose methotrexate. Annals of Internal Medicine, 91, 819-824.Chesher, G.B. and Jackson, D.M. (1974) Anticonvulsant effects ofcannabinoids in mice: drug interactions within cannabinoids, andcannabinoid interactions with phenytoin. Psychopharmacologia, 37,255-264.Clifford, D.B. (1983) Tetrahydrocannabinol for tremor in multiplesclerosis. Annals of Neurology, 13, 669-671.Consroe, P.F., Wood, G and Buchsbaum, H. (1975) Anticonvulsant natureof marihuana smoking. Journal of the American Medical Association,234, 306-307.Consroe, P. and Snider, S.R. (1986) Therapeutic potential ofcannabinoids in neurological disorders. In R. Mechoulam (ed)Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press.Consroe, P., Laguna, J., Allender, J., Snider, S., Stern, L., Sandyk,R., Kennedy, K. and Schram, K. (1991) Controlled trial of cannabidiolin Huntington's disease. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 40,701-708.Cunha, J.M., Carlini, E.A., Pereira, A.E., Ramos, O.L., Pimentel, C.,Gagliardi, R., Sanvito, W.L., Lander, N. and Mechoulam, R. (1980)Chronic administration of cannabidiol to healthy volunteers andepileptic patients. Pharmacology, 21, 175-185.Dobin, R.E. and Kleiman, M.A.R. (1991) Marijuana as antiemeticmedicine: A survey of oncologists' experiences and attitudes. Journalof Clinical Oncology, 9, 1314-1319.Goani, Y. and Mechoulam, R. (1964) Isolation, structure and partialsynthesis of an active constituent of hashish. Journal of the AmericanChemical Society, 86, 1646-1647. Graham, J.D.P. (1986) The bronchodilator action of cannabinoids. In R.Mechoulam (ed) Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents. Boca Raton,Florida: CRC Press.Grinspoon, L. (1990) Testimony In The Matter of MarihuanaRescheduling. In R Randall (ed) Cancer Treatment and MarijuanaTherapy. Washington, DC: Galen Press.Grinspoon, L. and Bakalar, J.B. (1993) Marihuana, the ForbiddenMedicine. New Haven: Yale University Press.Hepler, R.S., and Petrus, R.J. (1971) Marihuana smoking andintraocular pressure. Journal of the American Medical Association,217, 1392.Hepler, R.S., and Petrus, R.J. (1976) Experiences with administrationof marihuana to glaucoma patients. In Cohen, S. and R Stillman (Eds)The Therapeutic Potential of Marihuana. New York: Plenum Medical BookCompany.Hepler, R.S., Frank, I.M. and Petrus, R. (1976) Ocular effects ofmarihuana smoking. In M Braude and S. Szara (eds) The Pharmacology ofMarihuana. New York: Raven Press.Hepler, R.S. (1990) Testimony in The Matter of the MarihuanaRescheduling. In R Randall (ed) Cancer Treatment and MarijuanaTherapy. Washington DC: Galen Press.Institute of Medicine. (1982) Marijuana and Health. Washington DC:Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press.Iversen, L.L. (1993) Medical uses of marijuana? Nature, 365, 12-13.Jones, R.T., Benowitz, N. and Herning, R.I. (1981) The clinicalrelevance of cannabis tolerance and dependence. Journal of ClinicalPharmacology, 21, 143S-152S.Kaslow, R.A., Blackwelder, W.C., Ostrow, D.G., Yerg, D., Palenick, J.,Coulson, A.H. and Valdiserri, R.O. (1989) No evidence for a role ofalcohol or other psychoactive drugs in accelerating immunodeficiencyin HIV-1-positive individuals: A report from the Multicenter AIDSCohort Study. Journal of the American Medical Association, 261,3424-3429.Levitt, M. (1986) Cannabinoids as antiemetics in cancer chemotherapy.In R. Mechoulam (ed) Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents. Boca Raton,Florida: CRC Press.Mechoulam, R. (1986) The pharmacohistory of cannabis sativa. In R.Mechoulam (ed) Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents. Boca Raton,Florida: CRC Press.Mechoulam, R. (1988) Direct testimony. In Randall, R (ed) MarijuanaMedicine and the Law. Washington DC: Galen Press.Meinck, H.M., Schonle, P.W. and Conrad, B. (1989) Effect ofcannabinoids on spasticity and ataxia in multiple sclerosis. Journalof Neurology, 236, 120-122.Merritt, J (1988) Affidavit. In R Randall (ed) Marijuana Medicine andthe Law. Washington, DC: Galen Press.Mikuriya, T.H. (1990) Testimony. In R Randall (ed) Cancer Treatmentand Marijuana Therapy. Washington, DC: Galen Press.Morgan, J.P. (1990) Testimony. In R Randall (ed) Cancer Treatment andMarijuana Therapy. Washington, DC.: Galen Press.Nahas, G.G. (1984) The medical use of cannabis. In G.G. Nahas (ed)Marihuana in Science and Medicine. New York: Raven Press.Noyes, R., Brunk, F., Avery, D.H. and Canter, A. (1975) The analgesicproperties of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and codeine. ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 18, 84-89.Plasse, T.F., Gorter, R.W., Krasnow, S.H., Lane, M., Shapard, K.V. andWadleigh, R. (1991) Recent clinical experience with Dronabinol.Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 40, 695-700.Poster, D.S., Penta, J.S., Bruno, S. and Macdonald, J.S. (1981)Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in clinical oncology. Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 245, 2047-2051.Randall, R (1988) (ed) Marijuana Medicine and the Law. Washington DC:Galen Press.Randall, R (1989) (ed) Marijuana Medicine and the Law, Volume II.Washington DC: Galen Press.Randall, R (1990) (ed) Cancer Treatment and Marijuana Therapy.Washington DC: Galen Press.Randall, R (1991) (ed) Marijuana and AIDS: Pot, Politics and PWAs inAmerica. Washington DC: Galen Press.Sallan, S.E., Zinberg, N.E., and Frei, E. (1975) Antiemetic effect ofdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients receiving cancerchemotherapy. New England Journal of Medicine, 293, 795-797.Sandyk. R., Consroe, P., Stern, P., and Biklen, D. (1988) Preliminarytrial of cannabidiol in Huntington's disease. In G. Chesher, P.Consroe and R. Musty (eds) Marijuana: An International ResearchReport. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service.Segal, M. (1986) Cannabinoids and analgesia. In R. Mechoulam (ed)Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press.Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J. and Lee, Y.E. (1975) Effects of smokedmarijuana in experimentally induced asthma. American Review ofRespiratory Disease, 112, 377-386.Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J. and Frank, I.M. (1976) Acute effects ofmarihuana on airway dynamics in spontaneous and experimentally inducedbronchial asthma. In M Braude and S. Szara (eds) The Pharmacology ofMarihuana. New York: Raven Press.Tashkin, D.P. (1993) The pulmonary effects of cannabis. Paperpresented to conference on "Cannabis and Health", Wellington, NewZealand, October, 1993.Ungerleider, J.T., Andrysiak, T., Fairbanks, L., Goodnight, J., Sarna,G. and Jamison, K. (1982) Cannabis and cancer chemotherapy: Acomparison of oral delta-9-THC and prochlorperazine. Cancer, 50,636-645.Young, F.L. (1989) In the matter of Marijuana Rescheduling Petition.Opinion and recommended ruling, findings of fact, conclusions of lawand decision of Administrative Law Judge. In R Randall (ed) MarijuanaMedicine and the Law, Volume II. Washington, DC: Galen Press.Weil, A. (1988) Affidavit. In R Randall (ed) Marijuana Medicine andthe Law. Washington, DC: Galen Press. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-14IA087-000627-B016-271http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ch9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051825 text/html 26457HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:18:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:01:24 GMTContent-length: 26239 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use:chapter 9 The health and psychological consequences of cannabis use National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 25 9. An overall appraisal of the health and psychological effects of        cannabis 9.1 Summary The following is a summary of the major adverse health andpsychological effects of acute and chronic cannabis use, groupedaccording to the degree of confidence in the view that therelationship between cannabis use and the adverse effect is a causalone.9.1.1 Acute effects The major acute psychological and health effects of cannabisintoxication are:        anxiety, dysphoria, panic and paranoia, especially in naive        users;        cognitive impairment, especially of attention and memory for the        duration of intoxication;         psychomotor impairment, and probably an increased risk of        accidental injury or death if an intoxicated person attempts to drive        a motor vehicle or operate machinery;         an increased risk of experiencing psychotic symptoms among those        who are vulnerable because of a personal or family history of        psychosis; and        an increased risk of low birth weight babies if cannabis is used        during pregnancy.9.1.2 Chronic effectsThe major health and psychological effects of chronic cannabis use,especially daily use over many years, remain uncertain. On theavailable evidence, the major probable adverse effects appear to be:        respiratory diseases associated with smoking as the method of        administration, such as chronic bronchitis, and the occurrence of        histopathological changes that are precursors to the development of        malignancy;        development of a cannabis dependence syndrome, characterised by        an inability to abstain from or to control cannabis use; and        subtle forms of cognitive impairment, most particularly of        attention and memory, which persist while the user remains chronically        intoxicated, and may or may not be reversible after prolonged        abstinence from cannabis.The following are the major possible adverse effects of chronic, heavycannabis use which remain to be confirmed by controlled research:        an increased risk of developing cancers of the aerodigestive        tract, i.e. oral cavity, pharynx, and oesophagus;        an increased risk of leukemia among offspring exposed in utero;        and        a decline in occupational performance marked by underachievement        in adults in occupations requiring high level cognitive skills, and        impaired educational attainment in adolescents.        birth defects occurring among children of women who used cannabis        during their pregnancies.9.1.3 High risk groupsA number of groups can be identified as being at increased risk ofexperiencing some of these adverse effects. Adolescents        Adolescents with a history of poor school performance may have        their educational achievement further limited by the cognitive        impairments produced by chronic intoxication with cannabis.        Adolescents who initiate cannabis use in the early teens are at        higher risk of progressing to heavy cannabis use and other illicit        drug use, and to the development of dependence on cannabis.Women of childbearing age        Pregnant women who continue to smoke cannabis are probably at        increased risk of giving birth to low birth weight babies, and perhaps        of shortening their period of gestation.        Women of childbearing age who continue to smoke cannabis at the        time of conception or while pregnant possibly increase the risk of        their children being born with birth defects. Persons with pre-existing diseasesPersons with a number of pre-existing diseases who smoke cannabis areprobably at an increased risk of precipitating or exacerbatingsymptoms of their diseases. These include:         individuals with cardiovascular diseases, such as coronary artery        disease, cerebrovascular disease and hypertension;         individuals with respiratory diseases, such as asthma,        bronchitis, and emphysema;         individuals with schizophrenia, who are at increased risk of        precipitating or of exacerbating schizophrenic symptoms; and        individuals who are or have been dependent upon alcohol and other        drugs, who are probably at an increased risk of developing dependence        on cannabis.9.1.4 A caveatAs has been stressed throughout this document, there is uncertaintysurrounding many of these summary statements about the adverse healtheffects of acute, and especially chronic, cannabis use. To varyingdegrees, these statements depend upon inferences from animal research,laboratory studies, and clinical observations about the probable illeffects. In some cases, the inferences depend upon arguments from whatis known about the adverse health effects of other drugs, such astobacco and alcohol. In very few cases are there sufficient studieswhich provide the detailed evidence that epidemiologists would requireto make informed judgments about the health effects of cannabis; theinterpretation of what epidemiological evidence is available iscomplicated by difficulties in quantifying degree of exposure tocannabis, and in excluding alternative explanations (including otherdrug use) of associations observed between cannabis use and adversehealth outcomes. These interpretative problems are especially obviousin the case of many of the alleged psychological outcomes of cannabisuse in adolescence, since many of these putative "consequences" (e.g.poor school performance, deviant behaviour) also antedate the use ofcannabis. Nevertheless, these statements provide the best availablebasis for making societal decisions about what policies ought to beadopted towards cannabis use.9.2  Two special concernsTwo issues which have hitherto been ignored require brief discussion.These are the possible health implications of: the storage of THC inbody tissue; and any increases in the average potency of cannabisproducts (as indexed by THC content) that may have occurred in recentdecades.9.2.1 Storage of THC    There is good evidence that with repeated dosing of cannabis atfrequent intervals, THC can accumulate in fatty tissues in the humanbody where it may remain for considerable periods of time (see abovepp34-35). Attitudes towards this fact are strongly coloured by theperceiver's views about cannabis use: those who are opposed to its useusually regard this as a cause for major concern; proponents ofcannabis use largely ignore it. There is no evidence to make aconfident judgment one way or the other. The storage of cannabinoidswould be serious cause for concern if THC were a highly toxicsubstance which remained physiologically active while stored in bodyfat. The evidence that THC is a highly toxic substance is weak,although it does have a bewildering variety of biological effects(Martin, 1986). Its degree of activity while stored has not beeninvestigated. One potential health implication of THC storage is thatthe release of stored cannabinoids into blood may produce unexpectedsymptoms of cannabis intoxication. The release of stored THC has beensuggested as an explanation of "flashback experiences" (e.g. Negrete,1988; Thomas, 1993). Such experiences have been rarely reported bycannabis users (e.g. Edwards, 1983), and even in these casesinterpretation of their significance is complicated by the fact thatthose who have reported such experiences have typically used otherhallucinogenic drugs. Whatever the uncertainties about healthimplications of THC storage, all potential users of cannabis should beaware that it occurs.9.2.2 Increases in the potency of cannabis Cohen (1986) has been credited (Mikuriya and Aldrich, 1988) withinitiating the recent claim that the existing medical literature onthe health effects of cannabis underestimates its adverse effectsbecause it was based upon research conducted on less potent forms ofmarijuana (O.5 per cent to 1.0 per cent THC) than those that becameavailable in the USA in the past decade (3.5 per cent THC in1985-1986). This claim has been repeated often in the popular andscientific media, and supported by anecdotal evidence that samplescontaining up to 40 per cent THC have been seized by the police. Analleged "ten-fold" increase in potency has contributed to recentconcerns about the health effects of cannabis, because of theassumption that increases in average potency necessarily meansubstantial increases in the health risks of cannabis use. InAustralia this concern has been recently raised by the discovery ofhydroponically cultivated clones of cannabis plants that produce highlevels of THC, and by reports of the importation of high THC producingstrains of cannabis from New Guinea. There are a number of points to be made about this issue. First, theevidence for an increase in potency is not as clear as Cohen (1986)claimed, or as it seems from the data reported by ElSohy and ElSohy(1989). The inference that these data demonstrate that potency hasincreased depends upon the assumption that the samples analysed arerepresentative of cannabis consumed. Mikuriya and Aldrich (1988), forexample, have contested this assumption. They cite the results ofchemical analyses conducted on cannabis samples in California duringthe middle 1970s in which the average potency was well within theranges reported in samples seized by the US Drug Enforcement Agency inthe middle 1980s. They also argue that the analyses of the DEA samplesfrom the middle 1970s underestimated THC potency because the sampleswere not properly stored, allowing their average THC content to bedegraded. Second, even if we allow that there probably has been a small increasein the THC potency of cannabis products in the USA, there is atpresent no evidence of a similar increase in Australia. There is goodevidence from police samples analysed in New Zealand over the pastdecade that average potency has not increased there (Bedford, 1993).Press reports of increased potency have often been misleading in thatthey have been based upon individual samples of highly concentratedcannabis extracts, such as hash oil, which have never had a majorshare of the cannabis market.Third, the use of average potency can be also be potentiallymisleading, since the average ignores differences between cannabisusers in preferences for cannabis products of varying potency. Thereprobably has always been a market for more potent products among theheavier, and hence, more THC-tolerant, cannabis users. Marijuanaprobably remains the majority preference of cannabis users, althoughthis is an issue worthy of investigation.Fourth, it is not obvious that more potent forms of cannabisinevitably have more adverse effects on users' health than less potentforms. Indeed, it is conceivable that increased potency may havelittle or no adverse effect if users are able to titrate their dose toachieve the desired state of intoxication, as some have argued they do(e.g. Kleiman, 1992; Mikuyira and Aldrich, 1988). If users were ableto titrate their dose, the use of more potent cannabis products wouldreduce the amount of cannabis material that was smoked, which wouldmarginally reduce the risks of developing respiratory diseases. Fifth, even if users do not titrate their dose of THC, (or if they doso inefficiently), any increase in the average dose received would notinevitably have an adverse impact on users' health. The effect woulddepend upon the type of health effect in question, and the relativeexperience of users. Higher average doses may produce an increase inthe risk of minor adverse psychological effects of acute use,especially among naive users. This could be a desirable outcome if itdiscouraged further experimentation with the drug. Among experiencedcannabis users, an increased average dose may increase the risks ofaccidents among those who drive while intoxicated, especially ifcombined with alcohol. Higher average doses may also increase the riskof regular users developing dependence.All considered then, it is far from established that the average THCpotency of cannabis products has substantially increased over recentdecades. If potency has increased, it is even less certain that theaverage health risks of cannabis use have materially changed as aconsequence, since users may titrate their dose to achieve the desiredeffects. Even if the users are inefficient in titrating their dose ofTHC, it is far from certain that the probability of adverse healtheffects will be thereby increased. Nevertheless, given these concernsabout THC potency, it would be preferable to conduct research on theissue rather than to rely upon inferences about the likely effects ofincreased cannabis potency. Studies of the ability of experiencedusers to titrate their dose of THC would contribute to an evaluationof this issue, as would the inclusion in sample surveys of questionsabout the form and perceived potency of cannabis products used. 9.3 A comparative appraisal of health risks: alcohol, tobacco andcannabis useThe probable and possible adverse health and psychological effects ofcannabis need to be placed in comparative perspective to be fullyappreciated. A useful standard for such a comparison is what is knownabout the health effects of alcohol and tobacco, two other widely usedpsychoactive drugs. Cannabis shares with tobacco, smoking as the usualroute of administration, and resembles alcohol in being used for itsintoxicating and euphoriant effects.Considerable care must be exercised in making such comparisons.Firstly, the quantitative risks of tobacco and alcohol use are muchbetter known than the health risks of cannabis, since alcohol andtobacco have been consumed by substantial proportions of thepopulation, and there have been 40 years of scientific studies of thehealth consequences of their use. Cannabis, by contrast, has been muchless widely used, and for a shorter period, in Western society; it hasbeen primarily used by healthy young adults, and there have been fewstudies of its adverse health effects. Secondly, the prevalence of use of alcohol and tobacco is much higherthan that of cannabis. For example, the proportions of the Australianpopulation who are at least weekly users of alcohol, tobacco andcannabis are: 61 per cent, 29 per cent, (Department of Health, Housingand Community Services, 1992), and 11 per cent (Donnelly and Hall,1994) respectively. Any overall comparison of the health consequencesof the three drug types that was based upon existing patterns of usewould unfairly disadvantage alcohol and tobacco. Any attempt to adjustfor the differences in prevalence (e.g. by estimating the healtheffects if the prevalence of cannabis use was the same as those foralcohol and tobacco) would involve making controversial assumptions,so no such attempt has been made.The very different prevalence of use of alcohol, tobacco and cannabis,and the fact that we know a great deal more about the adverse effectsof alcohol and tobacco use, precludes any quantitative comparison ofthe current health consequences of these drugs. Nevertheless, aqualitative comparison of the probable health risks of cannabis withthe known health risks of alcohol and tobacco serves the usefulpurpose of reminding us of the risks we currently tolerate with ourfavourite psychoactive drugs. In undertaking this qualitative comparison, we have avoided thenecessity to comprehensively review the vast literatures on the healtheffects of alcohol and tobacco by using the following authorities asthe principal sources of evidence for our assertions about theirhealth risks: Anderson et al (1993); Holman et al's (1988) compendiumof the health effects of alcohol and tobacco; the Institute ofMedicine (1987); the International Agency for Research into Cancer(1990); Roselle et al (1993); and the Royal College of Physicians(1987).9.3.1 Acute effectsAlcohol. The major risks of acute cannabis use are similar to theacute risks of alcohol intoxication in a number of respects. First,both drugs produce psychomotor and cognitive impairment, especially ofmemory and planning. The impairment produced by alcohol increasesrisks of various kinds of accident, and the likelihood of engaging inrisky behaviour, such as dangerous driving, and unsafe sexualpractices. It remains to be determined whether cannabis intoxicationproduces similar increases in accidental injury and death, although onbalance it probably does.Second, there is good evidence that substantial doses of alcohol takenduring the first trimester of pregnancy can produce a foetal alcoholsyndrome. There is suggestive but far from conclusive evidence thatcannabis used during pregnancy may have similar adverse effects. Third, there is a major health risk of acute alcohol use that is notshared with cannabis. In large doses alcohol can cause death byasphyxiation, alcohol poisoning, cardiomyopathy and cardiac infarct.There are no recorded cases of fatalities attributable to cannabis,and the extrapolated lethal dose from animal studies cannot beachieved by recreational users.Tobacco. The major acute health risks that cannabis shares withtobacco are the irritant effects of smoke upon the respiratory system,and the stimulating effects of both THC and nicotine on thecardiovascular system, both of which can be detrimental to personswith cardiovascular disease.9.3.2 Chronic effectsAlcohol. There are a number of risks of heavy chronic alcohol use,some of which may be shared by chronic cannabis use. First, heavy useof either drug increases the risk of developing a dependence syndromein which users experience difficulty in stopping or controlling theiruse. There is strong evidence of such a syndrome in the case ofalcohol and reasonable evidence in the case of cannabis. A majordifference between the two is that it is uncertain whether awithdrawal syndrome reliably occurs after dependent cannabis usersabruptly stop their cannabis use, whereas the abrupt cessation ofalcohol use in severely dependent drinkers produces a well definedwithdrawal syndrome which can be potentially fatal. Second, there is reasonable clinical evidence that the chronic heavyuse of alcohol can produce psychotic symptoms and psychoses in someindividuals. There is suggestive evidence that chronic heavy cannabisuse may produce a toxic psychosis, precipitate psychotic illnesses inpredisposed individuals, and exacerbate psychotic symptoms inindividuals with schizophrenia.Third, there is good evidence that chronic heavy alcohol use canindirectly cause brain injury - the Wernicke-Korsakov syndrome - withsymptoms of severe memory defect and an impaired ability to plan andorganise. With continued heavy drinking, and in the absence of vitaminsupplementation, this injury may produce severe irreversible cognitiveimpairment. There is good reason for concluding that chronic cannabisuse does not produce cognitive impairment of comparable severity.There is suggestive evidence that chronic cannabis use may producesubtle defects in cognitive functioning, that may or may not bereversible after abstinence. Fourth, there is reasonable evidence that chronic heavy alcohol useproduces impaired occupational performance in adults, and lowerededucational achievements in adolescents. There is suggestive evidencethat chronic heavy cannabis use produces similar, albeit more subtleimpairments in occupational and educational performance of adults. Fifth, there is good evidence that chronic, heavy alcohol useincreases the risk of premature mortality from accidents, suicide andviolence. There is no comparable evidence for chronic cannabis use,although it is likely that dependent cannabis users who frequentlydrive while intoxicated with cannabis increase their risk ofaccidental injury or death.Sixth, alcohol use has been accepted as a contributory cause of cancerof the oropharangeal organs in men and women. There is suggestiveevidence that chronic cannabis smoking may also be a contributorycause of cancers of the aerodigestive tract.Tobacco. The major adverse health effects shared by chronic cannabisand tobacco smokers are chronic respiratory diseases, such as chronicbronchitis, and probably, cancers of the aerodigestive tract (i.e. themouth, tongue, throat, oesophagus, lungs). The increased risk ofcancer in the aerodigestive tract is a consequence of the shared routeof administration by smoking. It is possible that chronic cannabissmoking also shares the cardiotoxic properties of tobacco smoking,although this possibility remains to be investigated. It should be stressed that this section only describes the adversehealth effects of alcohol and tobacco for which there is some evidencethat chronic heavy cannabis use may also cause. It does not,therefore, provide an exhaustive inventory of all the adverse healtheffects of either chronic alcohol or tobacco use. Among the majoradditional adverse health effects of chronic heavy alcohol use whichare not shared by cannabis are: liver cirrhosis, peripheralneuropathy, and gastritis. 9.4 Implications for harm reduction The simplest health advice to anyone who wishes to avoid the probableacute and chronic adverse health effects of cannabis is to abstainfrom using the drug. This advice is especially apt for persons withany of the diseases (e.g. cardiovascular) or conditions (e.g.pregnancy) which would make them more vulnerable to the adverseeffects of cannabis. Current cannabis users should be aware of the following risks of usingthe drug. First, the risk of being involved in a motor vehicleaccident is likely to be increased when cannabis users drive whileintoxicated by cannabis. The combination of alcohol and cannabisintoxication will substantially increase this risk. Second, thechronic smoking of cannabis poses significant risks to the respiratorysystem, apart from any specific effects of THC. Third, the respiratoryrisks of cannabis smoking are amplified if deep inhalation andbreath-holding are used to maximise the absorption of THC in thelungs. This technique greatly increases the delivery and retention ofparticulate matter and tar. Fourth, daily or near daily use ofcannabis is to be avoided, as it has a high risk of producingdependence. ReferencesAnderson P., Cremona, A., Paton, A., Turner, C. and Wallace, P. (1993)The risk of alcohol. Addiction, 88, 1493-1508. Bedford, K. (1993) THC levels in New Zealand cannabis and cannabisproducts. Paper presented at Conference on Cannabis and Health,Wellington, New Zealand, October, 1993.Cohen, S. (1986) Marijuana research: selected recent findings. DrugAbuse and Alcoholism Newsletter, 15, 1-3.Department of Health Housing and Community Services (1993) Statisticson Drug Abuse in Australia, 1992. Canberra: Australian GovernmentPublishing Service.Donnelly, N. and Hall, W. (1994) Patterns of Cannabis Use inAustralia. Paper prepared for National Task Force on Cannabis.National Drug Strategy Monograph Series No. 27. Canberra: AustralianGovernment Publishing Service.Edwards, G. (1983) Psychopathology of a drug experience. BritishJournal of Psychiatry, 143, 139-142.ElSohy, M.A. and ElSohy, H.N. (1989) Marijuana: Analysis and detectionof use through urinalysis. In K.K. Redda, C.A. Walker and G. Barnett(eds) Cocaine, Marijuana, Designer Drugs. Boca Raton, Florida: CRCPress.Holman, C.D., Armstrong, B. et al (1988) The Quantification ofDrug-Caused Morbidity and Mortality in Australia. Prepared for theCommonwealth Department of Community Services and Health. Canberra:Australian Government Publishing Service.Institute of Medicine (1987) Causes and Consequences of AlcoholProblems: An Agenda for Research. Washington DC: National AcademyPress.International Agency on Cancer (1990) Cancer: Causes, Occurrence andControl. (Ed) L. Tomatis. Lyon: International Agency on Cancer.Kleiman, M.A.R. (1992) Against Excess: Drug Policy for Results. NewYork, Basic Books.Martin, B.R. (1986) The cellular effects of cannabinoids.Pharmacological Reviews, 38, 45-74.Mikuriya, T. and Aldrich, M.R. (1988) Cannabis 1988, old drug, newdangers: the potency question. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 20,47-55.Negrete, J (1988) What's happened to the cannabis debate? BritishJournal of Addiction, 83, 359-372.Roselle, G., Mendenhall, C.L. and Grossman, C.J. (1993) Effects ofalcohol on immunity and cancer. In R. Yirmiya and A.N. Taylor (eds)Alcohol, Immunity, and Cancer. Baton Rouge: CRC Press.Royal College of Physicians (1987) A Great and Growing Evil: Themedical consequences of alcohol abuse. London: Tavistock.Thomas, H. (1993) Psychiatric symptoms in cannabis users. BritishJournal of Psychiatry, 163, 141-149. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-15IA086-000614-B046-88http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022026 text/html 14835HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:20:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:26 GMTContent-length: 14617 Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Table of Contents The Report Letter of Transmittal Introduction I. Marihuana and the Problem ofMarihuana Origins of the Marihuana Problem Visibility Perceived Threats Symbolism The Need for Perspective Historical Perspective Cultural Perspective The Search for Meaning Skepticism The Limits of Rationality Formulating Marihuana Policy Scientific Oversimplification Philosophical Oversimplification Sociological Oversimplification Legal Oversimplification The Report II. Marihuana Use and Its Effects The Marihuana User Demographic Characteristics Patterns of Use Profiles of Users Experimental Users Intermittent Users Moderate and Heavy Users Very Heavy Users Becoming a Marihuana User Parental Influence Situational Factors and Behavioral Correlates Social Group Factors The Dynamics of Persistent Use Becoming a Multidrug User Epidemiologic Studies Profiles and Dynamics Sociocultural Factors Effects of Marihuana on the User Botany and Chemistry Factors Influencing Drug Effect Dosage Method of Use Metabolism Set and Setting Tolerance Reverse Tolerance Duration of Use Patterns of Use Definition of Dependence Effects Related to Pattern Use Immediate Drug Effects Subjective Effects Bodv Function Mental Function The Intoxicated State Unpleasant Reactions Anxiety States Psychosis Conclusions ShortTerm Effects Long Term Effects Very Long Term Effects Tolerance and Dependence General Body Function Social Functioning Mental Functioning Motivation and Behavioral Change Summary III. Social Impact of Marihuana Use Marihuana and Public Safety Marihuana and Crime The Issue of Cause and Effect Marihuana and Violent Crime Marihuana and Non Violent Crime A Sociocultural Explanation Marihuana and Driving Marihuana, Public Health and Welfare A Public Health Approach The Population at Risk Confusion and Fact Assessment of Perceived Risks Lethality Potential for Genetic Damage Immediate Effects Effects of LongTerm, Heavy Use Addiction Potential Progression to Other Drugs Preventive Public Health Concerns Summary Marihuana and the Dominant Social Order The Adult Marihuana User The Young Marihuana User The World of Youth Why Society Feels Threatened Dropping Out Dropping Down Youth and Radical Politics Youth and the Work Ethic The Changing Social Scene IV. Social Response to Marihuana Use The Initial Social Response The Change The Current Response The Criminal Justice System Law Enforcement Behavior Law Enforcement Opinion The Non Legal Institutions The Family The Schools The Churches The Medical Community Summary The Public Response V. Marihuana and Social Policy Drugs in a Free Society Drugs and Social Responsibility A Social Control Policy for Marihuana Approval of Use Elimination of Use Discouragement or Neutrality Implementing the Discouragement Policy The Role of Law in Effective Social Control Total Prohibition Regulation Partial Prohibition Recommendations for Federal Law Recommendations for State Law Discussion of Federal Recommendations Discussion of State Recommendations Discussion of Potential Objections A Final Comment Addendum Ancillary Recommendations Legal and Law Enforcement Recommendations Medical Recommendations Other Recommendations Index of Contributors, Contractors and Consultants The Appendix The Technical Papers of the First Report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, March, 1972 Letter of Transmittal Members and Staff Preface Part One -- Biological Aspects I. History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant History of the Medical Use History of the Intoxicant Use II. Biological Effects of Marihuana Botanical and Chemical Considerations Factors Influencing Psychopharmacological Effect Acute Effects of Marihuana (Delta 9 THC) Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term Cannabis Users III. Behavioral and Biological Concomitants of ChronicMarihuana Smoking by Heavy and Casual Users Part Two -- Social Aspects I. Marihuana Use in American Society Surveys of Marihuana Use The Incidence and Prevalence of Marihuana Use The Future of Marihuana Why People Use Marihuana Becoming a Marihuana User Circumstances of First Marihuana Use The Marihuana User The Patterns of Marihuana Use Marihuana Use and the User: 1972 II. Marihuana and the Use of Other Drugs Empirical Data on the Escalation Process Youth Drug Use Survey Summary III. Marihuana and Public Safety Problems in Assessing the Effects of Marihuana Marihuana and Violence Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime Marihuana and Driving Part Three -- Legal Aspects I. Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco History of Marihuana Legislation History of Alcohol Prohibition History of Tobacco Regulation II. The Legal Status of Marihuana International Control The Control of Marihuana Under Federal Law Control of Marihuana at the State Level The Role of Ancillary Offenses and Constructive Possession in Controlling Marihuana Marihuana Control at the Local Level Analysis of Statutes Requiring Physicians to Report Drug Addiction III. Trafficking Patterns of Marihuana and Hashish Marihuana Traffic From Mexico Marihuana Traffic From Jamaica The Growing Hashish Traffic Part Four -- Response of the Criminal Justice System toMarihuana Use Introduction I. Enforcement Behavior at the State Level Enforcement Behavior at the Federal Level General Trends Federal Enforcement of the Marihuana Laws: 1970 III. Opinion Within the Criminal Justice System Prosecutorial Opinion Opinion of Court Officials Part Five -- National Survey I. A Nationwide Study of Beliefs, Information and Experiences Main Report Methods and Procedures Part Six -- Social Policy Aspects I. The Constitutional Dimensions of Marihuana Control Substantive Limitations on the Criminal Law Federal Preemption of Marihuana Control II. Models and Statutory Schemes for Controlling Marihuana Law and Social Policy Legal Implementations of Marihuana Control Policies Formulating a Legal Scheme Implementation of Alcohol Prohibition Marihuana and Education Drug Programs in American Education State Departments of Education Survey Commission Visits Drug Education Programs of Special Interest Marihuana Education in State Programs Surveys of College Drug Courses The Federal Government and Drug Education Research Needs and Directions Biomedical Psychosocial Legal and Law Enforcement Index of Contributors, Contractors and Consultants Research Papers Prepared for the Commission Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B23-16IA088-000636-B009-64http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/shrthist.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100009 text/html 12615HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:59:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:39:15 GMTContent-length: 12397 A Short History of the Drug Laws A Short History of the Drug Laws by the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and DrugInformation ------begin quote------- The history of nonmedical drug use, and the development ofpolicies in response to drug use, also extends back to the earlysettlement of the country. Like alcohol, the classification ofcertain drugs as legal, or illegal, has changed over time. Thesechanges sometimes had racial and class overtones. According to Mosher and Yanagisako, for example, Prohibitionwas in part a response to the drinking practices of Europeanimmigrants, who became the new lower class. Cocaine and opiumwere legal during the 19th century, and were favored drugs amongthe middle and upper classes. Cocaine became illegal after itbecame associated with African Americans followingReconstruction. Opium was first restricted in California in 1875when it became associated with Chinese immigrant workers.Marijuana was legal until the 1930s when it became associatedwith Mexicans. LSD, legal in the 1950s, became illegal in 1967when it became associated with the counterculture. ------begin quote------- ------begin full text---------- Historical Overview of Prevention Alcoholic beverages have been a part of the Nation's pastsince the landing of the Pilgrims. According to Alcohol andPublic Policy: Beyond the Shadow of Prohibition, a publicationcommissioned by NIAAA and prepared by the National Academy ofSciences, the colonists brought with them from Europe a highregard for alcoholic beverages, which were considered animportant part of their diet. Drinking was pervasive becausealcohol was regarded primarily as a healthy substance withpreventive and curative powers, not as an intoxicant. Alcohol wasalso believed to be conducive to social as well as personalhealth. It played an essential role in rituals of convivialityand collective activity, such as barn raisings. While drunkennesswas condemned and punished, it was viewed only as an abuse of aGod-given gift. The first temperance movement began in the early 1800s inresponse to dramatic increases in production and consumption ofalcoholic beverages, which also coincided with rapid demographicchanges. Agitation against ardent spirits and the public disorderthey spawned gradually increased during the 1820s. In addition,inspired by the writings of Benjamin Rush, the concept thatalcohol was addicting, and that this addiction was capable ofcorrupting the mind and the body, took hold. The American Societyof Temperance, created in 1826 by clergymen, spread theanti-drinking gospel. By 1835, out of a total population of 13million citizens, 1.5 million had taken the pledge to refrainfrom distilled spirits. The first wave of the temperance movement(1825 to 1855) resulted in dramatic reductions in the consumptionof distilled spirits, although beer drinking increased sharplyafter 1850. The second wave of the temperance movement occurred in thelate 1800s with the emergence of the Women's Christian TemperanceMovement, which, unlike the first wave, embraced the concept ofprohibition. It was marked both by the recruitment of women intothe movement and the mobilization of crusades to close downsaloons. The movement set out to remove the destructivesubstance, and the industries that promoted its use, from thecountry. The movement held that while some drinkers may escapeproblems of alcohol use, even moderate drinkers flirted withdanger. The culmination of this second wave was the passage of the18th Amendment and the Volstead Act, which took effect in 1920.While Prohibition was successful in reducing per capitaconsumption and some problems related to drinking, its socialturmoil resulted in its repeal in 1933. Since the repeal of Prohibition, the dominant view of alcoholproblems has been that alcoholism is the principal problem. Withits focus on treatment, the rise of the alcoholism movementdepoliticized alcohol problems as the object of attention, as thealcoholic was considered a deviant from the predominant styles oflife of either abstinence or "normal" drinking. Thealcoholism movement is based on the belief that chronic oraddictive drinking is limited to a few, highly susceptibleindividuals suffering from the disease of alcoholism. The diseaseconcept of alcoholism focuses on individual vulnerability, be itgenetic, biochemical, psychological, or social/cultural innature. Under this view if the collective problems of eachalcoholic are solved, it follows that society's alcohol problemwill be solved. Nevertheless, the pre-Prohibition view of alcohol as aspecial commodity has persisted in American society and is anaccepted legacy of alcohol control policies. Following Repeal,all States restricted the sale of alcoholic beverages in one wayor another in order to prevent or reduce certain alcoholproblems. In general, however, alcohol control policiesdisappeared from the public agenda as both the alcoholismmovement and the alcoholic beverage industry embraced the view,"the fault is in the man and not in the bottle." This view of alcoholism problems has also been the dominantforce in contemporary alcohol problem prevention. Until recentlythe principal prevention strategies focused on education andearly treatment. Within this view education is intended to informsociety about the disease and to teach people about the earlywarning signs so that they can initiate treatment as soon aspossible. Efforts focus on "high risk" populations andattempt to correct a suspect process or flaw in the individual,such as low self esteem or lack of social skills. The belief isthat the success of education and treatment efforts in solvingeach alcoholic's problem will solve society's alcohol problem aswell. Contemporary alcohol problem prevention began in the 1970s asnew information on the nature, magnitude, and incidence ofalcohol problems raised public awareness that alcohol can beproblematic when used by any drinker, depending upon thesituation. There was a renewed emphasis on the diverseconsequences of alcohol use--particularly trauma associated withdrinking driving, fires, and violence, as well as long termhealth consequences. The history of nonmedical drug use, and the development ofpolicies in response to drug use, also extends back to the earlysettlement of the country. Like alcohol, the classification ofcertain drugs as legal, or illegal, has changed over time. Thesechanges sometimes had racial and class overtones. According toMosher and Yanagisako, for example, Prohibition was in part aresponse to the drinking practices of European immigrants, whobecame the new lower class. Cocaine and opium were legal duringthe 19th century, and were favored drugs among the middle andupper classes. Cocaine became illegal after it became associatedwith African Americans following Reconstruction. Opium was firstrestricted in California in 1875 when it became associated withChinese immigrant workers. Marijuana was legal until the 1930swhen it became associated with Mexicans. LSD, legal in the 1950s,became illegal in 1967 when it became associated with thecounterculture. By the end of the 19th century concern had grown over theindiscriminate use of these drugs, especially the addictingpatent medicines. Cocaine, opium, and morphine were commoningredients in various potions sold over the counter. Until 1903,cocaine was an ingredient of Coca-Cola(R). Heroin, which wasisolated in 1868, was hailed as a nonaddicting treatment formorphine addiction and alcoholism. States began to enact controland prescription laws and, in 1906, Congress passed the Pure Foodand Drug Act. It was designed to control opiate addiction byrequiring labels on the amount of drugs contained in products,including opium, morphine, and heroin. It also required accuratelabeling of products containing alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine. The Harrison Act (1914) imposed a system of taxes on opiumand coca products with registration and record-keepingrequirements in an effort to control their sale or distribution.However, it did not prohibit the legal supply of certain drugs,especially opiates. Current drug laws are rooted in the 1970 ControlledSubstances Act. Under this measure drugs are classified accordingto their medical use, their potential for abuse, and theirlikelihood of producing dependence. The Act contains provisionsfor adding drugs to the schedule, and rescheduling drugs. It alsoestablishes maximum penalties for the criminal manufacture ordistribution of scheduled drugs. Increases in per capita alcohol consumption as well asincreased use of illegal drugs during the 1960s raised publicconcern regarding alcohol and other drug problems. Preventionissues gained prominence on the national level with the creationof the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA)in 1971 and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) in 1974.In addition to mandates for research and the management ofnational programs for treatment, both Institutes includedprevention components. To further prevention initiatives at the Federal level, theAnti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 created the U.S. Office for SubstanceAbuse Prevention (OSAP), which consolidated alcohol and otherdrug prevention activities under the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, andMental Health Administration (ADAMHA). The ADAMHA block grantmandate called for States to set aside 21 percent of the alcoholand drug funds for prevention. In a 1992 reorganization, OSAP waschanged to the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP), partof the new SAMHSA, retaining its major program areas, while theresearch institutes of NIAAA and NIDA transferred to NIH. The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) wasestablished by the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. Its primaryobjective was to develop a drug control policy that includedroles for the public and private sector to "restore orderand security to American neighborhoods, to dismantle drugtrafficking organizations, to help people break the habit of druguse, and to prevent those who have never used illegal drugs fromstarting." In early 1992 underage alcohol use was includedamong the drugs to be addressed by ONDCP. While Federal, State, and local governments play asubstantial role in promoting prevention agendas, much of theactivity takes place at grass roots community levels. In additionto funding from CSAP's "Community Partnerships" grantprogram, groups receive support from private sources, such as TheRobert Wood Johnson "Fighting Back" program. While alcohol and other drug problems continue to plague theNation at intolerably high levels, progress is being made.National surveys document a decline in illicit drug use and aleveling off of alcohol consumption. And indicators of problemlevels, such as alcohol-involved traffic crashes, showsignificant declines. References A Promising Future: Alcohol and Other Drug Problem PreventionServices Improvement. CSAP Prevention Monograph 10 (1992) BK191 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Main Findings 1990(1991) BKD67 Mosher, J.F. and Yanagisako, K.L. "Public Health, NotSocial Warfare: A Public Health Approach to Illegal DrugPolicy," Journal of Public Health Policy 12(3):278-322, 1991 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-17IA086-000614-B048-24http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/duapip/pipmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023024 text/html 23916HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:30:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:12:42 GMTContent-length: 23698 Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Table of Contents Letter of Transmittal Introduction Chapter One -- Defining the Issues Definitional Confusion: What is Drug Abuse? "Drug"-The All-Purpose Concept Drug Abuse: Synonym for Social Disapproval The Roots of a "Problem" The Social Response: False Premises and the Perpetuation of a Problem The Assumptions and Premises of Present Policy Elimination of Non-Medical Drug Use Risk-Taking and Health Motivation for Mood Alteration Drugs and Individual Responsibility An Overview of the Present Response Risk-Education Coercion Sickness Perpetuating the Problem Defining the Problem The Meaning of Drug Use The Incidence of Drug Use Drug Using Behavior Drug-Related Risk Risks to Individual Health Drug-Induced Behavior Dependence Liability Evaluating the Social Consequences of Drug Use Defining America's Drug Problem The Limits of Social Control The Commission's Role Chapter Two Drug Using Behavior in the United States I. Drug Use in the General Population Tobacco and Alcohol Use of Proprietary and Ethical Psychoactive Substances Incidence and Prevalance Demographic Characteristics Motivations for Use Multi-Drug Use Alcohol, Ethical and Proprietary Psychoactive Drugs Marihuana and Ethical and Proprietary Psychoactive Drugs Concurrent Drug Usage Illicit Drug Use in the General Population Marihuana LSD, Other Hallucinogens Glue, Other Inhalants Cocaine Heroin Multi-Drug Use II. Drug Use Among Students Survey Methodology Comparative National Survey Student Data Incidence of Student Drug Use Alcohol Marihuana Inhalants Hallucinogens Stimulants Depressants Opiates Patterns of Student Drug Use Present and Future Drug Involvement Frequency and Intensity of Drug Use Duration of Student Drug Use Multi-Drug Use III. A Typology of Drug-Using Behavior Experimental Use Social-Recreational Use Circumstantial-Situational Use Intensified Drug Use Compulsive Drug Use IV. Psychosocial and Institutional Influences on Drug-Using Behavior Broad Cultural Influences Drugs and Youth Experimentation, Availability and Need Personal Dissatisfaction and the Search for "Something of Value" Age and Responsibility The Impact of Extended Education Institutional Sources of Identity Mood Alteration in America Factors Bearing on Drug Dependence A Final Note Chapter Three The Social Impact of Drug Dependence andDrug-Induced Behavior I. Drug Dependence Terminological Confusion Addiction Habituation The Search for Precision Drug Dependence Excising "Addiction" Toward a Functional Understanding of Drug Dependence Psychological Dependence: The Primary Reinforcer The Pharmacological Component: Reinforcement Potential Psycho-Social Components The Development of Dependence: Conditioning The Dependence Continuum Measuring the Degree of Dependence: Psychological Components Physical Dependence: The Secondary Reinforcer Summary Evaluating the Social Impact of Drug Dependence Dependence, Health and Behavior The Vulnerability Factor The Relevance of Social Response Present Social Impact Alcohol Heroin Barbiturates Amphetamines and Related Stimulants Cocaine Hallucinogens Cannabis II. Drug Induced Behavior Impact on Perception Impact on Memory Alteration of Mental States Impairment of Psychomotor Function Summary III.Impact on Public Safety Drugs and Crime Drugs and Their Criminogenic Effects Alcohol Marihuana Barbiturates Amphetamines Opiates Cocaine Hallucinogens Other Psychoactive Substances Summary Psychosocial Characteristics of Drug-Dependent Persons: Implications for Public Safety Social and Demographic Characteristics Age Educational Status Income, Occupation and Employment Status Home Environment and Marital Status Psychological Characteristics Problems in Inferring Causation The Costs of Heroin Dependence Cost to the Heroin-Dependent Person Cost to Society from Criminal Activity Criminal Justice Costs: Processing the Drug-Dependent Person The Effect of Drug Treatment on Crime Current Research Findings A Realistic Appraisal Drugs and Driving Research Limitations Research Findings Alcohol Marihuana Other Psychoactive Substances IV. Impact on Public Health and Welfare Public Health and Welfare: A Preventive Concept Assessing the Public Health and Welfare Impact of Drug Use The Population of Heavy Alcohol Users Economic Loss Death Alcohol Heroin Barbiturates Medical Complications of Chronic Drug Use Impact on the Family Structure Compensatory Social Costs Framing a Public Health Response Chapter Four Toward a Coherent Social Policy The Process Goals and Premises Drugs and Social Responsibility Irresponsible Use Discouragement and Social Tolerance Responsible Decision Making Risks and Perceived Advantages Designing a Differential Response to Drug Use I. The Availability Decision Models of Availability The Calculus: An Overview Relative Social Cost Efficacy of Controls Cost of Controls The Social Context of the Availability Decision The Present System Availability Not Limited As To Purpose of Consumption Availability Limited As To Purpose of Consumption Substances Not Available For Consumption Specific Recommendations Opiates Cocaine Amphetamines Barbiturates Non-Barbiturate Sedatives Minor Tranquilizers Hallucinogens Marihuana Alcohol Implementing Restrictions on Availability The Role of International Agreements Federal Enforcement Policy State Enforcement Policy II. The Consumption-Intervention Decision An Overview of the Possession Offense Deviance, Deterrence and Symbolism Philosophical Conflict Constitutionality Functional Overview Deterrence Social Costs of Enforcement Possession and Supply Symbolism Sickness and Treatment Origins of the Cult of Curability Addiction and Treatment: The Early Days The Therapeutic Premise Takes Hold Therapeutic Intervention Comes Under Attack Harnessing the Therapeutic Response Involuntary "Civil" Commitment: The Problems of a Therapeutic Response Therapy and the Criminal Process Dangerousness and Prevention Crime and the Public Safety Contagion and the Public Health and Welfare The Appropriate Role of Preventive Intervention Conclusion: The Possession Offense and Its Enforcement Functional Enforcement Role of the Police III. Defining the Government's Role Governmental Competence General Guidelines Analyzing the Government Response An Overview of the Government Response The Special Action Office: A Stopgap Failures of the Present System Identification of the Nature and Extent of Drug Use Definition of goals and objectives for drug-related functions Effective planning Affective control of resource allocation Coordination among federal agencies Drug-related functions within agencies whose primary mission is not solving drug problems Evaluation of programs in terms of their effectiveness Evaluation of programs in terms of efficiency Separation of drug and alcohol activities Reorganizing the Governmental Response Bringing the Drug Effort Under Control The Structure of the Unified Approach Organization of Response at the Community Level IV. Treatment and Rehabilitation An Overview of the Present Response Uncertainty About the Illness Uncertainty About the Objective of Treatment Diversity of Method History of the Treatment of Opiate Dependence 1870-1900: The Early Years 1900-1915: Years of Optimism 1915-1930: Confidence Wanes 1930-1960: The Dry Years The Sixties: Society Turns to Therapy Again Present Methods and Models of Treatment Hospitalization Ambulatory Drug-Free Treatment Therapeutic Communities Methadone Maintenance Antagonist Treatment Multi-Modality Programs Treatment for Non-Opiate Drug Dependence The Role of the Law in Treatment Legal Controls as Therapy Civil Procedures Criminal Procedures Legal Control of the Treatment Process Heroin Maintenance Conclusions and Recommendations on Treatment of Dependence Federal Funding and Services Federal Evaluation State Treatment Programs The Role of the Legal System in State Programs Uniformity of State Law Emergency Treatment of Drug Users V. Prevention The Information-Education Explosion Goals of Information-Education Prevention Information Policy Education Training The Media and Drug Use Prevention Other Prevention Strategies and Techniques Summary and Conclusion VI. Research A New Interest in Research The Need for a Directed Research Plan Incidence, Frequency and Intensity of Drug Use Etiology and Consequences of Drug Use The Role of the Criminal Justice System Efficacy of Treatment Other Areas VII. The Private Response The Health Professions Pharmaceutical Industry Alcohol Industry Legal Profession Industry Colleges and Universities Mass Media The Religious Community The Family Chapter Five Looking Ahead The Immediate Future: The Goal of the Commission's Recommendations Changing Attitudes Filling the Informational Gaps Unifying the Government Response Developing the Private Response Improving Controls on Availability Rationalizing Consumption Controls Expanding Treatment, Rehabilitation and Prevention Services The Immediate Future Policy Making Over the Long Term Confronting the Basic Question Reappraisal: The Need for Evaluation Sources Bibliography Consultants Contractors and Contributors Research Papers Prepared for Commission Recommendations Index of First Year Recommendations Index of Second Year Recommendations Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding WT01-B23-18IA088-000636-B009-303http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/studies.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100312 text/html 49952HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:03:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:56:02 GMTContent-length: 49736 Major Studies of Drugs and Drug Policy - Titles andSummaries Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Major Studies of Drugs and Drug Policy This page will contain full-text copies of the majorstudies of drugs and drug policy as they become available and aswe have resources to scan them and put them on the web. Readerswho wish to fund the addition of new research to the web shouldsee How You CanSupport the Schaffer Library. We are currently seeking copies of any reports for which wedo not yet have full text. These reports are marked with We also invite submissions of major reports which are notyet listed here. MajorStudies Table of Contents - Titles only Year Country Title 1894 India Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report This 3,281-page, seven-volume classic report on the marijuana problem in India by British and concluded: "Viewing the subject generally, it may be added that moderate use of these drugs is the rule, and that the excessive use is comparatively exceptional. The moderate use produces practically no ill effects." Nothing of significance in the report's conclusions has been proven wrong in the intervening century 1905 US Report of the Committee Appointed by the Philippine Commission to Investigate The Use of Opium and the Traffic Therein...Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Dept., Philippines Summary not yet available. 1926 England Departmental Committee on Morphine and Heroin Addiction, Report (The Rolleston Report): This landmark study by a distinguished group of British doctors appointed by the government codified existing practices regarding the maintenance of addicts on heroin and morphine by individual doctors and recommended that they continue without police or medical society interference. In coming to this conclusion, these physicians displayed a humane regard for the addicts in their care, perhaps due to their view of the nature of narcotic addiction: "Me condition must be regarded as a manifestation of disease and not as a mere form of vicious indulgence." The British addiction experts took pains to state that they did not agree with the opinions of "some eminent physicians, especially in the United States" that addicts "could always be cured by sudden withdrawal." 1928 US The Opium Problem by Charles E. Terry and Mildred Pellens Summary not yet available. 1929 US Panama Canal Zone Military Investigations (US Military, 1916-29) After an exhaustive study of the smoking of marijuana among American soldiers stationed in the zone, the panel of civilian and military experts recommended that "no steps be taken by the Canal Zone authorities to prevent the sale or use of Marihuana." The committee also concluded that "there is no evidence that Marihuana as grown and used [in the Canal Zone] is a 'habit-forming' drug." 1930 US Wickersham Commission Report on Alcohol Prohibition Summary not yet available. 1944 US The LaGuardia Committee Report Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in the City of New York commissioned by Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia, written by the New York Academy of Medicine, and published by the City of New York in 1944 This study is viewed by many experts as the best study of any drug viewed in its social, medical, and legal context. The committee covered thousands of years of the history of marijuana and also made a detailed examination of conditions In New York City. Among its conclusions: "The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead to addiction in the medical sense of the word." And: "The use of marihuana does not lead to morphine or heroin or cocaine addiction, and no effort is made to create a market for those narcotics by stimulating the practice of marihuana smoking." Finally: "The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects of marihuana smoking in New York City is unfounded." 1961 England Interdepartmental Committee, Drug Addiction, (The First Brain Report) When the Brain Committee first met at the invitation of the minister of health, its mission was to review the advice given by the Rolleston Committee in 1926. That advice had been to continue to allow doctors to treat addicts with maintenance doses of powerful drugs when the doctors deemed it medically helpful for the patient. Brain I reiterated that advice and in this first report recommended no changes of any significance on the prescribing powers of doctors. This report expanded on one important point alluded to in Rolleston-the authenticity of the existence of "stabilized addicts." While many American experts doubt their existence, this report explained, "careful scrutiny of the histories of more than a hundred persons classified as addicts reveals that many of them who have been taking small and regular doses for years show little evidence of tolerance and are often leading reasonably satisfactory lives." Six "case histories of known stabilized addicts" were included in an appendix. They were mature, older patients, functioning normally on what would be huge doses of drugs by American standards. "Mr. F.," for example, a clerical worker, was receiving the equivalent of 200 milligrams of morphine tablets each day. It is likely that these patients and their doctors would be dealt with as criminals in the United States. 1961 US Drug Addiction: Crime or Disease? Joint Committee of the American Bar Association and the American Medical Association on Narcotic Drugs, Interim and Final Reports, 1961: This report was the result of the only major combined study of drug policy made by two of the most important professional societies in the country. Chaired by attorney Rufus King of Washington, D.C.. the committee presented a direct challenge to the tough policies of Federal Bureau of Narcotics Director Harry Anslinger, a philosophical ancestor of the previous "drug czar," William Bennett. The blue-ribbon committee included a senior federal judge and was advised by Indiana University's Alfred Lindesmith, one of the most distinguished addiction scholars in history. The report observed, "Drug addiction is primarily a problem for the physician rather than the policeman, and it should not be necessary for anyone to violate the criminal law solely because he is addicted to drugs." The report concluded that drug addiction was a disease, not a crime, that harsh criminal penalties were destructive, that drug prohibition ought to be reexamined, and that experiments should be conducted with British-style maintenance clinics for narcotic addicts. 1965 England Interdepartmental Committee, Drug Addiction, Second Report, (The Second Brain Report) Brain II has been consistently misinterpreted by leading American scholars and officials. It did not recommend the dismantling of the British prescription system nor the compulsory registration of addicts, as has been claimed. Instead, Brain II urged that doctors who wished to prescribe "restricted drugs" to addicts for the purpose of maintenance be required to obtain a special license from the Home Office; treatment centers be established for treating addicts who were to be regarded as sick and not criminal; and doctors and other medical personnel be mandated to "notify" the Home Office when they encountered an addict in the course of their professional work. Originally, the category of restricted drugs included heroin and cocaine; now, dipipanone has been added. The core of the British system remains, however, and in recent years has been reinvigorated. Approximately 200 doctors with special licenses are free to prescribe all drugs, including the restricted medicines, for maintenance of addicts. Also, any doctor, unlike those in the U.S., may prescribe all of the other drugs for maintenance, including, for example, injectable morphine and methadone. Brain II in the end was aimed at controlling a few overprescribing doctors, not at adopting the American system of treating addicts as the enemy. 1968 England Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence, Cannabis, (The Wootton Report) This study report on marijuana and hashish was prepared by a group that included some of the leading drug abuse experts of the United Kingdom. These impartial experts worked as a subcommittee under the lead of Baroness Wootton of Abinger. The basic tone and substantive conclusions were similar to all of the other great commission reports. The Wootton group specifically endorsed the conclusions of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission and the La Guardia Committee. Typical findings included the following: There is no evidence that in Western society serious physical dangers are directly associated with the smoking of cannabis. It can clearly be argued on the world picture that cannabis use does not lead to heroin addiction. The evidence of a link with violent crime is far stronger with alcohol than with the smoking of cannabis. There is no evidence that this activity ... is producing in otherwise normal people conditions of dependence or psychosis, requiring medical treatment. 1970 Canada Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs, Interim Report, (The Le Dain Report) The distinguished Canadian experts on this governmental commission were led by law school dean, later Supreme Court Justice, Gerald Le Dain. The report was similar to the other great commission reports in terms of its non-martial, calm approach to the facts and in its belief that marijuana use did not constitute a great threat to the public welfare. The official governmental commission was remarkable in the extent to which its report portrayed casual drug users as decent, thoughtful citizens whose views deserved the fullest possible hearing by the government in the process of developing drug control strategies. A mother of four and school teacher was quoted in the report as saying: "When I smoke grass I do it in the same social way that I take a glass of wine at dinner or have a drink at a party. I do not feel that is one of the great and beautiful experiences of my life; I simply feel that it is pleasant, and I think it ought to be legalized." The commission did not ask for that change immediately but instead recommended that serious consideration be given to legalization of personal possession in the near future. The report also urged that police and prosecutors go easy on casual users and keep them out of jail as often as possible. 1970 US The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree of Knowledge: An Inquiry into the Legal History of American Marihuana Prohibition by Professors Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H. Whitebread, II, Virginia Law Review, Volume 56, October 1970 Number 6 This is the most definitive history of the marijuana laws. See The History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs for the author's short version of this history. The authors concluded that the marijuana laws were motivated by three major factors. The first state marijuana prohibition law came in Utah in 1915 and was enacted into law along with a number of other Mormon religious prohibitions. The early state marijuana laws in the Southwest and West were passed because "All Mexicans are crazy and marijuana is what makes them crazy." That is, they were the result of racial prejudice against newly arrived Mexican immigrants. The other early state marijuana laws were passed out of the fear that opiate addicts, who had been deprived of legal access to opiates by the Harrison Tax Act of 1914, would turn to marijuana. In other words, they were afraid that opiate use would lead to marijuana. The first Federal prohibition on marijuana was passed for reasons which can only be described as "nonsense," including the racial reasons listed above, as well as allegations that marijuana caused young lovers to elope. Interested readers may want to review the original source documents under Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. 1972 US The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs, by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors of Consumer Reports Magazine This is a landmark study, a "must-read", used as a basic textbook at major universities. This web page will ultimately include chapter by chapter summaries of the main points of this book. It is certainly one of the first books which should be read by people who want to know about this subject 1972 US The Koerner Commission Report, State of Ohio Summary not yet available. 1972 US Dealing With Drug Abuse: A Report to the Ford Foundation, by the Drug Abuse Survey Project. Summary not yet available. 1972 US Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding, National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse This commission was directed by Raymond P. Shafer, former Republican governor of Pennsylvania, and had four sitting, elected politicians among its eleven members. The commission also had leading addiction scholars among its members and staff and was appointed by President Nixon in the midst of the drug-war hysteria at that time. While the commission supported much existing policy, it produced two reflective reports, this being the final comprehensive document, which recommended research, experimentation, and humane compromise. The first recommendations of the commission were: Possession of marihuana for personal use would no longer be an offense, but marihuana possessed in public would remain contraband subject to summary seizure and forfeiture. Casual distribution of small amounts of marihuana for no remuneration, or Insignificant remuneration not involving profit, would no longer be an offense. The recommendations in this reports were endorsed by (among others) the American Medical Association, the American Bar Association, The American Association for Public Health, the National Education Association, and the National Council of Churches. 1973 US Drug Use in America: Problem in Perspective, National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Summary not yet available. 1977 US The Nation's Toughest Drug Law: Evaluating the New York Experience, by the Joint Committee on New York Drug Law Evaluation, of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York This commission was formed to review the Rockefeller drug laws, the toughest in the nation. The report basically concluded that tougher sentences had provided little, if any, benefit. Instead, they had increased the incentive for drug sellers to commit violence and had clogged the criminal justice system. The report also found that tougher penalties had done nothing material to reduce drug use but had instead exacerbated some of the existing problems with drug abuse. 1980 US The Facts About Drug Abuse, The Drug Abuse Council A 1972 report to the Ford Foundation, "Dealing With Drug Abuse," concluded that current drug policies were unlikely to eliminate or greatly affect drug abuse. This conclusion led to the creation and joint funding by four major foundations of a broadly based, independent national Drug Abuse Council. The council reviewed and assessed laws, programs, and projects-federal, state, and local, private and governmental-related to use and misuse of psychoactive drugs. In its final report, the council's board of directors offered a set of observations considered central to the process of reaching mom consistent, coherent, and responsible approaches to drug use and misuse. Psychoactive substances have been available throughout recorded history and will remain so. To try to eliminate them completely is unrealistic. The use of psychoactive drugs is pervasive, but misuse is much less frequent, and the failure to make the distinction between use and misuse creates the impression that all use is misuse and leads to addiction. There is a clear relationship between drug misuse and pervasive societal ills such as poverty, racial discrimination, and unemployment, and we can expect drug misuse so long as these adverse social conditions exist. The price of an effective strategy to eliminate drug misuse through the criminal law would be perceived by many Americans as too high in terms of invasions of privacy and abrogations of individual liberties. Drug laws and policies attend insufficiently to the problems of people misusing drugs and too much to the properties of drugs themselves, as though the drugs were somehow inherently to blame. Too many Americans have unrealistic expectations about what drug policies and programs can accomplish. We have a regrettable tendency to blame our drug problems on others, failing to recognize that our drug problems are products of our own national experience. The council's directors then offered a set of suggestions, Principal among them are the following, Treatment for drug dependence should be available chiefly because people need help, rather than as a crime control or behavior control method. There should be a major study of the effects of drug laws and their enforcement on personal decisions to use or not use illicit drugs. Legislative efforts to decriminalize at both state and federal levels the possession of small amounts of marijuana for personal use should continue. The report ends with the recommendation: "... that serious consideration be given to the use of state and local option as a means of attempting solutions appropriate in one place but not in others. Local options could encourage greater flexibility and ingenuity rather than reliance on an unrealistic, rigid homogeneity in national drug policy. We need to respond to the diversity of people who use and misuse drugs, base all our policies on a consistent set of principles seeking to discourage misuse, and keep our seemingly innate drug-using behavior within reasonable limits through means. which do not themselves produce more harm than they prevent. 1982 US An Analysis of Marihuana Policy, National Research Council of the National Academy of Science The NAS Committee on Substance Abuse and Habitual Behavior was composed of some of the leading American experts on medicine, addiction treatment, law, business, and public policy. These experts reviewed all of the available evidence on every aspect of the marijuana question. The committee then recommended that the country experiment with a system that would allow states to set up their own methods of controlling marijuana as is now done with alcohol. Under this approach, federal criminal penalties would be removed, and each state could decide to legalize the drug and impose regulations concerning hours of sale, age limits, and taxation. In the same vein as all the previous major objective studies, this report stated that excessive marijuana use could cause serious harm, that such use was rare, and that, on balance, the current policy of total prohibition was socially and personally destructive. The report placed great emphasis on building up public education and informal social controls, which often have a greater impact on drug abuse than the criminal law. Regarding the possibility of disaster for our youth under legalization, the report observed: There is reason to believe that widespread uncontrolled use would not occur under regulation. Indeed, regulation might facilitate patterns of controlled use by diminishing the "forbidden fruit" aspect of the drug and perhaps increasing the likelihood that an adolescent would be introduced to the drug through families and friends, who practice moderate use, rather than from their heaviest-using, most drug-involved peers, 1988 US DEA Docket No. 86-22, DEA Chief Administrative Law Judge ruling on medical marijuana This is the ruling of the DEA's own Chief Administrative Law Judge which arose as the result of a suit against the Federal Government, seeking to reschedule marijuana for medical purposes. Before issuing his ruling, Judge Francis Young heard two years of testimony from both sides of the issue and accumulated fifteen volumes of research. This was undoubtedly the most comprehensive study of medical marijuana done to date. Judge Young concluded that marijuana was one of the safest therapeutically active substances known to man, that it had never caused a single human death, and that the Federal Government's policy toward medical marijuana is "unconscionable." 1989 US AIDS and Drug Misuse, Part 1, Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs, 1988; Part 2, 1989 "The spread of HIV is a greater danger to individual and public health than drug misuse," declared the leading drug abuse and health experts of the United Kingdom who sit on this distinguished quasi-governmental advisory group. This concept operated as the guiding principle in this commission report, one part issued in 1988, another in 1989. In stark contrast to the Bush administration's war plans, the British council provided a comprehensive health plan that seeks to prevent the use of drugs, as is the American goal. However, the plan has realistic goals regarding drug abusers; abstinence in the American mode, where possible, but above all else, health and life. Thus, the Advisory Council accepted the lessons of the "harm reduction" programs of the Liverpool area and recommended that they be spread to the entire United Kingdom. Some of these lessons involve needle exchanges and prescribed drugs for addicts. The report even went beyond the Liverpool experience when these leading British experts quietly observed, "We believe that there is a place for an expansion of residential facilities where drug misusers may gain better health, skills, and self-confidence whilst in receipt of prescribed drugs." Thus, while the United States is planning more prison space for drug addicts, the United Kingdom is contemplating more hostels where addicts could be taught to live more healthy, more self-confident and more productive lives in the community. 1989 US Report of the Research Advisory Panel for the State of California This panel, appointed by the state legislature of California to regulate all research on controlled substances, reviewed drug policy and recommended that "the legislature act to redirect this, state away from the present destructive pathways of drug control." The report noted that we had followed a path of prohibition over the last fifty years and concluded that this policy "has been manifestly unsuccessful in that we are now using more and a greater variety of drugs, legal and illegal." In addition, the failure of prohibition has resulted in "societal overreaction (that] has burdened us with ineffectual, inhumane, and expensive treatment, education and enforcement efforts." They recommended a move toward the formulation of "legislation aiming at regulation and decriminalization" and the winding down of the war on drugs. The Research Advisory Panel made three specific recommendations for initial legislative action. These were permit the possession of syringes and needles; permit the cultivation of marijuana for personal use; and in order to project an attitude of disapproval of all drug use, take a token action in forbidding the sale or consumption of alcohol in state-supported institutions devoted in part or whole to patient care or educational activity. The panel recommended immediate and innovative action, concluding it is "incontrovertible that whatever policies we have been following over the past generations must not be continued unexamined and unmodified since our actions to date have favored the development of massive individual and societal problems." 1991 US "The Twin Epidemics of Substance Use and HIV" The National Commission on AIDS This indictment of current drug policy focuses on the relationship between the spread of HIV and drug use. The commission criticized the federal government's failure to recognize that these are twin epidemics and found that the "strategy of interdiction and increased prison sentences has done nothing to change the stark statistics" showing spread of AIDS by drug users. The commission singled out the Office of National Drug Control Policy for ignoring AIDS and "neglecting the real public health and treatment measures which could and must be taken to halt the spread." The commission put forward five recommendations: Expand drug treatment so that all who apply for treatment can be accepted into treatment programs. Remove legal barriers to the purchase and possession of injection equipment. The federal government must take the lead in developing and maintaining programs to prevent HIV transmission related to licit and illicit drugs. Research and epidemiologic studies on the relationships between licit and illicit drug use and HIV transmission should be greatly expanded and funding should be increased, not reduced or merely held constant. All levels of government and the private sector need to mount a serious and sustained attack on the social problems of poverty, homelessness, and lack of medical care that promote licit and illicit drug use in American society. The National Commission on AIDS could be described as the echo of the British Advisory Council on the misuse of drugs in its report on AIDS and drug misuse, as it made virtually the same policy recommendations. The commission concluded that "the federal government must recognize that HIV and substance use is one of the issues of paramount concern within the 'war on drugs.' Any program which does not deal with the duality of the HIV/drug epidemic is destined to fail." The commission urged the federal government to move away from a law enforcement approach in controlling drugs toward a public health approach, which to date has "been seriously neglected." 1994 US A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition, A Report of the Special Committee on Drugs and the Law of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York The Bar of the City of New York studied the issue of drugs and drug policy for about five years and concluded that the only reasonable way to correct the current problems would be to repeal the Federal laws on these drugs in their entirety and allow the states to develop their own programs, similar to the situation with alcohol. 1994 Australia Legislative Options for Cannabis. Australian Government Summary not yet available. 1994 US Technologies for Understanding and Preventing Substance Abuse and Addiction -- US Government Office of Technology Assessment -- October 18, 1994 Summary not yet available. 1996 Australia Drugs and our Community - Report of the Premier's Drug Advisory Council, Melbourne: Victorian Government, March, 1996 Summary not yet available. 1996 US Report and Recommendations of the Drug Policy Task Force, New York County Lawyers Association The recommendations are: Pursue Alternative Models in Establishing Future Drug Policy Provide Immediate Sentencing Relief and Additional Judicial Discretion in Criminal Prosecution of Drug Cases Reduce the Harms Associated With Substance Abuse and Drug Prohibition Concentrate Law Enforcement Resources on Reducing Violent Crime and Prosecution of Violent Criminal Offenders Reshape the Drug Policy Debate -- Return to Objective Analysis and Realistic Goals Implement Public Education Campaign on Drug Use and Substance Abuse Decriminalize Marijuana Reverse Encroachments on Civil Rights and Restore "Due Process of Law" Provide Alternative Social and Economic Opportunity for Inner City Youth End War on Youth and Inner City Communities -- Restore Confidence and Integrity in Government 1996 Australia Beyond Prohibition - Report of the Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law Reform Project - September 1996 This recent report from Australia explores specific options for alternatives to the current drug prohibition. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B23-19IA031-000655-B037-177http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlrintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112351 text/html 5854HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:23:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:52 GMTContent-length: 5637 Legal History of American Marijuana Prohibition -Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OFKNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRY INTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICANMARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** 1. INTRODUCTION Law may be rooted in fiction as well as fact. Indeed, a publicpolicy conceived in ignorance may be continuously reaffirmed,ever more vehemently, so long as its origins remain obscure orits fallacy unexposed. Yet once a spark of truth ignites thepublic opinion process, the authority of time will not stay theflames of controversy. In stable times the policy may soon bereversed or modified to comport with reality. In volatile times,however, a single controversy may lose its urgency. Fueled byflames generated by related public issues, the fire may spread;truth may again be consumed in the explosive collision ofcompeting cultural ideologies. So it has been with marijuana.' Suppressed for forty yearswithout significant public attention, the "killer weed"has suddenly surfaced as the preferred euphoriant of millions ofAmericans. Hardly a day passes without public exposure topropaganda from one side or the other. Hardly a day passeswithout arrests of newsworthy figures for violations of marijuanalaws. Before legislatures and courts, the law is attacked anddefended with equal fervor. Sociological, medical and policetestimony regarding the drug's effects is delivered feverishly toan attentive public. Yet, apart from some expedient peripheral actions, little hasbeen done. Detailed studies have been commissioned, but there hasbeen no significant reconsideration of basic assumptions. Becausethe marijuana issue has become ensnared in broader socialpolemics, it has been stalemated. Stability and change, defianceand repression, hippieism and middle-Americanism, "law andorder" and protest politics define the cultural milieu ofwhich the marijuana issue is viewed as but a symptom. This Article is motivated by twin concerns: that the flagrantdisregard of marijuana laws bespeaks a growing disenchantmentwith the capacity of our legal system rationally to ordersociety, and that the assimilation of the marijuana issue intolarger social conflicts has consigned the debate to the publicviscera instead of the public mind. Through a historical analysisof the marijuana laws we hope to refocus the debate. Anunderstanding of the origins of the laws might modulate thechallengers' hostile accusations and at the same time promote inlegislators an awareness of their own responsibility. For the purposes both of description and evaluation, law isinseparable from the process by which it is adopted and thevalues it manifests. Accordingly, our history focuses both on thepublic policy formation process and on evolving patterns of ourculture. With respect to policy, formation, marijuana's legalhistory is a significant illustration of the interaction of thepublic opinion, legislative and judicial processes, and, in abroader sense, the relation between folkways and gateways. Withrespect to its value-content, the evolution of marijuana policyreflects quite precisely emerging cultural attitudes towardpluralism, privacy and individual pursuit of pleasure in anincreasingly mechanized and depersonalized technological society. 1Throughout its tumultuous history, the common name of thecannabis drug has been spelled in numerous ways-marihuana,meriguana, marijuana, marijuana. We will use the last spellingbecause it appears most often in modern publications and conformsmore nearly to the Spanish. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge WT01-B23-20IA031-000655-B037-215http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlr1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112412 text/html 102087HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:23:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:46:57 GMTContent-length: 101868 The Antecedents: Criminalization of Narcotics and Alcohol Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H. Whitebread, II II. THE ANTECEDENTS: CRIMINALIZATION OF NARCOTICS AndALCOHOL The restrictive public policy with respect to marijuana,initiated in the late twenties and thirties and perpetuated tothe present day, has never been an isolated phenomenon. At eachstage of its development marijuana policy has been heavilyinfluenced by other social issues because the drug has generallybeen linked with broader cultural patterns. Particularly at itsinception, nationwide anti-marijuana legislation and its fate inthe courts were inseparably linked with the earlieranti-narcotics and prohibition experiences. In fact, the facilitywith which marijuana policy was initiated directly related to theastoundingly sudden and extreme alteration of public narcoticsand alcohol policy between 1900 and 1920. In 1906 there were only three dry states, and judicialprecedent abounded for the proposition that the right to possessalcohol for private consumption was an inalienable right. Yet, by1917, twenty states had enacted prohibitionary legislation andmost others were contemplating it. Two years later the eighteenthamendment and the Volstead Act had been enacted, and it was afederal crime to possess alcohol even for the purpose of drinkingit within the home. Similarly, in 1900 only a handful of statesin any way regulated traffic in narcotic drugs-opium, cocaine,morphine and heroin-even though all but heroin had been availablefor a decade or more. Yet, by 1914, all states had enacted sometype of prohibitionary legislation, and the national governmenthad enacted the Harrison Narcotic Act. There were many major differences between the temperance andanti-narcotics movements. The temperance movement was a matter ofvigorous public debate; the anti-narcotics movement was not.Temperance legislation was the product of a highly organizednationwide lobby; narcotics legislation was largely ad hoc.Temperance legislation was designed to eradicate known evilsresulting from alcohol abuse; narcotics legislation was largelyanticipatory. On the other hand, there were striking similarities betweenthe two movements. Both were first directed against the evils oflarge scale use and only later against all use. Most of therhetoric was the same: These euphoriants produced crime,pauperism and insanity. Both began on the state level and latersecured significant congressional action. Both ultimately foundfavor with the courts, provoking interchangeable dissentingopinions. We do not propose to unearth new truths about the events ofthis period. However, we do believe that a familiarity with thepolitical and judicial response to the alcohol and narcoticsproblems is essential to an understanding of the eventualsuppression of marijuana. We believe further that anunderstanding of the relation between public opinion and anysumptuary law is germane to a discussion of the predicament ofcurrent marijuana legislation. Finally, since much of the currentdebate about marijuana is focused on its harmful effects ascompared with those of narcotics and alcohol, the evolution ofpublic policy in those areas is particularly material. A. A Review of the Temperance Movement Although aggressive prohibition campaigns had been mounted inevery state in 1851-69,1 and again in 1880-90, in 1903 only Maine(1884), Kansas (1880) and North Dakota (1889) were completely drystates.2 Ernest Cherrington, the chronicler par excellence of theProhibition movement, blamed the failure of the first thrust inpart on the intervention of the slavery question, which siphonedthe moral fervor of the people from the temperance movement .4The failure of the second campaign he attributed to the inabilityof the prohibition activists to compete politically with growingliquor interests that dominated state and local governments.5 By 1906, however, the progress of the anti-saloon arm of thetemperance movement in local option contests" and theadoption of alcohol prohibition by the people of Oklahoma in aprovision of their constitution ratified upon admission tostatehood 7 signalled a new crusade for state prohibitionarylegislation. The Oklahoma vote so "electrified the moralforces of other states" 8 that by 1913 six additional stateshad enacted statewide prohibition, and half of the remainingstates were contemplating action.9 Perhaps the most significant development during this periodoccurred on the national level. The Supreme Court had earlierdeclared the police powers of the states, under which stateprohibition laws were enacted, impotent to prevent importation ofliquor from a wet state, of which there were still many, into adry state and to stay the sale and delivery of such liquor to thebuyer while in the original package." After a congressional attempt to deal with the decision in1890 aborted in the courts," the buyer of liquor shipped ininterstate commerce still had the right to receive and thereforeto use such liquor. But in 1913 Congress, by the Webb-Kenyon Act,12 filled the gap by prohibiting the shipment of liquor from onestate to another to be used in violation of the laws of thelatter; dry states could thus enforce their prohibition laws Themere passage of this law, according to against imported liquor.13 Cherrington, committed Congress to a policy that recognizedthe liquor traffic as an outlaw trade and indicated congressionaldesire to assist the dry states. 14 By November 1913, the tide had decidedly turned. More thanhalf the population and 71 percent of the area of the UnitedStates were under prohibitionary laws.", Accordingly, theFifteenth National Convention of the Anti-Saloon League ofAmerica unanimously endorsed immediate passage of NationalConstitutional Prohibition, whereupon the National TemperanceCouncil was formed to combine the forces of the varioustemperance organizations toward this end. 16 By April 4, 1917, when a joint resolution was introduced inthe Senate proposing an amendment to the Constitution prohibitingthe manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquorswithin the United States for beverage purposes, 17 eighty percentof the territory of the United States was dry." Adopted bythe constitutional majorities of both houses on December 18,1917, the eighteenth amendment was ratified by the thirty-sixthstate on January 16, 1919, and became effective on January 16,1920.19 The Volstead Act," passed on October 28, 1919,pursuant to section 2 of the eighteenth amendment, outlawedpossession of intoxicating liquor and therefore wentsignificantly beyond the amendment itself. The National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement (theWickersham Commission) attributed the passage of the eighteenthamendment not to public opposition to use of intoxicatingbeverages," although this was indeed the view of many of theleaders of the movement, but rather to antipathy to three majorrelated evils: excessive consumption, political corruption andlicensed saloons .22 Excessive use increased with the commercialization ofproduction and distribution, and the expansion of saloons. Publicresentment against the corrupting influence of the large liquordealers in local politics, especially in the larger cities,tended to focus public attention on removing a cancer from thebody politic. Finally, the institution that most strongly arousedpublic sentiment against liquor traffic was the licensed saloon,itself the symbol of intemperance and corruption. Owned orcontrolled by the large brewers or wholesalers, centers ofpolitical activity, homes of commercialized vice, the saloonswere the betes noires of middle-American public opinion. Because public opinion was largely opposed only to thesocio-political consequences of massive liquor traffic, theenforcement of total abstinence under the eighteenth amendmentbecame increasingly difficult. By 1931 it was an accepted factthat the upper and middle classes were "drinking in largenumbers in quite frank disregard of the declared policy" ofthe Volstead Act." The difficulties of securing compliance in such circumstanceswere aggravated by an inadequately designed enforcement strategy,24, public resentment of the lawless tactics of prohibitionagents, 25 and the lack of any sustained attempt at publiceducation.26 For twelve years, however, millions of dollars werespent by federal and state governments in a fruitless effort tosecure compliance with the law. Contemporary legal observers wereparticularly incensed by the dilution of constitutionalprotections, especially those provided by the fourth amendment,which was sanctioned by the courts in response to the "feltneeds" of securing compliance through enforcement alone.27 Although many plans were advanced for changing the prohibitionlaws to mitigate the lawlessness rampant during this period, aslate as 1931 even its most vigorous opponents felt that repeal ofthe eighteenth amendment was politically unfeasible.28 By 1932,however, public opinion had become so inflamed that theDemocratic National Convention included repeal in the partyplatform."' Proposed by Congress on February 20, 1933, thetwenty-first amendment was ratified by the thirty sixth state onDecember 5, 1933. B. Anti-Narcotics Legislation to 1914 For our purposes, the major feature of temperance history isthe responsiveness of the political process to public opinion.Whether or not a majority of Americans ever favored prohibitionand whether or not the thrust of public opinion was everaccurately assessed, the public opinion process was attuned tothe question for half a century. The alleged evils of alcoholabuse were matters of public knowledge; the proper governmentalresponse was a subject of endless public debate; enactment andrepeal of Prohibition were attended by widespread publicparticipation. In contrast, the early narcotics legislation was promulgatedlargely in a vacuum. Public and even professional ignorance ofthe effects of narcotic drugs contributed both to the dimensionsof the problem and the nature of the legislated cure. The initiallegislation was attended by no operation of the public opinionprocess, and instead generated a new public image of narcoticsuse. Only after this creation of a public perception occurred didthe legislative approach comport with what we shall call latentpublic opinion. 1. Narcotics Use at the Turn of the Century: A GrowingProblem Although estimates have varied widely regarding the number ofpersons regularly using cocaine, opium, morphine and heroinduring the pre-criminalization period, a sufficiently accuratefigure can be drawn from a composite of contemporary surveys30conducted between 1878 and 1924 .31 Estimates range from 182,215(1884) to 782,118 (1913). We can safely estimate that there werebetween one-quarter and one-half million Americans addicted tonarcotics around the turn of the century, comprising at least onepercent of the population." This rather large addict population included more females thanmales,33 more whites than blacks," and was confined neitherto particular geographical regions nor to areas of highpopulation concentrations Its most significant characteristic wasits predominantly middle-class composition. Such attributescontrast starkly with the overwhelmingly black, lower-class maleaddict population that today inhabits our major urban centers. Nineteenth century narcotics addiction was generallyaccidental. It is widely believed that medical addicts faroutnumbered "kicks" or pleasure" addicts.37Medical addiction stemmed from many sources. The first wasovermedication. Civil War hospitals used opium and morphinefreely and many veterans returned addicted to the drugs."Overmedication continued long after peace had been restored, dueto the ready availability of these drugs with and sometimeswithout prescription. Since physicians were free to dispensethese drugs as painkillers, persons given morphine first forlegitimate therapeutic purposes often found themselves addicted.39 This problem was exacerbated by the absence of restrictionsupon druggists in refilling prescriptions containing extensiveamounts of morphine and other opiates40 and by the introductionof the hypodermic syringe." The danger of overmedicationincreased in 1884 when cocaine was first introduced into thepractice of medicine, and again in 1898 when an advance in Germanchemistry produced heroin, a partially synthetic morphinederivative. 42 For a time recommended as a treatment for morphineaddiction ,43 heroin was also widely used for medicinal purposes. A second source of accidental addiction was the use andpopularity of patent medicines. Exotically labeled elixirs wereadvertised as general cures for- ills ranging from snake bite tomelancholia. By containing up to thirty or forty percent morphineor opiates by volume, most patent medicines fulfilled theircure-all promises. However, a heavy price was exacted for suchcures. In the absence of a requirement that contents be printedon the label, many an unsuspecting person became addicted withoutever knowing the medicine that worked so well contained dangerousnarcotics.44 Thus, careless prescription, incessant dispensation and hiddendistribution of harmful drugs, the addictive effects of whichwere unknown until too late, fostered a large addict populationwhich continued to increase in the early twentieth century. Theincrease in narcotics consumption, and therefore addiction, iswell illustrated by the fact that 628,177 pounds of opiates werebrought into this country in 1900, three times the amountimported thirty years earlier." Governmental and medicaldefault explains the innocent nature of nineteenth centurynarcotics addiction and therefore its predominantly middle-class,nationwide character. Not all addiction was accidental and private. It has beensuggested that both medical knowledge and governmental regulationoccurred only when each narcotic drug achieved a significantdegree of "street" use. Our research supports thisthesis, especially when "street" use is identified withthe poor and with racial minorities. For example, opium, the drugfirst determined addictive and first identified with "pleasure" use, was the earliest prohibited. Legislation wasfirst passed in the west coast states with newly immigratedChinese populations among whom its use was prevalent. Heroinearly achieved a widespread nonmedical or "street" use,especially in large urban centers among lower-class males."' Nevertheless, addiction, even to opium, was predominantlyinvoluntary until 1900. Professional attention was not focuseddirectly on! Street" use until after two developments hadsignificantly reduced the: possibility of medical addiction.First, the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act48 in 1906 led tothe demise of the patent medicine industry,: one of the primarycauses of medical addiction. The labeling requirements of theAct, coupled with the later regulation of the production anddistribution of the opiates, protected the public from thedangers of ignorance and virtually put the patent medicineindustry out of business.49 Second, the discovery of newnonaddictive pain killers and anesthetics reduced the likelihoodof post-operative addiction since physicians no longer needed torely so heavily on morphine and opium. preparations to reduce andcontrol pain. 2. State Legislative Response Before 1914 Although many states regulated narcotics indirectly throughtheir general "poison laws" before 1870,50 the firstanti-narcotics legislation did not appear until the last quarterof the nineteenth century. Most of the early legislation focusedprimarily on crime prevention" and public educationregarding the dangers of drug use." The spread of opiumsmoking, especially in the western states with high orientalpopulations,53 provoked legislation in eighteen states between1877 and 1911 designed to eradicate the practice either bypreventing the operation of opium dens or by punishing thesmoking of opium altogether. 54 As the addictive qualities ofopium, cocaine, morphine and later heroin became known, primarilythrough observation of "street" use, concernedphysicians finally began to agitate for stricter regulation thanthat provided by the "poison laws," even though suchlaws included opium and cocaine. Nevada enacted the first lawprohibiting the retail sale of opiates for nonmedical purposes in1877.55 In 1887, Oregon prohibited sale of cocaine without aprescription,"" and seven states followed suit by theturn of the century57 as did thirty-nine more by 1914.58 However,only twenty-nine states had included opiates in theirprohibitionary legislation by 1914.59 With the exception of the Oregon schemes nineteenth centurynarcotic laws did not attempt to restrict or prohibit possessionof narcotics, and were directed solely at distribution and sale.By 1913, only six states had prohibited the mere possession ofrestricted drugs by unauthorized persons .61 Three additionalstates prohibited possession with intent illegally to dispensesuch drugs .62 3. Watershed: The Passage of the Harrison Act The first national legislation designed to regulate narcoticsdistribution, the 1909 "Act to Prohibit Importation and UseOf Opium"' 63 barred the importation of opium at other thanspecified ports and for other than medicinal use. The law furtherrequired the keeping of import records. The main force behind thepassage of this statute was a desire to bring the United Statesinto line with other nations that had signed internationalconventions against the use of the drug. 64 However, as stateanti-narcotics legislation began to take on crusade proportions,pressure was generated for federal regulation of the importationof opium for medicinal purposes and of the interstate trade incocaine, morphine and heroin. Consequently, the Harrison Act,until this year the foundation of federal law controllingnarcotic drugs, was passed in 1914.65 The Harrison Act, a taxing measure, required registration andpayment of an occupational tax by all persons who imported,produced, dealt in, sold or gave away opium, cocaine or theirderivatives. The Act required all legitimate handlers of thesenarcotics to file returns setting forth in detail their use ofthe drugs. Each legitimate handler was required to use a specialorder form in making any transfer of narcotics. Since the Actalso provided that only legitimate users could register and noone but a registered user could obtain the specified form, anytransfer by an illegitimate user was a violation of the Act. Forthose failing to comply with its registration requirements, theoriginal Harrison Act provided penalties of not more than $2,000in fines or more than five years imprisonment, or both. The passage of the Harrison Act was the culmination ofincreasing concern in the medical profession66 about the freedomwith which physicians prescribed and druggists dispensedaddictive drugs, primarily morphine and heroin. During the periodof little or no regulation, the innocent addicts were regarded asvictims of an unfortunate sickness in need of treatment; usuallythey could find a friendly physician or druggist willing tosustain their habits. The passage of the Harrison Act, however,by imposing a stamp of illegitimacy on most narcotics use,fostered an image previously associated primarily with opium thatof the degenerate dope fiend with immoral proclivities. As theregulation of physicians and druggists became more stringent,especially after the Supreme Court held that prevention ofwithdrawal was not a legitimate medical use that a prescriptionto an unregistered person,67 this image fulfilled itself. Alladdicts, whether accidental or pleasure-seeking, were shut offfrom their supply and had to turn underground to purchase thedrugs. Inflated underground prices often provoked criminalactivity and this activity in turn evoked in the public a moralresponse,, cementing the link between iniquity and. drugaddiction.68 The early clinical experiments dealing with narcoticsaddiction were inevitable victims of enforcement of theAct." The concept that underlay the clinical effort-thataddiction was a medical problem to be dealt with by sustainingthe addict cheaply while trying to induce gentle withdrawal-wasantithetical to the attitude provoking the criminalclassification of unlawful possessors of narcotic drugs."Clinics were run .in such cities as New York, Shreveport andJacksonville," but by 1923 all were closed, thus removingstill another legitimate source of supply for the addict. Again,the crimes committed to enable these people to tap I the illicitsources increased public hysteria and misunderstanding 72 aboutthe link between the opiates and crime. Another result of the physicians' resignation to pressure wasthat addicts to the opiates began to commit petty crimes in orderto secure the drugs which could prevent their suffering. Theseinevitable law-induced crimes greatly accentuated the generalpublic belief that opiates had some inherent sinister propertywhich could change normal people into moral perverts andcriminals. In addition to redefining the public conception of narcoticaddiction in a way that would not be seriously challenged forhalf a century, the Harrison Act also provided a strange modelfor the administration of narcotics laws which wouldsignificantly affect future developments' Drafted as a tax lawrather than an outright criminal statute, the Act was intended todo indirectly what Congress believed it could not dodirectly-regulate possession and sale of the opiates. Indeed,congressional caution was justified. A five-to-four decision bythe Supreme Court in the 1903 Lottery Case73 suggested what laterbecame fact-the Court, as self-appointed arbiter of the federalsystem, would plant the tenth amendment in the path ofcongressional regulation of "local" affairs. Thatdirect regulation of medical practice was indeed consideredbeyond congressional power under the commerce clause is clearlyindicated in contemporary opinions. First, in its 1918 decisionin Hammer V. Dagenhart,74 the Court held the Child Labor Actunconstitutional. Second, the Court ultimately upheld theHarrison Act as a valid exercise of the taxing power 75 only by afive-to-four margin. Finally, there is some fairly explicitlanguage about congressional regulation of medical practice insubsequent Harrison Act opinions.76 This indirect regulation of narcotics traffic under thepretext of raising revenue had a number of significantconsequences. First, since the Act could not penalize users oraddiction directly, there was an immediate need for complementaryresidual state legislation in order to deal effectively with thedrug problem. Second, the enforcement of the Act was necessarilyassigned to the Internal Revenue Service in the TreasuryDepartment. The first enforcement agency for the Harrison Act was theNarcotics Division of the Prohibition Unit of the InternalRevenue Service created in 1920.77 This division was incorporatedin the Prohibition Bureau which was created in 1927 .78 In 1930,the enforcement of the narcotics laws was severed from the Bureauof Prohibition and established as the separate Bureau ofNarcotics in the Treasury Department .79 The existence of thisseparate agency anxious to fulfill its role as crusader againstthe evils of narcotics has done as much as any single factor toinfluence the course of drug regulation from 1930 to 1970."Although the impact of the Bureau on the passage of the UniformNarcotic Drug Act and the Marihuana Tax Act will be explained indetail in subsequent sections, it is important here to note thatthe existence of a separate bureau having responsibility only fornarcotics enforcement and for educating the public on drugproblems inevitably led to a particularly prosecutorial view ofthe narcotics addict. Moreover, this creation of the Bureauseparate from the newly created FBI in the justice Departmentunnecessarily bifurcated federal law enforcement operations inthis area. C. The Judicial Role and the Constitutional Framework: The Police Power and Intoxicant Prohibition to 1920 It is not novel to suggest that the fate of contemporaryconstitutional challenges to marijuana prohibition depends inpart on a judicial reading of public opinion as well as on theavailability of a constitutional peg on which to hang an"activist" judicial inquiry. Since contextual pressureand analytical conflict were also central elements of the'Judicial response to alcohol and narcotics prohibition between1850 and 1920, it is worthwhile to trace that response. As in today's court battles over marijuana laws, the clashthen was between two polar constitutional concepts-the policepowers of the state and allegedly "fundamental"personal constitutional rights. The conflict opened on stateconstitutional grounds and was continued in the realm of thefourteenth amendment. On the issues of alcohol and"hard" narcotics, the police power was triumphant. Inthe light of the comparisons drawn in current constitutionalarguments among marijuana , alcohol and narcotics, an inquiryinto the long struggle is informative. 1. Phase One: Prohibition of Sale and Manufacture of Alcohol During the first wave of prohibitionist legislation in the1850's, thirteen en states outlawed manufacture" and sale ofintoxicating beverages." The constitutionality of such lawsunder the commerce clause of the Federal Constitution had beenpresaged in the License Case83 in 1847, where in six separateopinions the Supreme Court upheld Massachusetts, New Hampshireand Rhode Island laws regulating wholesale and retail sales ofliquor. Chief Justice Taney's famous dictum stated: And if any State deems the retail and internal traffic in ardent spirits injurious to its citizens, and calculated to produce idleness, vice, or debauchery, I see nothing, in the constitution of the United States to prevent it from regulating and restraining the traffic, or from prohibiting, it altogether, if it thinks proper.84 Armed with this pronouncement, the courts of eight statesrebuffed challenges under their own constitutions." Some ofthese decisions gave scant attention to the constitutionalargument but simply defined the police power broad terms86 andperhaps cited the Taney dictum. However, the rationale and rhetoric of those decisionssquarely rejecting the constitutional objections merit a detailedcomparison with that of two decisions, in New York88 andIndiana89, declaring the statutes void. Even the opponents of the laws acknowledged the potentialpublic evils of intemperance90crime, pauperism and vice-theeradication of which was the objective of prohibitionarylegislation. Yet they argued that the means employed toaccomplish this end-prevention of sale was beyond the policepower. Alcohol had admittedly beneficial use91 and was harmfulonly when abused.92 In order to eliminate it from channels ofcommerce, thereby depriving its owners of a -fundamental incidentof ownership-the right to sell93 -a more pernicious character hadto be shown. 94 Accordingly, the public benefit did not justifythe restriction of private rights. The criminalization of sale ofalcohol beverages constituted a deprivation of"property" without due process;95 or, failing that, itconstituted an infringement of the inalienable right of 1ife,liberty And the pursuit of happiness rooted in the precepts ofnatural justice that the people reserved to themselves when theyentered into the social compact.96 New York, in Wynehamer v.People,97 accepted .the due process argument, at least withrespect to alcohol lawfully acquired, and Indiana endorsed theinalienable rights argument in Beebe v. State.98 The virtues of judicial restraint were vehemently defended inthe decisions rejecting these arguments: The courts uniformlyrefused to interfere with the discretionary exercise of thepolice power in the absence of a specific constitutionalprohibition. The Vermont Supreme Court view was typical: The legislature in passing the law in question doubtless supposed that the traffic and drinking of intoxicating liquors went hand in hand ... and that, by cutting off the one, the other would also fall with it. Whether the drinking of intoxicating liquors tends to produce intemperance and whether the intemperance is a gangrene, tending to corrupt the moral health of the body politic, and to produce misery and lamentation; and whether the law in question is well calculated to cut off or mitigate the evils supposed to flow directly from intemperance and indirectly from the traffic in intoxicating liquors, were questions to be settled by the lawmaking power; and their decision in this respect is final and not to be reviewed by us.99 Under this view, societal self-protection, the essence of thepolice power, is broadly defined.100 So long as the legislaturedetermines that the use of alcoholic beverages exerts an adverseeffect on public, health, safety or morals, the courts mayquestion neither the factual determination nor the means employedto restrict that use. In answer to the argument that the courtshave a special obligation to review the relation between meansand ends where personal liberties are curtailed, these courtsdisavowed any power "to annul a legislative Act upon highergrounds than those of express constitutional restriction,"101 or, after assuming for sake of argument the existence of suchpower, they declined to exercise It.102 In response to theargument accepted by Judge Comstock in Wynehamer v. New York-thatprohibition of sale of legally acquired alcohol was a deprivationof property without due process of law-most courts distinguishedWynehamer on its facts,103 held that no essential"property" right had been violated,"" orconstrued "due process" to refer only to due procedureand not to the "power ... to create and define anoffense." 105 Two polar conceptions of the scope of 'Judicial review clashedover a subject of intense public interest. The immediate questionwas settled in favor of the constitutionality of prohibitingmanufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages; in fact, the Indianacourt itself disavowed its contrary decision in Beebe three yearsafter rendering it.106 However, the jurisprudential dialogue107had merely begun. Today, Wynehamer is regarded as the initialstep, on the road to the vested rights conception of due process.Similarly, Beebe is the philosophical ancestor of all challengesto prohibition of intoxicants alcohol, narcotics, andmarijuana.108 With the passage of the fourteenth amendment, the SupremeCourt was called upon to determine whether prohibitionaryexercises of the state police powers were now limited by federallaw. The battle fought in the 1850's on state constitutionalgrounds was refought in the 1870's and 80's on federalterritory-with the same outcome. In a series of cases culminatingin Mugler v. Kansas,109 it slowly became settled that themanufacturer or seller of intoxicating liquors had noconstitutional rights under either the privileges and immunitiesor due process clauses that could prevent the operation of thepolice power of the state, regardless whether the liquor wasbought or manufactured before passage of the law or even whetherit was manufactured solely for personal use.110 Thus, as a matter of both state and federal constitutionallaw, the courts required no more, and probably less, than thatlegislation be designed to retard a public evil-here pauperismand crime-and be rationally related to that end."' Absent aspecific constitutional limitation, it did not concern the courtsthat such regulations affronted personal liberty and propertyrights. The theoretical Justification of incidental curtailmentof private liberties in the public interest was that thelegislature must conduct the balancing; if the balance isunsound, the law will be repealed. Indeed, the courts wereprobably willing to indulge that presumption as a practicalmatter since the passage of the prohibition laws was preceded byvigorous public debate. In fact, the public opinion process didwork in reaction to these curtailments of private liberty, andmost such laws were subsequently repealed"' in the ensuingdecade. 2. Phase Two: Probibition of Sale of Opium As noted above, the first prohibitionary narcotics legislationwas enacted on the west coast in the 1880's in order to prohibitsale and distribution of opium for nonmedical purposes. Theracial overtonesof this legislation were self-consciouslyacknowledged by the initial Oregon and Nevada decisions.Sustaining the conviction of an alien for selling opium in Exparte Yung Jon,"' the Oregon district court noted: Smoking opium is not our vice, and therefore it may be that this legislation proceeds more from a desire to vex and annoy the "Heathen Chinee" in this respect, than to protect the people from the evil habit. But the motives of legislators cannot be the subject of judicial investigation for the purpose of affecting the validity of their acts. 114 The opium laws were attacked on precisely the same grounds ashad been the alcohol prohibition legislation. The Nevada courthad no trouble in State v. Ah Chew;115 it simply cited theLicense Cases, the Delaware decision sustaining prohibition ofalcohol sale, and distinguished Wynebamer as holding only thatthe sale of lawfully acquired property could not be prohibited.Within this framework, the result was obvious: It is not denied that the indiscriminate use of opium . . .tends in a much greater degree to demoralize the persons usingit, to dull the moral senses, to foster vice and produce crime,than the sale of intoxicating drinks. If such is its tendency, itshould not have unrestrained license to produce such disastrousresults.... Under the police power . . . in the interest of goodmorals, the good order and peace of society, for the preventionof crime, misery and want, the legislature has authority to placesuch restrictions upon sale or disposal of opium a,, willmitigate, if not suppress, its evils to society.116 The Oregon court, in the Yung Jon decision five years later,did not take the easy way out. The court was apparently notdisposed to imply that sale of previously owned alcohol andcigarettes could be prohibited, and thus reject outright theWynebamer conception of due process;117 instead it chose to holdthat sale of opium for nonmedical purposes was not an incident ofownership and, since the law did not prohibit sale for medicalpurposes, no property right was deprived. Not as cautious as hisbrethren, Judge Deady inquired more actively into the nature ofopium before upholding the legislation. Whether a legislative actis "prohibitory" (and by implication whether itviolates the due process clause) "must depend oncircumstances, and particularly the character of the article, andthe uses and purposes to which it has generally been applied inthe community." 118 He then noted that opium was primarily amedicinal drug; that although used in the East for centuries asan intoxicant, that use was new in the United States and confinedprimarily to the Chinese; that it was classed as a poison and wasless easily detected than alcoholic intoxication, "which itis said to replace where law and custom have made the latterdisreputable;" and that its "evil effects" weremanifest upon the nervous and digestive systems, resemblingdelirium tremens. Thus, there was no longstanding regard of opiumas a legitimate article of property except for medical use.Accordingly, the act does not in effect prohibit the dispositionof the drug, but allows it under such circumstances, and on suchconditions, as will, according to the general practice andopinions of the country, prevent its improper and harmful use.119 Thus, whatever the judicial propensity to limit the policepower in the interest of property rights, prohibition of trafficin opium-worse than alcohol and confined to aliens-violated noimplied or express constitutional limitations. 3. Phase Three: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol to 1915 At this stage of constitutional jurisprudence, criminalizationof possession or consumption of alcohol or narcotics was arguablya deprivation of property without due process of law. The firstwave of prohibition cases had held only that the right to selleven previously acquired liquor was not an essential element ofownership. They had not held that the state could forbid theessential attribute of ownership-the right to use. In fact, manycourts had expressly noted that alcohol was still a legitimatearticle of property.120 Until 1915 the weight of authority was that it was beyond thepolice power to prohibit mere possession of alcoholic beveragesunless the quantity Justified an inference that they were heldfor sale. A few cases so held ;121 many courts so stated indictum, while holding the laws either in conflict with particularconstitutional provisions regarding the "sale" ofliquor"122 or in excess of the power of municipalcorporations;" and many contemporary commentators so stated.124 Although the due process rationale was sometimes employed, 125the preferred approach was "inherent" limitation. Inhis 1904 treatise, Police Power, Ernst Freund premised the"inherent" limitation of noninterference with purelyprivate conduct not on any inalienable natural right but on therequirement that interference be justified on grounds of thepublic welfare."' This and the "practical difficultiesof enforcement, coupled with the constitutional prohibition ofunreasonable searches," 127 would sufficiently deterlegislative abuse. Absent the addition of a natural rights notion, however, thisdecisional frame becomes ambivalent on the dispositive questionin an adjudication questioning such legislative"abuse": Can the mere "policy" ofnonintervention with private conduct a more rigorous judicialinquiry into the relation between the prohibited private acts andthe alleged public evil? If it cannot, the constitutional attackon prohibition of possession is no stronger than that onprohibition of sale. If it can, is not the judicial role subjectto the same charge of usurpation as it would be if the courtsemployed a pure natural rights approach? In any event, when the courts first confronted possessionprohibition, the rhetoric was varied-due process, 128 naturalrights"' and private liberty""-but the approachwas the same-a refusal to accept the legislative findings as tothe relation between private act and public harm and a refusal todefer to the legislative balance of private liberty and publicneed. For example, in one of the leading cases, Commonwealth v.Campbell,"' the Court of Appeals of Kentucky cited Cooley,Mill, and Blackstone for the proposition that [i]t is not within the competency of government to invade theprivacy of the citizen's life and to regulate his conduct inmatters in which he alone is concerned, or to prohibit him anyliberty the exercise of which will not directly injuresociety.132 Noting next that defendant was "not charged with havingthe liquor in his possession for the purpose of selling it, oreven giving it to another" and that "ownership andpossession cannot be denied when that ownership and possession isnot in itself injurious to the public," 133 the courtconcluded that the right to use liquor for one's own comfort, if the use iswithout direct injury to the public, is one of the citizen'snatural and inalienable rights .... We hold that the policepower-vague and wide and undefined as it is-has limits . . . 134 The key to this reasoning, of course, is the court'sinsistence that the injury be direct as measured according to aJudicial yardstick. Although the court devoted little attentionto the question, it implicitly rejected arguments that the onlyway to exorcize the public evils attending excessive use andadequately to enforce prohibitions against sale was to preventany private use at all. The court impliedly held that the positedconnection, albeit rational, was "remote" or"indirect" or "unreasonable" and thereforeentitled to no deference. 135 4. Phase Four: Prohibition of Possession of Narcotics This active 'Judicial role in alcohol cases should be comparedwith the courts' simultaneous refusals to second-guesslegislative "findings" with regard to thecriminalization of possession of opium. In a series of casesdecided in Washington, Oregon and California136 in 1890, 1896 and1911 respectively, courts held that the relation betweennarcotics use and public harm was to be drawn by the legislature. In answer to the argument, accepted in the alcohol cases, thatdespite the absence of explicit constitutional limitations thepolice power of prohibition was inherently limited to acts which"involve direct and immediate injury to another," 137the courts replied in predictable fashion: The state may preventa weak man from doing injury to himself if it determines thatsuch injury may cause the individual to become a "burden onsociety;" "' the state could find that excessive use ofopium, an active poison, would debase the moral and economicwelfare of' the society by causing ill health, pauperism andinsanity;... the state could find that the potential for andevils attending excessive use demand a prohibition also ofnondeleterious moderate use."' Accordingly, in the words ofthe Supreme Court of Washington, [i]t is for the legislature to place on foot the inquiry as tojust in what degree the use is injurious; to collate all theinformation and to make all the needful and necessarycalculations. These are questions of fact with which the courtcannot deal. The constitutionality of laws is not thus to bedetermined .141 The California court had more difficulty with the argumentthat punishment of possession of alcohol had been held beyond thepolice power. Despite its rhetoric regarding the wide bounds oflegislative fact-finding, the court actually made its owndetermination that public injury from private abuse was morelikely with narcotics than alcohol. The lower court had said soovertly: But liquor is used daily in this and other countries as abeverage, moderately and without harm, by countless thousands ...; whereas it appears there is no such thing as moderation in theuse of opium. Once the habit is formed the desire for it isinsatiable, and its use is invariably disastrous. 142 The California Supreme Court shied away: We do not understand this to have been intended to declare anestablished or conceded fact. So interpreted, the expressionwould be, perhaps unduly sweeping. But the validity oflegislation which would be necessary or proper under a givenstate of facts does not depend upon the actual existence of thesupposed facts. It is enough if the law-making body mayrationally believe such facts to be established. If the beliefthat the use of opium, once begun, almost ]Inevitably leads toexcess may be entertained by reasonable men-and we do not doubtthat it may-such belief affords a sufficient 'Justification forapplying to opium restrictions which might be unduly burdensomein the case of other substances, as, for example, intoxicatingliquors, the use of which may fairly be regarded as lessdangerous to their users or to the public. 143 What the court said is unobjectionable. What it did not say,however, is significant. This reasoning implies that if thelegislature should determine that the potential for excessive useof alcohol-and consequently for the public evils of pauperism,crime and insanity-is great enough to prohibit all use, thatjudgment would have to stand. Probably not intending so tosuggest, the court really held that it thought that opium use wasmore likely adversely to affect the public welfare than alcoholuse; accordingly, paternal criminal legislation was"reasonable" in the former case and not in the latter,even though they were identically "Indirect." Ithelped, perhaps, that the legislature was not telling the and hiswhite, middle-class colleagues that they shouldn't smoke opium,and that the objective was merely to prevent a few "HeathenChinee" from hurting themselves through their stupidity andfrom spreading their nasty habit to the whites."' The only astounding thing about the opium possession cases isthat there was at least one dissenting opinion. In the Washingtoncase, Ah Lim v. Territory,145 judge Scott, for himself andanother judge, insisted on either a more conclusive demonstrationthat the private act of smoking opium "directly and clearlyaffected the public in some manner" or a more narrowly drawnstatute. He catalogued the alleged public justifications: That smoking or inhaling opium injures the health of theindividual, and in this way weakens the state; that it tends tothe increase of pauperism. That it destroys the moral sentimentand leads to the commission of crime. In other words, that it hasan injurious effect upon the individual, and, consequently,results indirectly in an injury to the community. 146 After noting the insufficiency of all of the 'Justificationsincluding the argument that the moderate desires of some must besacrificed to prevent abuse by others, 147 then concluded: [The Act] is altogether too sweeping in its terms. I make noquestion but that the habit of smoking opium may be repulsive anddegrading. That its effect would be to shatter the nerves anddestroy the intellect; and that it may tend to the increase ofpauperism and crime. But there is a vast difference between thecommission of a single act, and a confirmed habit. There is adistinction to be recognized between the use and abuse of anyarticle or substance.... If this act must be held valid it ishard to conceive of any legislative action affecting the personalconduct, or privileges of the individual citizen. that must notbe upheld. . . . The prohibited act cannot affect the public inany way except through the primary personal injury to theindividual, if it occasions him any injury. It looks like a newand extreme step under our government in the field oflegislation, if it really was passed for any of the purposes uponwhich that character of legislation can be sustained, if at all.148 The sanctity of "the personal conduct or privileges ofthe individual " had suffered first blow. The knockout wasonly a few citizen rounds away. 5. Phase Five: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol After 1915 The year 1915 was the watershed year for prohibitionists inthe courts. By 1913, the tide had finally turned in the statelegislatures, many of which prohibited possession of more than acertain quantity of alcoholic beverages. The first of thesestatutes to reach the courts was that of Alabama in SouthernExpress Co. v. Whittle.149 Overruling its earlier decision in Eidge v. City ofBessemer,150 one of the leading cases during the earlier phase,the Alabama court swept away all restraints on the police power.So long as the legislation was directed at some legitimatepurpose and was not arbitrary, the court should not interfere.151Whether or not the Supreme Court had so intended, the Alabamacourt, like other state courts, relied heavily on justiceHarlan's opinion in Mugler v. Kansas,152 and gave its legislaturea blank check when exercising police powers: If the right of common law to manufacture an intoxicatingliquor for one's own personal use, out of one's own materials bythe application of one's own personal effort, may be forbidden byappropriate legislation under the police power, as was expresslyruled in Mugler v. Kansas . . . . it cannot be logically orsoundly asserted that the receipt or possession of more than aspecified quantity at one time may not be forbidden by a statute. . . . 153 The alleged sanctity of private conduct gave the court littlepause; this was just I one of a number of instances where ancillary prohibitions of acts and conduct, innocent in themselves, have been sustained and confirmed as an exercise of the police power of the state; and so upon the theory that some valid legislative purpose might be more certainly made effective, or that evasions of the laws might be prevented or hindered of accomplishment.154 Though the Alabama court did not do so, it could have citedthe opium possession cases as authority. Most courts did. The Alabama decision was quickly followed in Idaho155 and innine other states.156 When the Idaho case, Crane v. Campbell,157came before the Supreme Court, Justice McReynolds dealt theknockout blow: As the state has the power . . . to prohibit [sale and manufacture], it may adopt such measures as are reasonably appropriate or needful to render exercise of that power effective. And, considering the notorious difficulties always attendant upon efforts to suppress traffic in liquors, we are unable to say that the challenged inhibition of their possession was 'arbitrary and unreasonable or without proper relation to the legitimate legislative purposes 158 The principle noted by Freund,159 that the police power didnot easily extend to matters of private conduct, was ignored: [I] t clearly follows from our numerous decisions upholding prohibition legislation that the right to hold intoxicating liquors for personal use is not one of those fundamental privileges of a citizen of the United States which no State may abridge. A contrary view would be incompatible with the undoubted power to prevent manufacture, gift, sale, purchase or transportation of such articles-the only feasible ways of getting them. An assured right of possession would necessarily imply some adequate method to obtain not subject to destruction at the will of the State. 160 Given the restrictive interpretation of the privileges andimmunities clause161 and the refusal to extend substantive dueprocess outside the economic area, 162 there was no existingfederal constitutional pigeonhole for "private conduct"as a principle of constitutional limitation. And on the statelevel the courts ignored the "'intrinsic limitation"argument and discarded the direct-indirect yardstick in the wakeof the temperance movement. The commentators were outraged. Again and again the courtswere indicted for interpreting constitutional precepts tocorrespond with public opinion.163 The retreat on the temperancequestion coincided perfectly with the final success of theProhibition movement. And the commentators were quite justifiedin so noting. It was merely icing on the cake when the Supreme Court upheldthe provision of the Volstead Act164 outlawing possession ofintoxicating liquor. The Court predictably rebuffed165 anargument that it was beyond congressional power under section 2of the eighteenth amendment to prohibit possession for personalconsumption of liquor owned before the passage of the Act.166 6. A Postscript on the Police Power: The Cigarette Cases Interestingly, the legislative solicitude for the health ofthe citizenry during the period under discussion also extended tothe prohibition of cigarette smoking in several jurisdictions. In1897, the General Assembly of Tennessee made it a misdemeanor tosell, give away or otherwise dispose of cigarettes or cigarettepaper.167 The Supreme Court of Tennessee upheld the statute underthe police power on the grounds that cigarettes were notlegitimate articles of commerce, being "inherently bad andbad only." 168 The United States Supreme Court affirmed inAustin v. Tennessee,169 primarily on the authority of the alcoholand opium cases, noting that there need be only a rational basisfor the legislative determination that the commodity is harmfulto 'justify its prohibition.170 The Court did not even mentionany objection based on deprivation of property rights or personalliberty. The issue was posed more directly in Kentucky and Illinoiscases171 regarding the validity of local ordinances prohibitingsmoking of cigarettes "within the corporate limits" inone case and "in any street, alley, avenue ... park ... or[other] public place" in the other. Both courts held theordinances unreasonable interferences with personal liberty.172 The argument that the ordinances were calculated to insure thepublic safety by preventing fire hazards was held to be tooremote and the argument accepted in Austin regarding potentialinjury to the smoker's health apparently was not made or at leastwent unacknowledged by both courts. These decisions, rendered in. 1911 and 1914, were probablyconsistent, under a direct-indirect injury to society theory,with Austin and with the alcohol and narcotics cases up to thattime. The post-1915 alcohol possession cases, however, underminedany such distinction. insofar as it authorized a more activejudicial inquiry into the relationship between the privateconduct and the public need. At least at this stage of itsdevelopment it may be fruitless to seek out a "neutralprinciple" beyond common sense regarding the undefinedconstitutional limitations on the police power. Professor BrooksAdams noted in 1913 that the scope of the police power could notbe determined in advance by abstract reasoning. Hence. as, eachlitigation arose, the judges could follow no rule but the rule ofcommon sense, and the Police Power, translated into plain Englishpresently came to signify whatever, at the moment, the judgeshappened to think reasonable. Consequently, they began guessingat the drift of public opinion, as it percolated to them throughthe medium of their education and prejudices. Sometimes theyguessed right and sometimes wrong, and when they guessed wrongthey were cast aside, as appeared dramatically enough in thetemperance agitation .173 And justice Holmes noted: It may be said in a general way that the police power extends to all the great public needs. It may be put forth in aid of what is sanctioned by usage, or held by the prevailing morality or strong and preponderant opinion to be greatly and immediately necessary to the public welfare.174 Whether the development of the Judicial response to exercisesof the police power at the time was the result of the changingpublic opinion or a changing analytical framework, trends in thatresponse were evident. It remains to be seen whether any trendsare evident today to indicate how marijuana users will fare inthe future. Footnotes and References 1 E. CHERRINGTON, THE EVOLUTION OFPROHIBITION IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 135-45(1920) [hereinafter cited as CHERRINGTON1. 21d. at 176-84. 31d. at 180-81; Safely, Growth of State Power Under FederalConstitution to Regulate Traffic in Intoxicating Liquors, 3LOWAL. BULL. 221, 222 (1917). 4 CHERRINGTON139.  Id. at 181-82. 6 Id. at 280. 7 Id. at 280-81. 8 Id. at 281.  Id. at 284. 10 Leisy v. Hardin, 135 U.S. 100 (1890). 11Four months after Leisy Congress enacted the "WilsonLaw," designed to make all intoxicating liquors subject"upon arrival" to the laws of the state into which theywere sent. Act of Aug. 8, 1890, ch. 728, 26 Stat. 313. In Rhodesv. Iowa, 170 U.S. 412 (1898), however, the Supreme Court heldthat "upon arrival" meant after delivery to theconsignee. Thus the right to receive the liquor and the attendantenforcement problems remained. 12Act of Mar. 1, 1913, ch. 90, 37 Stat. 699. 13 The Act was upheld in Clark Distilling Co. v. Western Md.Ry., 242 U.S. 311 (1917). 14 CHERRINGToN, 285-86. 15 Id. at 320. 115 Id. at 321-22. 17 See H.R. Doc. No. 722, 71st Cong., 3d Sess. 5 (1931)thereinafter cited as WICKERSHAM COMMISSION J. 18 Id. Is Id. at 8. 20 Act of Oct. 28, 1919, ch. 85, 41 Stat. 305. 21 In 1904 Ernst Freund had noted, quoting from an article on"personal liberty" in the Cyclopedia of Temperanceand Prohibition: Even the advocates of prohibition concede that the state hasno concern with the private use of liquor. "The opponents ofprohibition misstate the case by saying that the state has noright to declare what a man shall cat or drink. The state doesnot venture to make any such declaration.... It is not theprivate appetite or home customs of the citizen that the stateundertakes to manage, but the liquor traffic. . . . If byabolishing the saloon the state makes it difficult for men togratify their private appetites, there is no just reason forcomplaint." E. FREuND, PoLicE POWER 484 (1904). 22 WICKERSHAM CommissioN 6-7. 23 Id. at 21. In 1929 President Hoover had devoted a majorpart of his inaugural address to the "disregard anddisobedience" of the eighteenth amendment. He attributed tothe ordinary citizen "a large responsibility" for a"dangerous expansion in the criminal elements."Attempting to generate moral support for the law, he chastisedthe citizenry: No greater national service can be given by men and women ofgoodwill-who, I know, are not unmindful of the responsibilitiesof citizenship-than that they should, by their example, assist instamping out crime and outlawry by refusing participation in andcondemning all transactions with illegal liquor. Our whole missing piece 28 F. BLACK, supra note 27, at 149-50. 29 R. CHilds, MAKING REPEAL WORK 12 (1947). 30 The earliest surveys employ a methodology much lesssophisticated than those conducted after 1914. The later studies,however, suffer from a time lag which inevitably detracts fromaccuracy. In any event, taken together, these surveys adequatelydescribe the contours of the phenomenon under consideration. 31 The earliest attempt at a compilation of addiction figureswas undertaken by O. Marshall in 1878. Marshall, The OpiumHabit in Michigan, 1878 MICH. STATE BD. OF HEALTH ANN. REP. 61-73. From questionnaires sent to doctors,Marshall found 1,313 users of opium or morphine and concludedtherefrom that there were 7,763 addicts in the state. Dr. CharlesTerry later concluded that, if Marshall's figures wererepresentative, total incidence of addiction in the United Statesin 1878 was 251,936. C. TERRY & M. PELLENS, THE OPIUM PROBLEM15 (1928) [hereinafter cited as TERRY & PELLENS]. Marshallwas unable fully to take into account the fact that the incidenceof drug abuse in the cities was much higher than that in therural areas he studied; accordingly, his figures probablyunderestimate the extent of addiction in the state. In a similar study of Iowa in 1884, J. M. Hull found 5,732addicts which, if representative, would reflect a national addictpopulation of 182,215. Hull, The Opium Habit, 1885 IOWASTATE BD. OF HEALTH BIENNIAL REP. 535-45, quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 16-18. In 1900 the author of a Vermont study sent 130 questionnairesto various druggists in an attempt to determine the monthly salesof various drugs. His 116 replies indicate that 3,300,000 dosesof opium were sold every month, or enough for every person inVermont over the age of 21 to receive 11/2 doses per day.Grinnel, A Review of Drug Consumption and Alcohol as Found inProprietary Medicine, 23 MEDico-LEGAL J. 426 (1905),quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 21-23. Perhaps the best pre-1914 estimate was made by Dr. CharlesPerry who, as Health Officer of Jacksonville, Florida, compileddata for that city in 1913. He found that 541 persons, or .81% ofthe city's population, used opium or some preparation thereof in1913. Nationwide, this incidence would be 782,118. 1913JACKSONVILLE, FLA, BD. OF HEALTH ANN. REP., quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 25. A researcher in 1915 found 2,370 registered addicts inTennessee and put the national addict population at between269,000 and 291,670. Brown, Enforcement of the TennesseeAnti-Narcotic Law, 5 Am. J. PUB. HEALTH 323-33 (1915), quotedin TERRY & PELLENs 27-29. The first post-Harrison Act study, and perhaps the mostreliable of all research during this period, was done by LawrenceKolb and A. G. DuMez of the United States Public Health Service.Utilizing previously computed statistics together withinformation regarding the supply of narcotics imported into theUnited States, these authors concluded the addict populationnever exceeded 246,000. KOLB & DUMEz, THE PREVALENCE ANDTREND OF DRUG ADDICTION IN THE UNITED STATES AND FACTORSINFLUENCING IT 1-20 (39 Public Health Reports No. 21) (May 23,1924). At the same time the Narcotic Division of the Prohibition Unitof the IRS estimated that there were more than 500,000 drugaddicts in America. Narcotic Division of the Prohibition Unit,Bureau of Internal Revenue, Release (May 4, 1924), quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 42 n.25. For more recent estimates of drug addiction in America, see W.ELDRIDGE, NARCOTICS AND THE LAW 49-103 (2d rev. ed. 1967); A.LINDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THE LAW 99-134 (1965); ARTHUR D.LITTLE, INC., DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 1l-21 (1967). 32 But see M. NYSWANDER, THE DRUG ADDICT AS A PATIENT1-13 (1956) (the author suggests that perhaps I to 4% of Americanadult population was addicted in 1890). 33 Of the 1,313 addictsin Marshall's Michigan study, 803 were females and only 510 males. TERRY & PELLENS 11. In the Florida study, therewere 228 men and 313 women. Id. at 25. Of the 2,370 registeredaddicts in the Tennessee study, 784 were men and 1,586 women. Id.at 27. A modern observer has concluded that there were at leastas many and probably twice as many women addicts as men.O'Donnell, Patterns of Drug Abuse and Their SocialConsequences, in DRUGS & YouTH 62, 64 (J. Whittenborn ed.1969). For the last thirty years, male addicts have probablyoutnumbered female addicts by four or five to one. Id. 34 Of the 228 men included in the Florida study, 188 werewhite and 40 black; of the women 219 were white and 94 black.TERRY & PELLENs 25. At that time the white and blackpopulations in Jacksonville were equal. Of those covered in theTennessee study, 90% were white. Id. at 28. 35 The Michigan, Iowa and Vermont studies covered primarilyrural areas. 36 See, e.g., Eberle, Report of Committee onAcquirement of Drug Habits, Am. J. PHARMACY, Oct. 1903, at474-88. "While the increase is most evident with the lowerclasses, the statistics of institutes devoted to the cure ofhabitues show that their patients are principally drawn fromthose in the higher walks of life." Id, quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 23. 37 See, e.g., O'Donnell, supra note 3 3, at 64. 38 TERRY & PELLENs 69. 39Stanley, Morpbinism, 6 J. Crim. L. & CRIMINOLOGY586, 588 (1915). 40 See the resolution of the Narcotics Control Association ofCalifornia, 13 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 126-27 (1922),calling for stricter laws regulating prescriptions andprescription order forms. 41 TERRY & PELLENs 66. 47 42 Brill, Recurrent Patterns in the History of Drug Dependenceand Some Interpretations, in DRUGS AND YOUTH 18 (J. Whittenborned. 1969). 43 TERRY & PELLENs 76-82. 44 See S. ADAms, THE GREAT AMERICAN FRAUD (1913). 45 TERRY & PELLENs 44. 46 Id. at 84-87. 47 See H. KANE, OPIUM-SMOKING IN AMERICA AND CHINA (1882), inwhich the author supports the contention that by approximately1890 narcotic addiction had become widespread among therespectable and professional classes. He states: The practice [opium smoking] spread rapidly and quietly amongthis class of gamblers and prostitutes until the latter part of1875, at which time the authorities became cognizant of the fact,and finding, upon investigation, that many women and young girls,as also young men of respectable family, were being induced tovisit the dens .... Quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 73. 48Ch. 3915, 34 Stat. 768 (1906). 49 "The peak of the patent medicine industry was reachedjust prior to the passage of the federal Pure Food and Drug Actin 1906." TERRY & PELLENs 75. 50 U.S. TREASURY DEPT, STATE LAWS RELATING TO THE CONTROL oFNARCOtic DRUGS AND THETREATMENT OFDRUG ADDICTION 1 (1931)[hereinafter cited as STATE LAWS]. 51 The first drug legislation enacted in eight states outlawedthe administering Of 2 narcotic drug to any person with theintent to facilitate the commission of a felony. These stateswere California (1872), Idaho (1887), New York (1897), NorthDakota (1883), Pennsylvania (1901), South Dakota (1883), Utah(1876) and Wisconsin (1901). Id. at 1-2. 52 Twenty-two states made such legislation their first lawsconcerning the drug problem. Id. at 2. 53 Id. at 3-4. 54 States with such legislation were Arizona (1883),California (1881), Georgia (1895), Idaho (1887), Maryland (1886),Missouri (1911), Montana (1881), Nevada (1877), New Mexico(1887), North Dakota (1879), Ohio (1885), Pennsylvania (1883),South Dakota (1879), Utah (1880), Wisconsin (1891) and Wyoming(1882). Sec id., Pt. III. 55 Id. at S. 56 Id. at 5, 2 5 1. 57 Arizona (1899), Arkansas (1899), Colorado (1897), Illinois(1897), Mississippi (1900), Montana (1889) and New York (1893).Id., Pt. 111. 58 See id. 59 Id. 60 Id. at 251. 61 California (1909), Maine (1887), South Carolina (1911),Tennessee (1913), Wm Virginia (1911) and Wyoming (1903). Id., Pt.III. 62 Maryland (1912), Ohio (1913) and Virginia (1908). Id. I" Act of Feb. 9, 1909, ch. 100, 35 Stat. 614, aS amended,21 U.S.C. S 173 (1964). This act was revised by Act of Jan. 17,1914, ch. 9, 38 Stat. 275, in the same wave of reform thatproduced the Harrison Act. 64 Hearings on the Importation and Use of Opium Before theHouse Comm. on Ways and Means, 61st Cong., 2d Sess. passim(1910). 65 38 Stat. 785 (1914), as amended, 26 U.S.C. S 4701-36(1964). 66 See, eg., Stanley, supra note 39, at 587; Fixes Blame forDope Fiend Evil, Boston Herald, Jan. 5, 1917. 67 Webb V. United States, 249 U.S. 96 (1919). 68 See Weber, Drugs and Crime, 44 A.B.A. REP. 527 (1919).Kolb, Factors That Have Influenced the Management and Treatmentof Drug Addicts, in NARCOTIC DRUG ADDICTION PROBLEMS 23, _26 (R.Livingston ed. 1958) states: See generally T. Duster, THE LEGISLATION OF MORALITY 3-28(1970). 69 See generally A. LiNDEsmITH, supra note 31, at 135-61;King, Narcotic Drug Laws and Enforcement Policies, 22 LAW &CONTEMP. PROB. 113, 124-26 (1957); King, The Narcotics Bureau andthe Harrison Act, 62 YALE L.J. 736 (1953); Note, NarcoticsRegulation, 62 YALE L.J. 751, 784-87 (1953). 70 For a savage attack on the clinic system by a well-knownsupporter of the law enforcement model of the Harrison Act, seeStanley, Narcotic Drugs and Crime, 12 J. Crim. L. &CRIMINOLOGY 110 (1921). 71 Lindesmith reports that for a brief period of time from1919 to 1923 some forty clinics of this type existed in theUnited States. A. Lindesmith, supra note 31, at 136, 72 The closing of the New York Clinic in 1919 was anespecially potent factor in promoting hysteria about heroin. Morethan 7,400 addicts, about 90 percent Of whom were users ofheroin, were thrown on the streets of the city. Driven to commitcrimes, including those of narcotic violations, many of theseaddicts were arrested. The increased number of arrests was widelyinterpreted as an indication of moral deterioration due tonarcotics instead of evidence of maladministration of what couldhave been a useful law. There were, of course, physicians whodissented both as to the wisdom of closing the clinics and as tothe harmful effect of the drugs. Many of those who persisted inhelping their patients were arrested. Kolb, supra note 68, at 27. 73 188 U.S. 3.21 (1903). 74 247 U.S. 251 (1918). 75 United States v. Doremus, 249 U.S. 86 (1919). The fourdissenters asserted that "the statute was a mere attempt byCongress to exert a power not delegated, that is, the reservedpolice power of the States." Id. at 95. It is interesting tonote, however, that a subsequent congressional attempt toregulate child labor through the taxing power was alsoinvalidated. Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co., 259 U.& 20(1922). 76 justice McReynolds stated for the Court in Linder v. UnitedStates, 268 U.S. 5, 18 (1925): Obviously, direct control ofmedical practice in the States is beyond the power of the FederalGovernment. Incidental regulation of such practice by Congressthrough a taxing act cannot extend to matters plainlyinappropriate and unnecessary to reasonable enforcement of arevenue measure. The Court also held that the Harrison Act did not apply tomere possession of opium. In reaching this conclusion the Courtpointed out that any congressional attempt to punish as a crimepossession of any article produced in a state would raise the'gravest questions of power. United States v. Jin Fuey Moy, 241U.& 394, 401 (1916). 77 Schmeckebier, The Bureau of Prohibition, in BROOKINGS INST.FOR GOVT RESEARCH, SERVICE MONOGRAPH No. 57, at 143 (1929). 78 An Act to Create a Bureau of Customs and 2 Bureau ofProhibition in the Department of the Treasury, ch. 348, 44 Stat.1381 (1927). 79 Act of June 14, 1930, ch. 488, 46 Star. 585. 80 See generally King, The Narcotics Bureau and the HarrisonAct, 62 YALE L.J. 736 (1953). 81 The primary objective of prohibitionary legislation was tosuppress all traffic in intoxicating beverages. Accordingly, moststates prohibited both manufacture and sale. However, NewHampshire's law, in effect from 1855 through 1903, forbade only,sale. 82 Sixteen states passed prohibitionary legislation for thewhole territory of the state. However, twelve of them hadrepealed this legislation by 1903, and a thirteenth, Maine, hadrepealed its statute before 1884 when prohibition was embodied ina constitutional amendment. E. FREuND, POLICE POWER 202, 203(1904). 83 46 U.S. (5 How.) 504 (1847). 84 Id. at 577. 85 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185 (1858); State v. Wheeler, 25Conn. 290 (1856); State v Allmond, 7 De]. 612 (1856); People v.Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856); Santo v. State' 2 Iowa 165 (1855);Lincoln v. Smith, 27 Vt. 328 (1855); People v. Hawley, 3 Mich.330 (1854); Commonwealth v. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.) 414(1853); Jones v. People, 14-111. 196 (1852). 86 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185 (1858); Commonwealth v. Kendall,66 Mass. (I 2 Cush.) 414 (1853); Jones v. People, 14 III. 196(1852). 87 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290 (1856); State v. Allmond, 7De]. 612 (1856); Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165 (1855); Lincoln v.Smith, 27 Vt. 328 (1855). 88 Wynehamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378 (1856). 89 Beebe v. State,6 Ind. 501 (1855). 90 Dissenting in People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856),justice Pratt noted' "That intemperance is a great evil, nosane man can doubt." Id. at 284. The Iowa court asserted: There is no statistical or economical proposition betterestablished, nor one to which a more general assent is given byreading and intelligent minds, than this, that the use ofintoxicating liquors as a drink, is the cause. of more want,pauperism, suffering, crime and public expense, than any othercause-and perhaps it should be said, than all other causescombined. Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165, 190 (1855). 91 Dissenting in People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856) ,justice Pratt stated: "Spiritous liquors are necessary inthe prosecution of many of the most valuable arts,' as well asfor mechanical, manufacturing and medicinal purposes." Id.at 260. 92 The Indiana Court noted "as a matter of generalknowledge . . . that the use of beer &c. as a beverage, isnot necessarily hurtful, any more than the use of lemonade or icecream.... It is the abuse, and not the use, of all thesebeverages that is hurtful." Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501,519-20 (1855). 93 Justice Pratt reasoned: Liquors, then, whether produced by fermentation ordistillation, do legally constitute property of use and value;and the owner of this species of personal property, when lawfullyacquired, is, upon every principle, . . . entitled to thepossession and use of it. This legally includes the right ofkeeping, selling or giving it away, as the owner may deem proper.This is a natural primary right incident to ownership . . . . People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244, 263 (1856); accord,Wynehamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378, 396-98 (1856) (Comstock, J.). 94 Said the Indiana Court: [T]he legislature enacted the law in question upon theassumption that the manufacture and sale of beer . . . werenecessarily destructive to the community, and in acting upon thatassumption, in our judgment, has unwarrantably invaded the rightto private property, and its use as a beverage and article oftraffic. . . . We repeat, the manufacture and sale and use of liquorsare not necessarily hurtful, and this the Court has a right tojudicially inquire into and act upon in deciding upon thevalidity of the law in question-in deciding . . . whether it isan indirect invasion of a right secured to the citizen by theConstitution. Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501, 520-21 (1855) (emphasisadded). 95 In an opinion often cited as the first to invoke thesubstantive construction of "due process of law," judgeComstock in Wynchamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378, 392-93, 398 (1856),stated: To say that "the law of the land" or "dueprocess of law", may mean the very act of legislation whichdeprives the citizen of his rights, privileges or property, leadsto a simple absurdity. The Constitution would then mean, that noperson shall be deprived of his property or rights unless thelegislature shall pass a law to effectuate the wrong, and thiswould be throwing the restraint entirely away. The trueinterpretation of these constitutional phrases is, that whererights are acquired by the citizen under existing law, there isno power in any branch of the government to take them away. When a law annihilates the value of property, and strips it ofits attributes, by which alone it is distinguished as property,the owner is deprived of it according to the plainestinterpretation, and certainly within the spirit of aconstitutional provision intended expressly to shield privaterights from the exercise of arbitrary power. 96 The Indiana court held the prohibitionary legislation incontravention of a provision in the state constitution declaringthat "all men are endowed by their Creator with certaininalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and thepursuit of happiness." Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501, 510(1855). Dissenting in People v. Gall2gher, 4 Mich. 244, 258(1856), Justice Pratt conducted an identical natural rightsinquiry without the benefit of Thomas Jefferson's penmanship. 97 13N.Y. 379 (1856). 98 6 Ind. 501 (1855). 99 Lincoln v. Smith, 27 Vt. 328, 337-38 (1855). 100 See State v. Guerney, 37 Me. 156, 161 (1853). 101 State v. Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 639 (1856); see Lincoln v.Smith, 27 Vt. 328, 338-39 (1855). 102 People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244, 255 (1856); State v.Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290, 297-98 (1856). 103 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290, 297 (1856); State v.Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 642 (1856). 104 State v. Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 692 (1856). 105 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185, 197 (1858); Lincoln v. Smith,27 Vt. 328, 360 (1855). 106 Meshmeier v. State, II Ind. 482 (1858). 107 In People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856), the majoritystated: The legislature has said that . . . no man shall sell liquorsto be used as a beverage, because by so doing, he inflicts injuryon the public; but, says the defendant, irrespective of the evil,this right to sell liquors is a natural right, and you have nopower to pass a law infringing that right. How does he prove it?Not by any adjudged cases; there are none, nor by anything in theconstitution preserving to him this right; but it is to bedetermined by the nature and character of the right. . . . [Themanner in which the determination is to be made is] a questionvery suitable and proper for the discussion and deliberation of alegislative body, but one which cannot be entertained by thiscourt. Id. at 257. judge Pratt replied: If the doctrine is true that the legislature can, by theexercise of an implied discretionary power, pass any law notexpressly inhibited by the constitution, then it is certain thata hundred laws may be enacted by that body, invading directlylegitimate business pursuits, impairing and rendering worthlesstrades and occupations, and destroying the substantial value ofprivate property, to the amount of millions of dollars. . . . Butwho, I ask, believes that the legislature possesses the power, orthat the people, in their sovereignty, ever intended to confer onthat body such unlimited omnipotence? As appears to me, no man ofreason and reflection can believe it. Id. at 277-79 (dissenting opinion). 108 Mere possession or consumption of alcohol was notprohibited during this phase of temperance legislation. Many ofthe courts were careful to allude to this feature and to notethat forfeiture could result only from illegalpossession-possession with intent to sell in violation of thelaw. See, e.g., Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165 (1855); Commonwealthv. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.) 414 (1853). 109 123 U.S. 623 (1887). 110 In Bartemeyer v. Iowa, 85 U.S. (18 Wall.) 129 (1873), theSupreme Court held that the prohibition of traffic inintoxicating drinks violates no privilege and immunity of UnitedStates citizenship; the Court avoided the question whether a lawprohibiting sale of liquor owned before the law was passed was adeprivation of property without due process. Four years later, inBeer Co. v. Massachusetts, 97 U.S. 25 (1877), the Court sustaineda prohibition law against a challenge under the obligation ofcontracts clauses but still deferred consideration of theWynehamer question. In upholding the seizure and forfeiture ofliquors belonging to the petitioner, justice Bradley stated: Ifthe public safety or the public morals require the discontinuanceof any manufacture or traffic, the hand of the legislature cannotbe stayed from providing for its discontinuance, by anyincidental inconvenience which individuals or corporations maysuffer. All rights are held subject to the police power of theState. 97 U.S. at 32. Finally, in Mugler v. Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887), Wynebamerwas slain. The Court sustained a conviction for selling beermanufactured before the passage of the law. The Court even heldthat, in order to make effective its regulations against sale,the State might forbid manufacture for personal use. Id. at 662.The only constitutional inhibitions remaining after Mugleremanated from the commerce power. For a discussion of the gradualelimination of these restrictions by congressional action, seeSafely, Growth of State Power Under Federal Constitution toRegulate Traffic in Intoxicating Liquors, 3 IOWA L. BuLL. 221,229-34 (1917). 111 In Mugler, justice Harlan stated: There is no justification for holding that the State, underthe guise merely of police regulations, is here aiming to deprivethe citizen of his constitutional rights. . . . If, therefore, astate deems the absolute prohibition of the manufacture and sale,within her limits, of intoxicating liquors for other thanmedical, scientific, and manufacturing purposes, to be necessaryto the peace and security of society, the courts cannot, withoutusurping legislative functions, override the will of the peopleas thus expressed by their chosen representatives. They havenothing to do with the mere policy of legislation. 123 U.S. at662. 112 See note 82 supra. 113 28 F. 308 (D. Ore. 1886). The prisoner had been convictedin an Oregon court and was being heard on petition for habeascorpus. 114 Id. at 312. 115 16 Nev. 50 (1881). 116 Id. at 55-56. 117 The Supreme Court rejected it one year later in Mugler v.Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887). 118 Ex parte Yung Jon, 28 F. 308, 311 (D. Ore. 1886). 119 Id. In defining property essentially in terms of habits ofthe community, judge Deady was leaving room for the"natural" rights argument with regard to alcohol andtobacco: True, we permit the indiscriminate use of alcohol and tobacco,both of which are classed by science as poisons, and doubtlessdestroy many lives annually. But the people of this country havebeen accustomed to the manufacture and use of these for manygenerations, and they are produced and possessed under the commonand long-standing impression that they are legitimate articles ofproperty, which the owner is entitled to dispose of without anyunusual restraint. . . . On the other hand, the use of opium,otherwise than as this act allows, as a medicine, has but little,if any, place in the experience or habits of the people of thiscountry, save among a few aliens. Id. at 311-12 (emphasis added). 120 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290 (1856); Lincoln v. Smith,27 Vt. 328 (1855); Commonwealth v. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.)414 (1853); cf. State v. Clark, 28 N.H. 176, 181 (1854)(ordinance that prohibited using or keeping intoxicating liquorsin any refreshment saloon or restaurant, "notunreasonable," since it did not "profess to prohibiteither the use or sale of liquor altogether"). 121 Ex parte Wilson, 6 Okla. Crim. 451, 119 P. 596 (1911);Titsworth v. State, 2 Okla. Crim. 268, 101 P. 288 (1909); Statev. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.F. 61 (1908); Ex parte Brown, 38Tex. Crim. 295, 42 S.W. 554 (1897) (alternative holding). Contra,Cohen v. State, 7 Ga. App. 5, 65 S.E. 1096 (1909); Easley TownCouncil v. Pegg, 63 S.C. 98, 41 S.E. 18 (1902). 122 Commonwealth v. Campbell, 133 Ky. 50, 117 SAN,. 383(1909); Ex parte Brown, 38 Tex. Crim. 295, 42 S.W. 554 (1897);State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 293 (1889). 123 Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246(1909); Sullivan v. City of Oneida, 61 Ill. 242 (1871). But seeTown of Selma v. Brewer, 9 Cal. App. 70, 98 P. 61 (Dist. Ct. App.1908). 124 H. BLACK, INTOXICATING LIQUORS 50 (1892); E. FREUND,POLICE POWER 484 (1904); H. JOYCE, THE LAW RELATING T0INTOXICATING LIQUORS  85 (1910); Rogers, "Life, Libertyand Liquor": A Note on the Police Power, 6 VA. L. Rev. 156,174 (1919). 125 E.g., State v. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.E. 61 (1908). 126 F. FREUND, P0LICE: POWER 486 (1904): Under these circumstances it seems impossible to speak of aconstitutional right of private consumption. There seems to be nodirect judicial authority for declaring private acts exempt fromthe police power, and the universal tolerance With regard to themshould be ascribed to policy. Like am, other exercise of thepolice power, control of private conduct would have to justifyitself on grounds of the public welfare. 127 Id. 128 E.g., State v. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.E. 61 (1908). 129 E.g., State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 283 (1889). 130 E.g., Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246(1909); Commonwealth v. Campbell, 133 Ky. 50, 117 S.W. 383(1909). 131 133 Ky. 50, 117 S.W. 383 (1909). 132 Id. at 58, 117 S.W. at 385 (emphasis added). 133 Id. at 63, 117 S.W. at 387. 134 Id. 63-64,117 S.W. at 387. 135 Similarly, in State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 283(1889), the court stated: It can hardly be questioned that the right to possess propertyis [an inalienable] right, and that that right embraces theprivilege of a citizen to keep in his possession property foranother. It is not denied that the keeping of property which isinjurious to the lives, health, or comfort of all persons may beprohibited under the police power. . . . [I]t must, of course, bewithin the range of legislative action to define the mode andmanner in which every one may so use his own as not to injureothers. But it does not follow that every statute enactedostensibly for the promotion of these ends is to be accepted as alegitimate exercise of the police Power of the State . . . . The keeping of liquors in his possession by a person, whetherfor himself or for another, unless he does so for the illegalsale of it, or for some other improper purpose , can by nopossibility injure or affect the health, morals, or safety of thepublic; and, therefore, the statute prohibiting such keeping inpossession is not a legitimate exertion of the police power. Id. at 148-49, 10 S.E. it 284 (emphasis added); accord, Exparte Brown, 38 Tex. Crim. 795, 42 S.W. 554 (1897). In Ex parte Wilson, 6 Okla. Crim. 451, 119 P. 596 (1911), theCourt, after quoting extensively from Commonwealth v. Campbell,noted, "The only conclusion that we can legitimately arriveat is that the act in question is not within a reasonableexercise of the police powers of the state-is unconstitutionaland void." 6 Okla. Crim. at 475, 119 P. at 606 (emphasisadded). Finally, the Alabama Supreme Court stated, in strikingdown a local ordinance prohibiting possession by beverage dealersof alcoholic beverages: [The ordinance] can be justified only, if at all, on theground that it sustains some reasonable relation to theprohibition law in the way of preventing evasions of that law bytrick, artifice, or subterfuge under guise of which that 12W isviolated. But it has no such relation. It undertakes to prohibitthe keeping if) any quantity and for any purpose, howeverinnocent, of intoxicating liquors and beverages in places whichare innocent in themselves. Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala.599, 606, 51 So. 246, 249 (1909). 136 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 114 P. 835 (1911); Luckv. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 44 P. 693 (1896); Ah Lim v. Territory, IWash. 156, 24 P. 588 (1890). 137 Ah Lim v. Territory, I Wash. 156, 163, 24 P. 588, 589(1890). 138 If the state concludes that a given habit is detrimentalto either the moral, mental or physical well being of one of itscitizens to such an extent that it is liable to become a burthenupon society, it has an undoubted right to restrain the citizenfrom the commission of that act; and fair and equitableconsideration of the rights of other citizens make it not onlyits right, but its duty, to restrain him. Id. at 164, 24 P. at590; accord, Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 515, 114 P. 835,837 (1911); Luck v. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 426, 44 P. 693, 694(1896). 139 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 515, 114 P. 835, 837(1911); Luck v. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 425, 44 P. 693, 694 (1896). 140 But it is urged . . . that a moderate use of opium . . .is not deleterious and consequently cannot be prohibited. Weanswer that this is a question of fact which can only be inquiredinto by the legislature. Ah Lim v. Territory, I Wash. 156, 164, 24 P. 588, 590 (1890).The dissent argued that moderate use by some could not bepunished to prevent excessive use by others. Id. at 172-74, 24 P.at 592-93. 141 Id. at 165, 24 P. at 590. [W]hether [opiums] nature andcharacter is such that for the protection of the public itspossession by unauthorized persons should be prohibited is aquestion of fact and of public policy, which belongs to thelegislative department to determine. Luck v. Sears, 29 0re. 421,426, 44 P. 693, 694 (1896). 142 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 514, 114 P. 835, 838(1911) (quoting lower court opinion) (citations omitted). 143 Id. at 515, 114 P. at 838 (emphasis added). 144 "It must be conceded that its indiscriminate usewould have a very deleterious and debasing effect upon our raceId. at 514, 114 P. at 838. 145 l Wash. 156, 24 P. 588 (1890). 146 Id. at 168, 24 P. at 591. 147 Individual desires are too sacred to be ruthlesslyviolated where only acts are involved which do not clearly resultin an in jury, to society, unless, possibly thus renderednecessary in order to prevent others from like actions which tothem are injurious. Id. at 173, 24 P. at 592. He concluded, however, that thestatute was too broad and that this question need not be reached. 148 Id. at 174-75, 24 P. at 593, 149 194 Ala. 406, 69 So. 652 (1915). 150 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246 (1909). 151 It is the peculiar function of the lawmakers to ascertainand to determine when the welfare of the people requires theexercise of the state's police powers, and what are appropriatemeasures to that end, subject only to the power and authority ofthe courts to see, when assured to the requisite certainty, thatthe measures of police so adopted do not arbitrarily violaterights protected by the organic laws. 194 Ala. at 421, 69 So. at656. 152 123 U.S. 623 (1887), quoted in 194 Ala. at 428-33, 69 So.at 659-60. 153 194 Ala. at 433, 69 So. at 660. 154 Id. at 434, 69 So. at 660. 155 Ex parte Crane, 27 Idaho 671, 151 P. 1006 (1915), aff'dsuh nom. Crane v. Campbell, 245 U.S. 304 (1917). 156 Ex parte Zwissig, 42 Nev. 360, 178 P. 20 (1919); Fitch v.State, 102 Neb. 361, 167 N.W. 417 (1918); State v. Brown, 40 S.D.372, 167 N.W. 400 (1918); Liquor Transportation Cases, 140 Tenn.582, 205 S.W. 423 (1918); State v. Certain Intoxicating Liquors,51 Utah 569, 172 P. 1050 (1918); Delaney v. Plunkett, 146 Ga.547, 91 S.E. 561 (1917); State v. Carpenter, 173 N.C. 767, 92S.E. 373 (1917); City of Seattle v. Brookins, 98 Wash. 290, 167P. 940 (1917); Brennan v. Southern Express Co., 106 S.C. 102, 90S.E. 402 (1916) (dictum). 157 245 U.S. 304 (1917). 158 Id. at 307-08 (citations omitted). 159 See text at note 126 supra. 160 245 U.S. at 308. 161 Eg., Slaughter House Cases, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 36 (1873). 162 Substantive due process was slowly being watered down evenin the economic area during this time. See, e.g., Muller v.Oregon, 208 U.S. 412 (1908). 163 E.g., Bronaugh, Limiting or Prohibiting the Possession, ofIntoxicating Liquors for Personal Use, 23 LAW NoTEs 67 (1919);Rogers, "Life, Liberty & Liquor": A Note on thePolice Power, 6 VA. L. REV. 156 (1919); Safely, Growth of StatePower Under Federal Constitution to Regulate Traffic inIntoxicating Liquors, 3 IOWA L, Bull 221 (1917); Vance, The Roadto Confiscation., 25 YALE I.J. 285 (1916). 164 Ch. 85, 41 Stat. 305 (1919). 165 Cornell v. Moore, 257 U.S. 491 (1922). 166 This argument was accepted in United States v. Dowling,278 F. 630 (S.D. Fla. 1922). 167, Law of Feb. 11, 1897, ch. 30, [1897] Tenn. Acts 156. 168 Austin v. State, 101 Tenn. 563, 48 S.W. 305 (1898), aff'd,179 U.S. 343 (1900). 169 179 U.S. 343 (1900). 170 The primary issue before the Court was whether the statuteinfringed the exclusive power of Congress to regulate interstatecommerce. Id. at 344. However, before turning to the"original package" questions, the Court first had toconclude that the statute was a legitimate exercise of the policepower, for only then could an indirect interference withinterstate commerce be sustained. Id. at 349. The Court noted onthis point: Cigarettes do not seem until recently to have attracted theattention of the public as more injurious than other forms oftobacco; nor are we now prepared to take judicial notice of anyspecial injury resulting from their use or to indorse the opinionof the Supreme Court of Tennessee that "they are inherentlybad and bad only." At the same time we should be shuttingour eyes to what is constantly passing before them were we toaffect an ignorance of the fact that a belief in theirdeleterious effects, particularly upon young people, has becomevery general and that communications are constantly finding theirway into the public press denouncing their use as fraught withgreat danger to the youth of both sexes. Without undertaking toaffirm or deny their evil effects, we think it within theprovince of the legislature to say how far they may be sold, orto prohibit their sale entirely . . . provided . . . there be noreason to doubt that the act in question is designed for theprotection of the public health. Id. at 348-49; cf. Gundling City of Chicago, 177 U.S. 183(1900) (affirming validity of licensing sale of cigarettes 171 City of Zion v. Behrens, 262 111. 510, 104 N.E. 836(1914); Hershberg v. City of Barbourville, 142 Ky. 60. 133 S.W.985 (1911). 172 In the broad language in which the ordinance is enacted itis apparently an attempt on the part of the municipality toregulate and control the habits and practices of the citizenwithout any reasonable basis for so doing. The ordinance is anunreasonable interference with the private rights of the citizen. . . . 262 Ill. at 513, 104 N.E. at 837-38. The ordinance is so broad as to prohibit one from smoking acigarette in his own home or on any private premises in the city.To prohibit the smoking of cigarettes in [such circumstances] isan invasion of his right to control his own personal indulgences.142 Ky. at 61, 133 S.W. at 986 (1911). By holding that theordinance applied in the home, the Kentucky court avoided thequestion raised in the Illinois case. The reasoning would appearto compel the same result, however. 173 B. ADAMS, THE THEORY OF. SOCIAL REVOLUTIONS 94 (1913). 174 Noble State Bank v. Haskell, 219 U.S. 104, III (1911). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Major Studies of Drugs and DrugPolicy ForbiddenFruit and the Tree of Knowledge - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B23-21IA031-000655-B037-244http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlr2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112430 text/html 49059HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:24:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:21 GMTContent-length: 48841 The Genesis of Marijuana Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H. Whitebread, II III. THE GENESIS OF MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Until the inclusion of marijuana in the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct in 1932 and the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937,there was no "national" public policy regarding thedrug. However, as early as 1914 the New York City Sanitary Lawsincluded cannabis in a prohibited drug list and in 1915 Utahpassed the first state statute prohibiting sale or possession ofthe drug. By 1931 twenty-two states had enacted such legislation.In the succeeding section, we shall delve into the circumstancessurrounding the passage of several of these early laws and theensuing judicial acquiescence in the legislative value judgmentsconcerning marijuana. We conclude that the legislative action andapproval were essentially kneejerk responses uninformed byscientific study or public debate and colored instead by racialbias and sensationalistic myths. A. Initial State Legislation 1914-1931 As indicated above, the Harrison Act, a regulatory measure inthe garb of a taxing statute, left many gaps unfilled in theeffort to prohibit illegal or nonmedical use of opiates andcocaine. Although Commissioner Anslinger of the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics stated in 1932 that few states had responded to theHarrison Act,1 most states had in fact enacted or reenactednarcotics laws in the period from 1914 to 1931.2 In so doing,twenty-one states had also restricted the sale of marijuana aspart of their general narcotics articles, one state hadprohibited its use for any purpose, and four states had outlawedits cultivation.3 Our objective in this section is to determinewhy these states chose to include cannabis in their lists ofprohibited drugs. The first consideration was the increasing public awareness ofthe narcotics problem. As noted above, the Harrison Actengendered a shift in public perception of the narcotics addict.With ever-increasing frequency and venom, he was portrayed in thepublic media as the criminal "dope fiend." Thishysteria, coupled with the actual increases in drug-relatedcriminal conduct due to the closing of the clinics,4 was thebasis for a good many of the post-Harrison Act narcoticstatutes.5 Other forces such as lurid accounts in the media,6publications of private narcotics associations 7 and theeffective separation of the addict and his problems from themedical profession8 all pressed legislatures into action to dealmore effectively with what was perceived as a growing narcoticsproblem. Despite the increasing public interest in the narcoticsproblem during this period, we can find no evidence of publicconcern for, or understanding of, marijuana, even in those statesthat banned it along with the opiates and cocaine. Observers inthe middle and late 1930's agreed that marijuana was at that timea very new phenomenon on the national scene.9 The perplexingquestion remains-why did some states include marijuana in theirprohibitive legislation a decade before it achieved any noticewhatsoever from the general public and the overwhelming majorityof legislators? From a survey of contemporary newspaper and periodicalcommentary we have concluded that there were three majorinfluences. The most prominent was racial prejudice. During thisperiod, marijuana legislation was generally a regional phenomenonpresent in the southern and western states. Use of the drug wasprimarily limited to Mexican-Americans who were immigrating inincreased numbers to those states. These movements were wellnoted in the press accounts of passage of marijuana legislation.A second factor was the assumption that marijuana, which waspresumed to be an addictive drug, would be utilized as asubstitute for narcotics and alcohol then prohibited by nationalpolicy. This factor was particularly significant in the New Yorklaw, the forerunner of nationwide anti-marijuana legislation.Finally, there is some evidence that coverage of the drug by theGeneva Conventions in 1925 was publicized in this country and mayhave had some influence. 1. Rationale in the West: Class Legislation Geometric increases in Mexican immigration after the turn ofthe century naturally resulted in the formation of sizeableMexican-American minorities in each western state.10 It wasthought then11 and is generally assumed now12 that use ofmarijuana west of the Mississippi was limited primarily to theMexican segment of the population. We do not find it surprising,therefore, that sixteen of these states prohibited sale orpossession of marijuana before 1930.13 Whether motivated byoutright prejudice or simple discriminatory disinterest, theresult was the same in each legislature-little if any publicattention, no debate, pointed references to the drug's Mexicanorigins, and sometimes vociferous allusion to the criminalconduct inevitably generated when Mexicans ate "the killerweed." In Utah, for example, the nation's first statewide prohibitionof marijuana 14 in 1915 was attended by little publicity. Thecombination of increasing Mexican immigration15 and thetraditional aversion of the Mormons to euphoriants of any kind16led inevitably to the inclusion of marijuana in the state'somnibus narcotics and pharmacy bill. Similarly, when the NewMexico and Texas legislatures passed marijuana legislation in1923, the former by separate statute17 and the latter byinclusion,18 newspaper reference was minimal despite coverage inboth states of legislative action.19 The longest of the Santa FeNew Mexican references noted: The Santa Fe representative, however, had better luck with his bill to prevent sale of marihuana, cannabis indica, Indian hemp or hashish as it is variously known. This bill was passed without any opposition. Marihuana was brought into local prominence at the penitentiary board's investigation last summer when a convict testified he could get marihuana cigarets anytime he had a dollar. The drug produces intoxication when chewed or smoked. Marihuana is the name commonly used in the Southwest and Mexico.20 In its only direct reference to marijuana, the Austin TexasStatesman stated: The McMillan Senate Bill amended the anti-narcotic law so as to make unlawful the possession for the purpose of sale of any marihuana or other drugs. Marihuana is a Mexican herb and is said to be sold on the Texas-Mexican border .21 The discriminatory aspects of this early marijuanalegislation, suggested only obliquely by origin and apparentdisinterest in Utah, New Mexico and Texas, are directly confirmedin Montana and Colorado. Montana newspapers gave relatively"full" coverage to a proposal to exclude marijuana fromthe general narcotics law and to create a separate marijuanastatute.22 On seven different days from January 14 to February10, 1929 (the date of the bill's passage), the Montana Standardsuccinctly noted the progress of the bill through thelegislature. The giveaway appeared on January 27 when the paperrecorded the following: There was fun in the House Health Committee during the week when the Marihuana bill came up for consideration. Marihuana is Mexican opium, a plant used by Mexicans and cultivated for sale by Indians. "When some beet field peon takes a few rares of this stuff," explained Dr. Fred Fulsher of Mineral County, "He thinks he has just been elected president of Mexico so he starts out to execute all his political enemies. I understand that over in Butte where the Mexicans often go for the winter they stage imaginary bullfights in the 'Bower of Roses' or put on tournaments for the favor of 'Spanish Rose' after a couple of whiffs of Marijuana. The Silver Bow and Yellowstone delegations both deplore these international complications" Everybody laughed and the bill was recommended for passage.23 The same year, a change in Colorado's marijuana law wasprecipitated by less comic apprehensions of the drug's evileffects. On April 7, 1929, a girl was murdered by her Mexicanstep-father. The story was lead news in the Denver Post every dayuntil April 16, probably because the girl's mother was white. Onthe 16th it was first mentioned that this man might have been amarijuana user. Headlined "Fiend Slayer Caught in Nebraska[;] Mexican Confesses Torture of American Baby," andsubheaded "Prisoner Admits to Officer He is MarihuanaAddict," the story, relates in full the underlying events: "You smoke marihuana?" "Yes " The Mexican said he had been without the weed for two days before the killing of his step-daughter .24 On April 17, the story on the Mexican included the following: He repeated the story he had told the Sidney Chief of Police regarding his addiction to marihuana saying that his supply of the weed had become exhausted several days before the killing and his nerves were unstrung.25 With regard to the legislative news there is no mention at anytime of a bill to regulate marijuana; however, on April 21, theDenver Post noted the Governor had signed a bill increasingpenalties for sale, possession or production of marijuana.26 The reader should note that public perception of marijuana'sethnic origins and crime-producing tendencies often went hand inhand, especially in the more volatile areas of the westernstates. Stories such as the one appearing in the Denver Post,where defendants charged with violent crimes attempted to blametheir actions on the effects of marijuana were primarilyresponsible for the drug's characterization as a "killerweed." In any event, from this brief survey of marijuanaprohibition in the western states, we have concluded that itsMexican use pattern was ordinarily enough to warrant itsprohibition, and that whatever attention such legislative actionreceived was attended by sensationalist descriptions of crimesallegedly committed by Mexican marijuana users. 2. Rationale in the East: Substitution The first significant27 instance of marijuana regulationappeared in the 1914 amendments to the New York City SanitaryLaws. The inclusion by the New York legislature of marijuana inIts general narcotics statute in 1927 was the precursor ofnationwide legislation .28 For these reasons, we have chosen NewYork as the most likely source of information regarding the.rationale for marijuana prohibition in Maine, Massachusetts,Michigan, Ohio, Rhode Island and Vermont, all of which had actedbefore 1931.29 In January 1914 the New York legislature passed its firstcomprehensive statute-The Boylan Bill-regulating the sale and useof habit forming drugs"' and did not include marijuana amongits list of prohibited narcotics. It appears that the Board ofHealth of New York City then amended its Sanitary Code adding"Cannabis indica, which is the Indian hemp from which theEast Indian drug called hashish is manufactured,"31 to theCity's list of prohibited drugs. Violation of this provision ofthe City Sanitary Code was a misdemeanor punishable by a smallfine and/or a jail term of up to six months. On July 29, 1914, anarticle reporting the amendment appeared in the New York Timeswherein the drug was described: This narcotic has practically the same effect as morphine and cocaine, but it was not used in this country to any extent while it was easy to get the more refined narcotics.32 The next day the editors of the Times commented: [T]he inclusion of cannabis indica among the drugs to be sold only on prescription is only common sense. Devotees of hashish are now hardly numerous enough here to count, but they are likely to increase as other narcotics become harder to obtain.33 From these observations, it would appear (1) that there werefew marijuana users at the time; and (2) that use of the drug wasexpected to increase as a direct result of the restriction ofopiates and cocaine. Despite New York City's early classification of cannabis withknown narcotics, New York State did not prohibit sale andpossession of the drug for other than medicinal purposes until1927.34 And this was true despite a great deal of activity on thenarcotics front from 1914 to 1927, when the legislature actedfour different times.35 Throughout all this tumult and in thevariety of narcotics proposals suggested or enacted,36 marijuanaor cannabis was not classified among the restricted drugs untilthe drafting of the 1927 Act. This act37 defined cannabis as a"habit-forming drug," 38 and accordingly punished asmisdemeanors39 the control, sale, distribution, administrationand dispensing40 of cannabis except for medical purposes. Thepenalty provision of the statute did not discriminate among typesof offenses, first or subsequent violations, or the prohibitednarcotic drugs.41 There is no apparent indication in the contemporary commentaryof the reasons for inclusion of marijuana in the New York laws.When the 1927 law was passed, public concern was focused on thegeneral need to reduce narcotic addiction; none of thecommentators were concerned about marijuana.42 While there werenumerous articles in the media dealing with the problems of theopiates, morphine, cocaine and heroin, only four articles aboutmarijuana appeared in the major New York newspaper during theentire period from 1914 until 1927. In 1923 the New York Timesnoted that the "latest habit forming drug ... marihuana,which is smoked in a cigarette" was exhibited at a women'sclub meeting.43 In 1925 the same paper reported that the drug hadbeen banned in Mexico.44 One year later, the paper reported theresults of testing in Panama on the effects of marijuana. Thearticle noted that as a result of these tests the study groupconcluded marijuana smoking was relatively safe; thus, it was"recommended that no steps be taken by the authorities ofthe Canal Zone to prevent the sale or use of marijuana and thatno special legislation on that subject was needed." 45Finally, in July 1927, the Times reported that a Mexican familywas said to have gone insane from eating marijuana.46 Perhaps theclearest indication of the absence of notice given the marijuanasection of the 1927 Act is that none of the articles discussingthe Act after its passage refer to marijuana .47 It is likely, then, that the inclusion of cannabis in thestate law was motivated primarily by the same fear that hadprovoked the Sanitary Law Amendment in 1914. Use, though stillslight, was expected to increase. Throughout the entire New Yorkexperience the main argument was preventive: Marijuana use mustbe prohibited to keep addicts from switching to it as asubstitute for the drugs which had become much more difficult toobtain after the enactment of the Harrison Act, and for alcoholafter Prohibition.48 Accordingly, the passage of the Harrison andVolstead Acts were direct causes of the preventive inclusion ofmarijuana among prohibited drugs. In fact, it has been observedthat marijuana use did increase during this period .49 Another factor that may have influenced the passage of the1927 Act was the Second Opium Conference at Geneva in 1925,50which included Indian hemp within the Convention against Opiumand other Dangerous Drugs, even though the United States hadwithdrawn in 1925 from the League of Nations deliberations oncontrolling and regulating the international traffic in dangerousdrugs.51 3. The International Scene The first mention of marijuana on the international front camewith the preliminary negotiations for the Hague Conference of1912. In preparing for this Conference, which represented anattempt to deal with the international opium traffic, thegovernment of Italy proposed that the production and traffic inIndian hemp drugs be included as part of the agenda of theConference.52 During the Conference itself, there was no mentionof the drug, and the Convention did not include cannabis in itsprovisions. In addition to the Convention, however, the delegatessigned a closing protocol: 2. The Conference considers it desirable to study the question of Indian hemp from the statistical and scientific point of view, with the object of regulating its abuses, should the necessity thereof be felt, by internal legislation or by an international agreement .53 It was not until just before the Geneva Conference of 1925that the proposal was mentioned again. In 1923 the followingresolution was passed by the Advisory Committee on Traffic inOpium and Other Dangerous Drugs of the League of Nations: IV. With reference to the proposal of the Government of the Union of South Africa that Indian hemp should be treated as one of the habit-forming drugs, the Advisory Committee recommends the Council that, in the first instance, the Governments should be invited to furnish to the League information as to the production and use of, and traffic in, this substance in their territories, together with their observations on the proposal of the Government of the Union of South Africa .54 At the 1925 meeting in Geneva, the Egyptians led the way inproposing that hashish be included within the Convention.55 AnEgyptian delegate presented a paper on the effects and use ofhashish in Egypt. Mr. El Guindy's study is so typical of theso-called scientific or empirical evidence that has beenpresented to justify the drug's prohibition that the followingexcerpt must be included. In stating that the real danger ofhashish is that it will produce insanity, the Egyptian delegatepresented the following: The illicit use of hashish is the principal cause of most of the cases of insanity occurring in Egypt. In support of this contention, it may be observed that there are three times as many cases of mental alienation among men as among women, and it is an established fact that men are much more addicted to hashish than women.56 The Egyptian proposal was referred to a subcommittee for studyand later in the Conference this group reported that the use ofIndian hemp drugs should be limited to medical and scientificpurposes. The proceedings contain no record of what medical orscientific evidence might have been brought forward to supportthe inclusion of the Indian hemp drugs in the Convention.57Nevertheless, they were the subject of Chapters IV and V of theConvention.58 4. Conclusion The early laws against the cannabis drugs were passed withlittle public attention. Concern about marijuana was relatedprimarily to the fear that marijuana use would spread, even amongwhites, as a substitute for the opiates and alcohol made moredifficult to obtain by federal legislation. Especially in thewestern states, this concern was identifiable with the growth ofthe Mexican-American minority. It is clear that no stateundertook any empirical or scientific study of the effects of thedrug. Instead they relied on lurid and often unfounded accountsof marijuana's dangers as presented in what little newspapercoverage the drug received. It was simply assumed that cannabiswas addictive and would have engendered the same evil effects asopium and cocaine. Apparently, legislators in these states foundit easy and uncontroversial to prohibit use of a drug they hadnever seen or used and which was associated with ethnicminorities and the lower class. B. Judicial Corroboration Two significant conclusions appear from a study of the fewcases59 involving convictions for marijuana offenses under theinitial wave of state laws. First, the argument regarding aprivate conduct limitation on the police power had been sodiscredited it was not even made. Second, the courts, like thelegislatures, relied on nonscientific materials to support theproposition that marijuana was an addictive, mind-destroying drugproductive of crime and insanity. In only one case was there a serious constitutional challengeto the validity of the legislation. Appealing a Louisianaconviction for possession of five hundred plants of marijuana,the defendant in State v. Bonoa60 argued not that the state couldnot punish mere possession but rather that the statute wasoverbroad, since aside from its use as an intoxicant themarijuana plant was employed in the manufacture of hemp line, inthe preparation of useful drugs and for the production of birdseed for canaries. Defendant's contention was that onlypossession, sale or use for deleterious purposes could beprohibited. The court's reply was that the drug's deleterious propertiesoutweighed its uses, especially since " [t]he Marijuanaplant is not one of the crops of this state." 61 Defendantalso offered the reductio ad absurdum argument that if possessionof the marijuana plant may be prohibited simply becauseintoxicating resin may be extracted from the flowering tops, thenthe possession of corn or grapes may be prohibited becausewhiskey and wine may be made from them, or possession of poppiesbecause opium may be extracted from them. To this the courtreplied that alcohol was less injurious than marijuana and thatboth alcohol and opium were difficult to prepare from thesesources while the marijuana plant was easily converted intotobacco and cigarettes. The court's reasoning is admirable if we accept the basicpremise that the marijuana drug is deleterious. To support thisconclusion the court quoted from Solis Cohen Githens'Pharmacotheraupeutics: The first symptom is usually an exaltation of the mind . . . . The ideas are joyous Sleep follows . . . . When aroused from sleep . . . the mind passes into the same somnolent condition, which lasts for several hours and is followed by a sense of weakness and extreme mental depression. In certain eastern people . . . perhaps because of continued use, the somnolent action is replaced by complete loss of judgment and restraint such as is seen more often from alcohol. An Arab leader, fighting against the crusaders, had a bodyguard who partook of haschisch, and used to rush madly on their enemies, slaying everyone they met. The name of "haschischin" applied to them has survived as "assassin." The habitual use of cannabis does not lead to much tolerance, nor do abstinence symptoms follow its withdrawal. It causes, however, a loss of mentality, resembling dementia, which can be recognized even in dogs.62 The court also quotes Rusby, Bliss & Ballard, TheProperties and Uses of Drugs: The particular narcosis of cannabis consists in the liberation of the imagination from all restraint . . . . Not rarely, in [the depression] state, an irresistible impulse to the commission of criminal acts will be experienced. Occasionally an entire group of men under the influence of this drug will rush out to engage in violent or bloody deeds.63 On these two sources, the entire opinion stands. The allegedlydeleterious consequences-criminal activity and insanity-aresupported only by the mythical etymology of the word"assassin." The marijuana user's purported propensitytoward crime, based on similar and often weaker authority, wasthe primary rationale underlying passage of the Marihuana TaxAct.64 So preposterous is this assertion that even the proponentsof criminalization-including the Cormmissioner of the Bureau ofNarcotics-later implicitly rejected it.65 In any event, the courts were as willing to accept suchevidence as the legislatures. In a Utah case, State v. Navaro,66where the court cited the acknowledged evils of marijuana torepel a vagueness attack,67 it relied on another set of dubiousauthorities. First, the court referred to the case of State v.Diaz68 wherein a defendant in a first degree murder prosecutiontried to disprove the requisite mens rea by showing that he wasunder the influence of marijuana at the time of the offense. Diazhad claimed that "his mind was an entire blank as to allthat happened to him and stated that after smoking the marijuanahe became 'very crazy.' To corroborate his assertion, defendantsummoned a physician whose testimony was summarized in Diaz in apassage quoted in full in Navaro: He stated that [marijuana] is a narcotic and acts upon thecentral nervous system affecting the brain, producingexhilarating effects and causing one to do things which heotherwise would not do and especially induces acts of violence;that violence is one of the symptoms of an excessive use ofmarijuana. That the marihuana produces an "I don'tcare" effect. A man having used liquor and marihuana mightdeliberately plan a robbery and killing and carry it out andescape, and then later fail to remember anything that hadoccurred. 70 Thus an attempt in an adversary setting by an accused toescape criminal responsibility by blaming his offense onmarijuana intoxication became medical authority for thescientific hypothesis that marijuana use causes crime. The second source of support in Navaro for the allegedlydeleterious effects of marijuana was a 1932 article by Hayes andBowery (the latter a member of the Wichita, Kansas, PoliceDepartment) entitled Marihuana .71 Calling for stricter penaltiesfor marijuana use, the authors stated that during theexhilaration phase, the user is likely to have increased sexualdesires72 and to commit "actions of uncontrollable violence,or even murder." 73 For these propositions, they citednewspaper accounts of crimes the causes of which the reporterattributed to marijuana74 and police testimony to the sameeffect.75 For example, the Chief Detective of the Los AngelesPolice Department was quoted as saying: In the past we have had officers of this department shot and killed by Marihuana addicts and have traced the act of murder directly to the influence of Marihuana, with no other motive. Numerous assaults have been made upon officers and citizens with intent to kill by Marihuana addicts which were directly traceable to the influence of Marihuana.76 It should be noted that Hayes and Bowery attributed theviolent impulse to the absence of restraint engendered during theso-called exhilaration phase, while each of the authorities citedby the Louisiana court in Bonoa attributed the same impulse tothe sufferings experienced during the "depression"phase.77 The authors also asserted that habitual use leads to a"loss of mental activity, accompanied by a general dullnessand indolence, like that of chronic alcoholics or opiumcaters," to "destruction of brain tissues" andinevitably to insanity. For this proposition, the authors merelysaid that "seventeen to twenty per cent of all malesadmitted to mental hospitals and asylums in India have becomeinsane through the use of this drug."78 Finally the court cited an article by Eugene Stanley, theDistrict Attorney of New Orleans, entitled Marihuana as aDeveloper of Crimiinals.79 The title conveys the message. We willreturn to Mr. Stanley in the succeeding section.80 The nonchalance with which Utah and Louisiana courts citedsensationalistic, nonscientific sources to support theproposition that marijuana produced crime and insanity suggestshow widely accepted this hypothesis was among decision-makers,both judicial and legislative, prior to 1931. Given theprevalence of this attitude, the noninvolvement of the middleclass, and the precedent established in the earlier alcohol andnarcotics cases, it is not surprising that constitutionalchallenges were either not made or easily rebuffed. Nor is itsurprising that challenges regarding the ambiguity of the word"marijuana" were unsuccessful.81 The courts, like thelegislatures, assumed marijuana caused crime and insanity, andassumed that had public opinion crystallized on the question, itwould have favored the suppression of a drug with such evileffects. Footnotes and References 1 Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State NarcoticLegislation, 21 GEO. L.J. 52, 53 (1932). 2 STATE Laws 35-327. 3 Id. at 14. 4 For a discussion of the change in the public image ofaddicts and the closing of clinical experiments, see p. 988supra. 5 See TERRY & PELLENS 877-919. 6 See, eg., text at notes 24-25 infra. For somewhat moreclinical discussions, see TERRY & PELLENS 877-919. 7 See Weber, Drugs and Crime, 10 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY370 (1919). 8 A. LINDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THE LAW 3-3S (1965); King,Narcotic Drug Laws and Enforcement Policies, 22 LAW &CONTEMP. PROB. 113, 120-26 (1957). 9 Hearing on H.R. 6385 Before the House Comm. on Ways andMeans, 75th Cong, 1st Sess. 20 (1937) [hereinafter cited as TaxAct Hearings]. 10 The Bureau of Immigration recorded the entry of 590,765Mexicans into the United States between 1915 and 1930. Of these,upwards of 90% in each year were to be resident in the 22 stateswest of the Mississippi, and more than two-thirds were to residein Texas alone. Information compiled from Tables, ImmigrantAliens, By States of Intended Future Residence and Race orPeoples, published yearly for each fiscal year from 1915 to 1930in COMM'R GEN. OF IMMIGRATION ANN. REP. 11 Tax Act Hearings 20, 3 3. 12 THE MARIHUANA PAPERs at xiv (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 13 Id.at xv. 14 At its 1915 session, the Utah legislature passed an omnibusnarcotics and pharmacy bill which included under it the cannabisdrugs. Ch. 66,  7, 8, [1915] Utah Laws 77. The law forbadesale and possession of the named drugs, and provided for medicaluse under a system of prescriptions and order blanks.Interestingly, clinical treatment of addicts was allowed. Id. at77-80. The law also prohibited possession of opium and marijuanapipes. Id. at 80. Violations were misdemeanors punishable byfines and/or imprisonment for terms up to six months, but thirdoffenders faced prison terms from one to five years. The statutemade no distinction between sale and possession, nor among thevarious drugs. The law was revised in 1927. Ch. 65, [1927]1 UtahLaws 107. 15 See note 10 supra. 16 See THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS OF THE CHURCH OF JESUSCHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS, CONTAINING THE REVELATIONS GIVEN TOJOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET  89, at 154 (192 1) (PP, P 5, 7, wineor strong drink) (P 8, tobacco) (P 9, hot drinks) (revelationsgiven through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio,February, 27, 1833, known as the Word of Wisdom). 17 The statute made importation of cannabis illegal andestablished a presumption of importation whenever a person wasfound to possess the drug. Ch. 42,   1-2, [1923] N.M. Laws58-59. Violations were punishable by fine and/or imprisonmentfrom one to three years. Cultivation, sale or giving awaycannabis except for use by physicians and pharmacists was alsoprohibited, and violations were punishable on first offense byone to three years in prison and on subsequent offenses by threeto five years imprisonment. Id.  3, 4. 18 The Texas general narcotics statute, ch. 150, [1919] Tex.Gen. Laws 277-79, as amended, ch. 61, [1919] Tex. Special Sess.Laws 156-57, similar in format to the Utah statute and theHarrison Act, included "any drug or preparation known orsold under the Spanish name of 'Marihuana........... Id. at 278.Unlike the Utah and New Mexico statutes, Texas prohibited onlyselling, furnishing or giving away marijuana. Except for theexempted medical purposes, such divestment of any of the listednarcotics could have resulted in a fine and/or imprisonment fromone month to one year. Id. at 279. 19 The Santa Fe New Mexican, hometown paper of the bill'ssponsor, made only one mention of marijuana at the time ofpassage, and that was to note that the drug was being smuggledinto the state prisons. Santa Fe New Mexican, Feb. 1, 1923. The Austin Texas Statesman gave heavy coverage to legislativenews at this time because the legislature was in special sessioncalled by the Governor to deal with a budgetary problem. 20 Santa Fe New Mexican, Jan. 31, 1923. The statute was passedon February 27, 1923; during the period from January 20 toFebruary 28, there were only three other references to marijuana.The newspaper first noted the bill in a one sentence report thata ban on sale of marijuana was to be discussed. Id., Jan. 20,1923. Finally, in articles entitled "A Day In TheLegislature," the progress of the bill (H.B. 56) was notedon February 21 and 27 in simple lists of bills enacted. Id., Feb.21, 27, 1923. So inconsequential was the bill that it was noteven mentioned in two stories describing the activities of thelegislature for that session. Id., Feb. 27, 1923, at 1, col. 1. 21 Austin Texas Statesman, June 19, 1923. Despite heavycoverage of legislative news and of narcotics generally, the ElPaso Times made no reference to marijuana between June 10 andJune 25. The Texas Statesman mentioned the "McMillanBill" only two other times, each time without directreference to marijuana. 22 Unlike most states that passed laws early in the 1920'sagainst marijuana use, Montana in 1927 passed a statute whichmerely amended the first section of its general narcotic law,Rev. Code of Mont. ch. 227, S 3186 (1921), to include marijuana.Ch. 91,  1, [ 1927] Mont. Laws 324. The new law, ch. 6, [1929]Mont. Laws 5, made use, sale or possession without a prescriptiona misdemeanor. 23 The Montana Standard, Jan. 27, 1929, at 3, col. 2. 24Denver Post, April 16, 1929, at 2, col. 1. 25 Id., April 17,1929, at 2, col. 1. 26 Id., April 21, 1929. Ch. 95, (1927] Colo. Laws 309,penalized possession, sale, gift, or cultivation of any of thecannabis drugs as a misdemeanor. Offenses carried a fine and/orimprisonment in the county jail for not less than one or morethan six months. The new law, ch. 93, [1929] Colo. Laws 331,increased the penalties for second offenders to one to five yearterms in the penitentiary. 27 Although Commissioner Anslinger stated in the 1937 Tax ActHearings that the District of Columbia had no law regulatingmarijuana, Dr. Woodward of the AMA refuted the Commissioner'sstatement by citing a 1906 provision which limited the sale ofcannabis to pharmacists and regulated sale of the drug by suchpharmacists to the public. Tax Act Hearings 92-93. The D.C.provision, Act of May 7, 1906, ch. 2084,  13, 34 Star. 175, istypical of early attempts to deal with the drug under the generalpoison laws, but it is noteworthy in its treatment of marijuanaseparately from opiates. 28 See pp. 10 30-3 3 infra. 29 In 1913, Maine prohibited the sale of cannabis indicawithout a prescription. STATE LAWS 137. Massachusetts passed asimilar law in 1917, id. at 150, and Michigan forbade possessionin 1929, id. at 161. A 1923 Ohio law prohibited sale orpossession with intent to sell, id. at 242; Rhode Islandprohibited sale in 1918, id. at 263; and Vermont barred salewithout a prescription in 1915, id. at 296. 31 Ch. 363, [1914] N.Y. Laws 1120. The first narcoticslegislation in New York was enacted in 1893. Ch. 661, art. XII,208, 11893] N.Y. Laws 1561. The 1893 law provided that noprescription containing opium, morphine, cocaine or chloral couldbe filled more than once. Two years later, the legislatureenacted a provision requiring that the effect of narcotics on thehuman system be taught in the public schools. Ch. 1041, 1,[18951 N.Y. Laws 972. In 1897, a law was passed making it afelony to possess any narcotic "with intent to administerthe same or cause the same to be administered to another"without his consent. Ch. 42,  1, [1897] N.Y. Laws 21. The firstprovision aimed at the sale of narcotics was passed in 1907 andprovided that the sale or distribution of cocaine without aprescription was unlawful. Ch. 424, @ 1, [ 1907] N.Y. Laws 879.This provision was subsequently amended to provide for thekeeping of records of sales and of transactions between dealers.Ch. 470,  2, [1913] N.Y. Laws 984; ch. 131,  1, [1910] N.Y.Laws 231; ch. 277,  1, [1908] N.Y. Laws 764. 31 N.Y. Times, July 29, 1914, at 6, col. 2. 32 Id. 33 Id., July 30, 1914, at 8, col. 4. 34 Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695-1703. 35 The 1914 act was amended by the Whitney Act in 1918 whichalso provided for the repeal of the 1914 act. Ch. 639, [1918]N.Y. Laws 2026. In 1921 an act was passed that in effect repealedall the legislation relating to the narcotics problem. Ch. 708,[1921] N.Y. Laws 2496. The measure made no provision for otherlaws on the subject. This surprising move was made in theinterests of economy, N.Y. Times, Jan. 6, 1921, at 1, col. 8, andwith the belief that the drug problem could be better handled bylocal authorities working in concert with federal agencies. Seeid., Jan. 9, 1921, S 2, at 1, col. 7; id., May 22, 1921, S 2, at11, col. 3, An act making illegal the sale of cocaine without aprescription was enacted in 1923. Ch. 130, [1923] N.Y. Laws 160.The possession of opium or cocaine without a prescription wasoutlawed in 1926. Ch. 650,  2, [1926] N.Y. Laws 1198. 36 As late as 1918, a legislative committee that hadexhaustively studied the narcotics problem in New York did notmention the use of marijuana and concluded: "The drugs whichare the sources of the difficulty are cocaine and eucaine withtheir salts and derivatives and opium and its derivatives,codeine, morphine and heroin." JOINT LEGISLATIVE COMM. TOINVESTIGATE THE LAWS IN RELATION TO THE DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OFNARCOTIC DRUGS, FINAL REPORT, NEW YORK SENATE Doc. No. 35 (1918).quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 833. 37 The Act of April 5, 1927, repealed both the 1923 and 1926laws and replaced them with a comprehensive narcotic controlscheme. Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695. This act containedprovisions relating to the control and use of narcotic drugs andtreatment of addicts; it also exempted certain preparations fromits coverage. The act furnished the model for the UniformNarcotic Drug Act. See pp. 1030-31 infra. Subsequently, in 1929, unlawful sale of narcotics was made afelony and all other violations of the 1927 act were mademisdemeanors. Ch. 377, [19291 N.Y. Laws 881. 38 Ch. 672, S 421(14), [ 1927] N.Y. Laws 1697. 39 Id. S 443, at 1702, 40 Id. 5 423, at 1697. 41 See id.  443, at 1702. 42 See N.Y. Times, Mar. 25, 1927, at 4, col. 6. 43 Id., Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. 44 Id., Dec. 29, 1925, at 10, col. 7. 45 Id., Nov. 21, 1926,  2, at 3, col. 1. 46 Id., July 6, 1927, at 10, col. 6. 47 See id., Mar. 25, 1927, at 4, col. 6; id., April 6, 1927,at 13, col. 2. 48 See Simon, From Opium to Hasheesh, Sci Am., Nov. 1921, at14-15. See also N.Y. Times, Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. Asimilar argument was made with respect to cocaine: Cocaine in particular is greatly in demand. When prohibitionis in force, persons, especially drinkers from compulsion ofhabit who have been robbed of their daily drink, will naturallyresort to cocaine . . . . Weber, supra note 7, at 372. 49 B. RENBORG, INTERNATIONAL DRUG CONTROL 216 (1947): As the campaign against the illicit traffic in opium,morphine, and cocaine drugs made progress and gradually resultedin diminution of the supplies on the illicit market, a markedincrease in the illicit traffic and the use of Indian hemp drugswas noticed. more particularly on the North American Continent(the problem of marihuana) and in Egypt (the hashish problem). 50 See Second Geneva Opium Conference, Convention, Protocoland Final Act, quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, OPIUM AS AN INTERNATIONALPROBLEM 534-70 (1925). 51 Id. at 344-46. 52 Wright, The International Opium Conference, 6 Am. J. INT'LL. 865, 871 (1912). 53 Addendum and Final Protocol of The international OpiumConf., The Hague, 1912, quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50,at 492. 54 ADVISORY Comm. ON TRAFFIC in OPIUM AND OTHER DANGEROUSDRUGs, REPORT To COUNCIL ON THE WORK OF THE SIXTH SESSION (1924),quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50, at 374. 55 See W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50, at 2 SI. 56 Quoted in id. at 378. Mr. El Guindy concludes by saying:"Generally speaking, the proportion of cases of insanitycaused by the use of hashish varies from 3 to 60 percent of thetotal number of cases occurring in Egypt." Id. at 379. 57 There are no records of these subcommittee hearings, so wecan only surmise that the quality of the evidence might have beenabout as bad as that presented in the floor report of theEgyptian delegation. 58 Geneva Convention of 1925, quoted in W.WILLOUGHBY, supranote 50, at 539. Moreover, the Convention defines Indian hemp asfollows: "Indian hemp" means the dried flowering or fruitingtops of the pistillate plant Cannabis sativa L. from which theresin has not been extracted, under whatever name they may bedesignated in commerce. Id. at 535 59 In an extensive surveyof cases appearing in the FourthDecennial Digest for the years 1926 to 1936, we could find onlyeight cases dealing with marijuana under laws enacted prior tothe Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. In chronological order: Gonzalesv. State, 108 Tex. Crim. 253, 299 S.W.. 901 (1927); State v.Franco, 76 Utah 202, 289 P. 100 (1930); State v. Bonoa, 172 La.955, 136 So. 15 (1931); Santos v. State, 122 Tex. Crim. 69, 53S.W.2d 609 (1932); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209, 58 S.W.2d534 (1933); Horton v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 237, 58 S.W.2d 833(1933); State v. Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 26 P.2d 955 (1933); People v.Torres, 5 Cal. App. 2d 580, 43 P.2d 374 (Dist. Ct. App. 1935). 60 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15 (1931). 61 Id. at 964, 136 So. at 18. 62 id. at 961-62, 136 So. at 17-18. 63 id. at 962-63, 136 So. at 18. 64 See pp 1055-57 infra. 65 See pp. 1072 infra. 66 see Utah 6, 26 P.2d 955 (1933) 67 Appellant, convicted on an information charging"possession of marijuana," contended that the statueprohibited only possession of the flowering tops and leaves ofthe marijuana plant. The court held that marijuana was thepopular name for the drug, not just the plant, and that theinformation accordingly charged an offense. For this proposition,it cited dictionaries, other state statutes, articles, cases andtexts. It is the court's familiarity with the articles describingthe allegedly evil effects of the drug with which we areconcerned. 68 76 Utah 463, 290 P. 727 (1930). 69 Id. at 469, 290 P. at 729 70 83 Utah at 12, 26 P.2d at 957, quoting 76 Utah at 469-470,290 P. at 729 71 Hayes & Bowery, Marihuana, 23 J. CRim. L. &CRIMINOLOGY 1086 (1932). 72 Id. at 1087, 1089. 73 Id. at 1088. 74 Id. at 1093. 75 Id. at 1088, 1090-91. 76 Id. at 1088 (emphasis added). 77 Compare text at note 72 supra with text at notes 62-63supra. 78 Hayes & Bowery, supra note 71, at 1090. 79 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.Police Sci. 252 (1931),cited in State v Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 14-15,26 P.2d 955, 958 (1933). 80 See p. 1044 infra. 81 E.g., State v. Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 15, 26 P2d 955, 959(1933); State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 959, 136 So. 15, 17 (1931 ).The Texas court was somewhat stricter in a series of casescharging simply sale or possession of "narcotic drugs"without specifying marijuana. On the same day, the court reversedconvictions in Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209. 58 S.W.2d 534(1933) (possession); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 212, 58S.W.2d 535 (1933) (sale or possession); and Horton v. State, 123,Tex. Crim. 237, 58 S.W.2d 833, (1933) (possession). On the otherhand the Court held that an indictment charging "possessionof marijuana" is sufficient even though it does not allegethat marijuana is a narcotic drug. Santos v. State 122 Tex. Crim.69, 53 S.W.2d 609 (1932). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B23-22IA031-000655-B037-267http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlr3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112445 text/html 63786HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:24:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:10 GMTContent-length: 63568 Passage of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act: 1927-1937 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II IV. PASSAGE OF THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUG ACT: 1927-1937 Our conclusions to this point bear summarization. During thefirst two decades of the twentieth century, state as well asnational policy was steadfastly opposed to manufacture, sale andconsumption of narcotics and alcohol except for medical purposes.Constitutional objections ions were uniformly ignored, in thenarcotics cases primarily because the nexus between the privateconduct and public harm was in fact a close one, and in thealcohol cases primarily because the legislation was in responseto full operation of the public opinion process, to which thecourts were willing to defer. We have also found that public opinion had not crystallizedagainst intoxicants generally, although public policy was movingrapidly in that direction. Ultimately, the mere existence of thatpublic policy even in the form of criminal law-was not sufficientto convert a public antipathy toward the evils of commercialalcohol traffic into opposition to moderate use of alcohol. Onthe question of private use, the public policy was unenforceableand eventually abandoned. However, with respect to narcotics, thepublic policy, also expressed through the criminal law,effectively converted narcotics use, in the public view, from amedical problem to a legal-moral problem. Sympathy forunfortunate victims turned into moral indictment. Because otherlaws and medical advances had reduced the number of accidentaladdicts, the number of addicts decreased; in this sense thepublic policy was successful. However, to the extent that thispolice, effectively ostracized a group of users from the rest ofsociety, drove them to criminal activity to sustain their habit,and engendered a moralistic public image, the stage was set formany ensuing problems the consequences of which have onlyrecently become matters of public debate. Ancillary to these developments during this period was theclassification of marijuana in some half the states as anaddictive drug that produced the same evils as the opiates andcocaine--crime, pauperism and insanity. The users, few in number,were primarily Mexicans. But as Mexican immigration increased andthe legitimate supply of narcotics and alcohol disappeared, afear developed, particularly in the western states, thatmarijuana use would increase, particularly among the white youth.As a result, some twenty-two states restricted marijuana use tomedical channels. The private conduct objection havingevaporated, the courts uncritically affirmed the legislativeclassification, accepting on faith nonscientific opinion thatmarijuana was a "killer weed." Even though the public opinion process did not operate on theissue during this period, the decision-makers in all probabilitythought that their actions comported with latent publicattitudes. If indeed marijuana caused crime and insanity, ofcourse the public would oppose its use, as it presumably did useof opium and cocaine. Because the users were few in number andconfined primarily to a suppressed social and economic minority,there was no voice which could be beard to challenge theseassumptions. To put it another way, the middle class hadsuccessfully frustrated alcohol prohibition because the publicopinion process came to reflect its view that the law should notcondemn intoxication. Yet because marijuana use was primarily alower class phenomenon, the middle class was generally unaware ofthe proposed legislation. The public opinion process did not operate and decision-makersremained uninformed about the drug. Quickly and with neitherconsideration nor dissent, the laws were enacted, thusestablishing a deliberative format followed often in thesucceeding debates. Although the groundwork had been laid, denigration of the"loco-weed" was primarily a regional phenomenon until1932. Nationalization ensued in two fell swoops in the 1930's.First, cannabis was included in an optional provision of theUniform Narcotic Drug Act proposed in 1932. Second, Congressenacted the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937. In the following sectionswe shall scrutinize these two watershed developments. A. Origins of the Uniform Law As we have suggested, the Harrison Act's masquerade as arevenue measure required residual state legislation in order toeffectuate full prohibition of the narcotics trade in America.1After its passage most states obediently marched to the tuneplayed in Washington. By 1931 every state had restricted the saleof cocaine and, with the exception of two, the opiates.2Thirty-six states had enacted legislation prohibitingunauthorized possession of cocaine3 and thirty-five prohibitedunauthorized possession of the opiates and other restricteddrugs.4 Eight states also prohibited possession of hypodermicsyringes.5 Perhaps the most significant feature of the stateresponse to the Harrison Act was the sharp increase in penaltiesbetween 1914 and 1931.6 Even those penalties, however, seem lightin comparison with the current penalties.7 On the other hand, some influential legislators thought thatthe Federal Act was sufficient to deal with the problem.8 Andthere was a considerable lack of uniformity regarding theoffenses prohibited and the penalties imposed by the severalstates. Finally, there was little attention devoted todevelopment of enforcement patterns within and among the states.9 With such a variety of state legislation, it is not surprisingthat little data is available on the enforcement of these laws.Since the Uniform Crime Statistics, currently the most reliablesource for enforcement data, were first compiled in 1932, thereare no figures on the number of drug arrests by state authoritiesin the 1920's. One commentator asserts: As of June 30, 1928, of the 7738 prisoners in federal penitentiaries, 2529 were sentenced for narcotics offenses, 1156 for prohibition law violations, and 1148 for stolen-vehicle transactions. Data are not available for approximately the same number in state institutions at this time.10 Despite the significant degree of federal enforcement activityevidenced by the above data, state law enforcement agenciesseldom involved themselves with narcotics.11 Perhaps the bestevidence of the lax enforcement of state narcotic laws from 1914to 1927 is the 1921 call for more effective enforcement of the1917 Massachusetts anti-narcotic law by the Medical Director ofthe Boston Municipal Court: Our laws aiming at the suppression of morphinism could perhaps be better, but, no matter whether they be improved or not, they will not have their maximal efficiency without adequate appropriations for their enforcement. Even with the insufficient funds now available, more could be reached. I understand, for instance, that there is no special police force (white squads) entrusted with the detection and arrest of cases of V.D.L. [Violation of the Drug Law.] and that officers are very much hankered by not being allowed to follow suspected persons outside their particular districts.12 The general lack of uniformity in anti-narcotic legislation,13the weakness of state enforcement procedures, 14 and the growinghysteria about dope fiends and criminality15 converged in severalrequests beginning as early as 1927 for a uniform state narcoticlaw.16 The drafting process of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act mustalso be viewed against the backdrop of two larger movements: (1) the trend toward the creation and dissemination of uniformstate laws by the National Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, agroup to which each state sent two representatives appointed bythe governor; and (2) the general concern in the late 20's and early 30's aboutcontrolling interstate crime, manifested, for example, in thecreation of the nearly autonomous Federal Bureau of Investigationin 1930. Because the concepts of states rights and narrowly construedfederal power held shelf sway in this period, appeal to theNational Commissioners was the inevitable recourse for thosepressing for uniform and-narcotic regulations. B. Drafting the Law A committee of Commissioners in conjunction with Dr. WilliamC. Woodward, Executive Secretary of the Bureau of Legal Medicineand Legislation of the American Medical Association, prepared andsubmitted at the 1925 meeting of the Commissioners the FirstTentative Draft.17 The Committee report stated: "It occursto your committee that the New York Act should be taken as abasis for framing a Uniform Act, and the draft submitted herewithis largely a copy of the New York Act." 18 It appears thatthe First Draft was drawn up by the Chairman of the Committeealone.19 It was never presented on the floor of the full meetingbut was recommitted for further study. 20 The First Draftincluded the following definitions: (12) "Cannabis indica" or "cannabis sativa" shall include any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative or preparation thereof and any synthetic substitute for any of them identical in chemical composition. (13) "Habit forming drugs" shall mean coca leaves, opium, cannabis indica or cannabis sativa.21 Nowhere in the Committee report or in the Proceedings doesthere appear an explanation of the inclusion of cannabis underthe prohibited or regulated drugs. The Second Tentative Draft was presented in 1928,22 and againthe draft was not discussed at the Conference but recommitted forfurther study.23 The Second Draft was an exact copy of the 1927New York statute.24 It retained cannabis in the class of"habit forming drugs ." 25 The lack of concern on thepart of the Commissioners themselves for the whole narcoticsmatter is reflected in the remarks of the President of theConference in introducing a brief statement to the Conference byDr. Woodward: President Miller: In view of the importance of the act I think it would not be amiss to listen to the Doctor for a few minutes, that he may point out to us why it is important. In some of the states we do not recognize the importance because it has not been called to our attention.26 Moreover, the statements of Dr. Woodward point out that one ofthe major forces supporting the drafting of the Uniform Act wasthe AMA. The doctors not only wanted to protect the public fromdrug addiction but also sought uniformity among state laws"in order that the profession may have a betterunderstanding of its obligations and duties and of its rights inthe use of narcotic drugs. " 27 Two Third Drafts were submitted. The initial one closelyresembled the first two Tentative Drafts and was presented in1929.28 Again, it was recommitted for further study.29 The secondThird Tentative Draft30 was the first to remove cannabis from thedefinition of "habit forming drugs" and to include onlya supplemental provision for dealing with the drug.31 Theexplanation for this change from the first two drafts iscontained in this note following the supplemental section: Note: Because of the many objections raised to the inclusion of cannabis indica, cannabis americana and cannabis sativa in the general list of habit-forming drugs, no mention is made of them in other sections of this act. The foregoing section is presented in order to meet an apparent demand for some method of preventing the use of such drugs for the production and maintenance of undesirable drug addiction. It may be adopted or rejected, as each state sees fit, without affecting the rest of the act.32 Judge Deering, the Chairman of the Committee on the UniformNarcotic Drug Act, recommended recommission for further studybecause the committee had not yet had a chance to consult withthe newly created Bureau of Narcotics. At the time of thisconference (August 14, 1930) no one had yet been appointed tofill the office of Commissioner of the Bureau.33 After receiving suggestions from the newly appointedCommissioner Anslinger, the Committee presented a FourthTentative Draft to the national conference in September 1931.34The section dealing with marijuana was identical to that includedin the 1930 revised version of the Third Tentative Draft.35 Thenational conference directed the Committee to return the nextyear with a Fifth Tentative or Final Draft:36 The Fifth-and final-Tentative Draft was adopted by theNational Conference of Commissioners on October 8, 1932.37 Therewere some major changes in the Uniform Act between the Fourth andthe Fifth Tentative Drafts with regard to the regulation ofmarijuana. Although the marijuana provisions remainedsupplemental to the main body of the Act, any state wishing toregulate sale and possession of marijuana was instructed tosimply add cannabis to the definition of "narcoticdrugs," in which case all the other provisions of the Actwould apply to marijuana as well as the opiates and cocaine.38 Itappears that the change from a supplemental section to a seriesof amendments to the relevant sections of the Act was preferredby the Narcotics Bureau.39 The only opposition to adoption of theFinal Draft came from some Commissioners who objected to tyingthe uniform state law to the terms of the Federal Harrison Act.40This last obstacle to adoption of the Act was overcome by theargument that a number of states had already passed suchlegislation so that the federalism problem should not stand inthe way; the Act was adopted 26-3.41 These floor arguments at thenational conference are a most important indication that no onechallenged or even brought up the issue of the designations ofthe drugs to be prohibited. Moreover, this brief debate confirmsthe notion that the Act received very little attention of any ofthe Commissioners other than those sitting on the committee thatdrafted it.42 Examination of the annual proceedings of the Commissionersimmediately suggests several conclusions about the drafting andproposal of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. (1) It was drafted inconjunction with the American Medical Association and, after1930, Commissioner Anslinger of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.(2) It was not one of the more controversial uniform laws and itwas given little consideration during the full meetings of theCommissioners. (3) Impetus for the legislation, especially theoptional marijuana provisions, came from the Bureau of Narcoticsitself. (4) No scientific study of any kind was undertaken beforethe optional marijuana section was proposed. (5)The first threetentative drafts included marijuana within the general part ofthe Act while the last two (including the one finally adopted bythe Commissioners) made marijuana the subject of a separate,optional provision. (6) The model for all the drafts of theUniform Act was the 1927 New York State statute. C. Passage of the State Laws By 1937 every state had enacted some form of legislationrelating to marijuana, and thirty-five had enacted the UniformAct.43 The process by which a previously regional phenomenonbecame nationwide closely parallels that which characterized theearlier state-by-state developments. The major difference is thatthe Bureau of Narcotics sought to insure passage of the Act ineach state through lobbying and testifying before thelegislatures and by propagandizing in channels of public opinion.The Bureau's role has been overstated, however. The same factorsthat combined to produce the earlier legislation were exacerbatedduring the nationalization period, 1932-1937, and the legislationprobably would have passed just as easily without the efforts ofthe Bureau. Use of the drug was still slight and confined tounderprivileged or fringe groups who had no access either topublic opinion or to the legislators. The middle class had littleknowledge and even less interest in the drug and the legislation.Passage of the Act in each state was attended by littlepublicity, no scientific study and even more blatant ethnicaspersions than the earlier laws. In short, the laws wentunnoticed by legal commentators, the press and the public atlarge, despite the propagandizing efforts of the Bureau ofNarcotics. 1. Use Patterns and Public Knowledge: 1931-1937 As we noted earlier, marijuana use began in this country instates near the Mexican border,44 "marijuana" in factbeing a Mexican label for the cannabis drug. Throughout the1920's marijuana use was confined primarily to theMexican-American community; however, by the late 20's use of thisdrug had spread to many of the larger cities and had become quitepopular among some elements in the Black ghettoes .45 jazzmusicians, dancers and others found the drug a cheap and readilyavailable euphoriant.46 Nevertheless, use still remained slight even in 1934.Commissioner Anslinger himself asserted in 1937: "Ten yearsago we only heard about it [marijuana] throughout the Southwest .. . . [I]t has only become a national menace in the last 3years." 47 Still another commentator has written: Only in the 1920's was there any significant usage even by the Mexican-American communities in border cities, and only in the mid and late 1920's did Negro, jazz musicians and "degenerate" bohemian sub-cultures start smoking marijuana. Even the most lurid Journalists did not claim marijuana "seeped" into society at large until the 1930's and usually the mid-30's.48 As late as 1928, the arrest of one Harlem youth for possessionof a small amount of marijuana was news." Thus, we concludethat the number of users was still small, although it may havebegun to grow around 1935, and that these users were stillconcentrated regionally in the West and Southwest andsocioeconomically within the lower class Mexican-American andBlack communities. At the same time, the overwhelming majority of middle-classAmericans in the 1930's knew nothing of marijuana use-they hadnever seen marijuana and knew no one who used the drug. Prior to1935 there was little, if any, attention given marijuana in majornational magazines50 and the leading national newspapers.51 Thatfew middle class Americans in this period knew anything ofmarijuana or its effects is best illustrated by the fact that theBureau of Narcotics conducted a campaign to alert people to thedangers of marijuana. The Bureau as early as 1932 began arousingpublic opinion against marijuana by "an educational campaigndescribing the drug, its identification and its evileffects." 52 In July 1936, the New York City police wereshown marijuana so that they would recognize it growing or indried, smokeable form .53 Thus, even policemen had to be shownthe plant as late as 1936 to permit effective enforcement of theNew York state law. We may accordingly infer that the level ofpublic familiarity with the drug was quite low indeed.54 What little information filtered to the middle class wasgenerated by sporadic campaigns by local newspapers detailing thepotential evils of marijuana; the accounts, as before, weresensationalistic and tended to exacerbate latent ethnicprejudices. For example, a 1934 newspaper account linked crime inthe Southwest with marijuana smoking Mexican-Americans in theregion.55 In a 1935 letter to the editor of the New York Times, aSacramento, California, reader asserted: Marijuana, perhaps now the most iinsidious of our narcotics, is a direct by-product of unrestricted Mexican immigration . . . . Mexican peddlers have been caught distributing sample marijuana cigarettes to school children.56 The writer went on to demand a quota on Mexicans permitted toenter the country. In testifying in favor of the Marihuana TaxAct, Commissioner Anslinger submitted a letter he had receivedfrom the editor of a Colorado newspaper asking the Bureau to helpstamp out the marijuana menace. After describing an attack by aMexican-American, allegedly under the influence of marijuana, ona girl of his region the writer stated: I wish I could show you what a small marijuana cigaret can do to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents. That's why our problem is so great; the greatest percentage of our population is composed of Spanish-speaking persons, most of whom are low mentally, because of social and racial conditions.57 Again, in the testimony at the hearings on the Marihuana TaxAct the following is excerpted from an article included in therecord: We find then that Colorado reports that the Mexican population there cultivates on an average of 2 to 3 tons of the weed annually. This the Mexicans make Into cigarettes, which they sell at two for 25 cents, mostly to white school students.58 Thus, not only did few middle-class Americans know aboutmarijuana and its use, but also what little"information" was available provoked an automaticadverse association of the drug with Mexican immigration, crimeand the deviant life style in the Black ghettos. Naturally, theimpending drug legislation, as had the earlier state legislation,became entangled with society's views of these minority groups. 2. Role of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics It has become quite fashionable among critics of existingmarijuana legislation to assert that the sole cause of theillegal status of marijuana has been the crusading zeal of theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and especially of its long-time head,Harry J. Anslinger. Some observers have suggested that theBureau's activity was produced by bureaucratic exigencies and theneed to expand;59 others have said the Bureau was on a moralcrusade;60 still others have asserted that the Bureau believedits own propaganda about the link between criminality and dopefiends.61 While much of this may be true, it is clear that theBureau did not single-handedly conjure up the idea of banningmarijuana use. Since many states had already undertaken theregulation of marijuana before the creation of the Bureau in1930, we cannot credit the Bureau alone with the pressure tooutlaw the drug. At the same time, it is certain that the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics' actions quickened the pace of the passage by statelegislators of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. The Bureau saw thepassage of state narcotics laws as one of its primary objectives.To this end we have detailed how directly the Bureau was involvedin the creation of the Final Draft of the Uniform Act. Afterapproval of the Final Draft, the Bureau began a significantcampaign in the newspapers and legal journals to boost publicsupport for the Uniform Act.62 By detailing the inability offederal enforcement agencies to deal with the burgeoningnarcotics traffic, the Bureau continued to press for passage ofthe Uniform Act by creating a felt need in the public for suchlegislation.63 Despite the efforts of the Bureau, the Uniform Actwent virtually unnoticed by legal commentators and periodicals,and by the public media. 3. Legislative Scrutiny and Media Coverage The Uniform Act was passed by the legislatures of most stateswith out scientific study or debate and without attracting publicattention. In examining in detail the passage of the Uniform Act inVirginia and some other selected states, it will be clear thatpublic concern over marijuana succeeded the outlawing of the drugand did not precede it. Our methodology to determine the extentof public attention in a given state at the time of the passageof the act was to review the newspapers of larger cities for thetwo weeks before and after passage.64 In Virginia the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act passed the House88-0 on February 16, 1934,65 and was approved 34-0 by the Senateon February 22.66 Although the Act as passed in Virginiacontained no marijuana provisions, the same legislature the nextmonth passed a bill (H.B. 236), prohibiting "use of opium,marijuana [and] loco weed ... in the manufacture of cigarettes,cigars" and other tobacco products.67 This law, whichamended a 1910 Virginia statute prohibiting the use of opium inthe manufacture of cigarettes,68 was the first mention ofmarijuana, or any of its derivatives in the Virginia Code. An examination of the Richmond Times-Dispatch, the newspaperof the state capital and perhaps the most influential newspaperin the state at that time, for the period surrounding theenactment of these two provisions (February 1 to March 15, 1934)shows clearly that little, if any, public attention attendedtheir passage. There is no mention at any time of H.B. 236.69 Asfor H.B. 94 (the Uniform Act), the Times Dispatch reported onFebruary 7 that the bill had been introduced. This announcementwas buried among the list of all bills introduced and referred onFebruary 6.70 In a February 12 article dealing with"controversial" bills before the House and Senate thatweek no mention was made of H.B. 94. On March 6, the newspaperrecorded: "Among the important bills passed were. . . . [fardown the list] the Scott bill, making the State narcotic lawconform to the Federal statute." 71 That is the sum of thepublicity received by the Uniform Act and the statute that firstregulated marijuana in any way in Virginia. In 1936, the legislature passed a separate statute prohibitingthe sale and use of marijuana. This bill-S.B. 289-passed theHouse and Senate unanimously.72 The Act prohibited, except for anarrow medical exception, sale, possession, use and cultivationof marijuana .73 The penalties for violation, interestingly, weremore severe than those for violation of the 1934 Uniform Act.Looking again at the Times-Dispatch for the period from February15 to March 19, 1936, we find only one brief article on the newmarijuana legislation. After the Senate passed the measure onFebruary 29, the following appeared: Among the bills passed by the Senate was the Apperson measure prohibiting the cultivation, sale or distribution of derivatives of the plant cannabis sativa, introduced as an outgrowth of alleged traffic in marihuana cigarettes in Roanoke. It fixes punishment for violation of its provisions at from one to 10 years in the penitentiary, or by confinement in jail for 12 months and a fine of not more than $1,000 or both. Charges that school children were being induced to become addicts of marihuana cigarettes and that the weed was being cultivated in and near the city on a wide scale were laid before the Roanoke City Council last year. A youth who said he was a former addict of the drug testified before the Council that inhalation of one of the cigarettes would produce a 'cheap drunk' of several days' duration.74 No further mention of this statute was made after the Housepassed it or after the Governor signed it into law. In order to determine whether the lack of public attention inVirginia was common to other states when the first prohibition ofmarijuana took place, we have surveyed the leading newspapers ofseveral other states at the times encompassing passage of thelaw. We tried to select states that had not previously regulateduse of the drug under the assumption that more publicity wouldattend initial legislation than an amendment of existing law. In New Jersey, Rhode Island, Oregon and West Virginia, forexample, the major newspapers of Newark, Providence, Salem andCharleston 78 respectively, referred to the Uniform Act only onceand to marijuana not at all. In Kentucky, the Louisville HeraldPost printed only two short references to the Uniform Act,79 oneof which referred to marijuana: [Congressman] Kramer added that boys and girls of school age are being led into the use of habit forming drugs by underworld leaders.......... Muggles" or cigarettes made from marijuana, commonly called loco weed or hemp, are also tabooed under the new state law, it was learned.80 Typical of both legislative and newspaper concern about thenew law is the following Charleston Daily Mail comment: A Narcotic Bill Inconspicuously upon the special calendar of the house of delegates rather far down upon it-is Engrossed S.B. No. 230, lodging specific powers in the hands of state authorities for the control of the traffic in narcotics. It has passed the Senate unanimously. It should pass the House, and its only danger of defeat there is the very real one that it will become lost in the shuffle of adjournment now but a few hours away. The bill goes under the name of the uniform narcotic drug act and it is just that. Identical measures for the control by the states of illicit traffic on drugs have been passed by other states, notably the Southern group. Its passage here would result in a broad territory in which there are corresponding laws .... 81 The editorial nowhere mentions marijuana. The bill itselfpassed in the waning hours of the special session with nosubsequent attention given it. 82 From our survey of these and other states, we have concludedthat with but one exception83 the Virginia experience was thenorm. (1) The laws prohibiting use, sale, possession, anddistribution of marijuana passed unnoticed by the media. Therewas no public outcry for such legislation. (2) Quite often thebill was buried beneath more controversial bills in a busylegislative session. (3) In many states the Act was passed latein the session along with myriad other"uncontroversial" laws. (4) Finally, no state undertookindependent study to determine the medical facts aboutmarijuana-they relied on information supplied by the FederalBureau of Narcotics84 or a few lurid newspaper stories.85 4. Available Medical Opinion In conjunction with the fourth conclusion from our state casehistories of the passage of this Act, we should examine theextent of medical knowledge that might have been available tolegislators had they wanted to conduct an independent evaluationof the dangers of the hemp drugs. There were five influential sources for information about theeffects of marijuana and hemp on humans. None of these wereconducted with the scientific precision characterizing modernstudies of drug effects. However, they each deserve mention hereeither because they deserved attention then or because theyheavily influenced later commentators. The first exhaustive study of the effects of cannabis and theother hemp drugs was done by the British in India. Their IndianHemp Drugs Commission studied cannabis use among the nativepopulation in India in 1893 and 1894,86 and submitted itsconclusions in a 500-page report. The Commission receivedevidence from 1,193 witnesses, including 335 doctors, and studiedthe relevant drug-related judicial proceedings and the intakerecords of every mental hospital in British India. As a resultthey concluded: In regard to the moral effects of the drugs, the Commission are of opinion that their moderate use produces no moral injury whatever. There is no adequate ground for believing that it injuriously affects the character of the consumer. Excessive consumption, on the other hand, both indicates and intensifies moral weakness or depravity. Manifest excess leads directly to loss of self-respect, and thus to moral degradation. In respect to his relations with society, however, even the excessive consumer of hemp drugs is ordinarily inoffensive. His excesses may indeed bring him to degraded poverty which may lead him to dishonest practices; and occasionally, but apparently very rarely indeed, excessive indulgence in hemp drugs may lead to violent crime. But for all practical purposes it may be laid down that there is little or no connection between the use of hemp drugs and crime.87 It is quite clear, however, that the Indian Hemp DrugCommission88 Report was not disseminated in the United Statesuntil 1969 . On the other hand, periodic reports of the Panama Canal ZoneGovernor's Committee to study the physical and moral effects ofthe use of marijuana were available to legislators before thepassage of the Uniform Act. After an investigation extending fromApril to December 1925, the Committee reached the followingconclusions: There is no evidence that marijuana as grown here is a"habit-forming" drug in the sense in which the term isapplied to alcohol, opium, cocaine etc. or that it has anyappreciable deleterious in influence on the individual usingit.89 In 1933, a similar Panama Canal Zone committee reported: Delinquencies due to marijuana smoking which result in trial by military court are negligible in number when compared with delinquencies resulting from the use of alcoholic drinks which also may be classed as stimulants and intoxicants.90 About the time that the final Governor's Committee Report fromthe Canal Zone was completed, a New Orleans physician, Dr.Fossier, completed a study from which he concluded that marijuanawas a highly dangerous drug with habit-forming properties.91 Thispiece would have remained relatively unnoticed due to theobscurity of the journal in which it was published had it notbeen picked up by the New Orleans District Attorney, EugeneStanley, and made the basis for his own article-Marihuana as aDeveloper of Criminals92 which appeared in a law enforcementjournal. Mr. Stanley stated: It is an ideal drug to cut off inhibitions quickly. . . . At the present time the underworld has been quick to realize the value of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelicts to that of a master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint, and to its influence may be attributed many of our present day crimes. It has been the experience of the Police and Prosecuting Officials in the South that immediately before the commission of many crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged in by criminals so as to relieve themselves from the natural restraint which might deter them from the commission of criminal acts, and to give them the false courage necessary to commit the contemplated crime.93 Mr. Stanley's article, based on no empirical data whatsoever,was widely used by courts to corroborate early legislation and bylobbyists to justify the later prohibitive legislation againstthe hemp drugs.94 In 1933 the following colloquy appeared in the Journal of theAmerican Medical Association: Effects of Cannabis To the Editor:-I have been hearing about the smoking of cigarets dipped into or medicated with fluid extract of Cannabis americana. I can find nothing about the use of the drug by addicts. What is its immediate effect? What are its late effects? What is the minimum lethal dose? In what way does it differ from or resemble "muggles" in its action? While in Louisiana I was told that the use of marihuana causes dementia. Is this true' Please omit name. M.D., Illinois. ANSWER.-The effect of Cannabis americana is the same as that of Cannabis indica- and, of the effect of the latter, the books are so full that it is hardly necessary to detail them here. It must suffice here to say that cannabis, at the height of its action, usually produces hallucinations, with or without euphoria, and that these are followed by a deep sleep. Its most marked after-effect is the liability to the establishment of a craving for the drug, the habitual use of which undermines the intellectual qualities and the social value of the victim and leads to general physical deterioration. It is stated that smokers nearly always become imbecile in time. The minimum lethal dose is unknown, no fatalities having been reported in man. In view of the fact that one dose may kill one dog that has no marked effect on another, one must admit the possibility of a lethal effect on man. In view of what has been said, it must be admitted that "marihuana," which is merely another name for Cannabis indica, may cause dementia.95 The reply contains no indication how or where the persons whoanswered the question got their data. It seems clear from thenature of the response that the medical community was quiteuncertain as to the effects of the drug in 1933. In 1934, Dr. Walter Bromberg, senior psychiatrist at BellevueHospital, reported that marijuana was not a habit-forming drugand was far less responsible for crime than other drugs such asalcohol. In this study, Bromberg drew his data from examinationof 2,216 inmates convicted of felonies.96 Dr. Bromberg pointedout that marijuana users tend to be passive in comparison tousers of alcohol and that the hemp drugs should lead to crimeonly in cases of use by already psychopathic types. 97 This then was the extent of medical evidence available tolaymen and legislators alike at the time the Uniform NarcoticDrug Act and the fast prohibitions of marijuana were enacted inmost states. We can conclude the following from our brief reviewof the medical literature. (1) Little was really known about theeffects of marijuana use-there were few studies and what studiesthere were had serious methodological flaws. (2) Even if thestudies we record had been adequate methodologically, theyappeared generally in obscure medical not widely read by laymen.(3) Of these studies, most found marijuana relatively harmlessespecially in contrast to use of alcohol. (4) None of thesestudies were considered in either the formulation or the passageof the Uniform Act in the states examined. And what is moreastounding is that instead of consulting medical opinion,legislators relied on lurid newspaper accounts of marijuana,often provided by defendants in criminal prosecutions whosemotivation was to use marijuana to escape criminalresponsibility. 5. Provisions of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act andSupplemental Virginia Marijuana Statute Having studied the circumstances surrounding passage of theUniform Act and similar legislation in several states between1932 and 1937, we shall briefly summarize the provisions of thoselaws. (a) Classification and Offenses.-The Virginia legislature madeno changes in the Uniform Act as drafted by the Commissioners anddid not include the supplementary marijuana provisions in passingthat Act.98 In 1936, Virginia passed special marijuanalegislation99. which defined cannabis exactly as did thedefinitional provision of the Uniform Act. Both the specialmarijuana statute in Virginia and the Uniform Act prohibitedpossession, transfer and cultivation of the drug100 but did notrefer to the more specific acts that later came to be separatedand punished more heavily, such as sale to a minor and possessionof more than a certain amount. (b) Penalties.-The Uniform Act contained no specific penaltiesfor its violations; the matter of supplying the appropriatepenalties was left to each state. Virginia punished firstviolations of its Uniform Act by a fine not exceeding $100 and/orimprisonment in jail not exceeding one year, and second andsubsequent offenses by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and/orimprisonment for not more than five years in the penitentiary.101The penalties for violation of Virginia's 1936 marijuana statutewere stiffer than for violation of its Uniform Act. Each offensewas punishable by imprisonment in the penitentiary for from oneto ten years or by confinement in jail for not more than twelvemonths and/or by a fine up to $1,000, in the discretion of thecourt or jury.102 An analysis of penalties for violation of the marijuanastatutes enacted in other states at about the same time indicatesVirginia's penalties were atypically harsh. In New Jersey, forinstance, the penalty for unlawful possession and sale ofmarijuana was that attaching to a high misdemeanor.103 In RhodeIsland the penalty for unlawful possession was a fine of not morethan $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than threeyears orboth.104 For unlawful selling, Rhode Island provided a fine ofnot more than $2,000 or imprisonment for not more than five yearsor both.105 In Kentucky the penalty for a first offense violationwas a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 or jailfor not less than thirty days nor more than one year or both. Forsecond and subsequent offenses the statute required imprisonmentin the penitentiary for not less than one nor more than fiveyears.106 Finally, West Virginia penalized a first offender by afine not exceeding $100 or jail for not exceeding one year orboth, and subsequent offenders by fine not exceeding $1,000 orimprisonment in the penitentiary not exceeding five years orboth.107 This comparison indicates that Virginia penalties could bemore severe than the average. Moreover, Virginia did notdistinguish in penalty between possession and sale of the drug,and violation of Virginia's separate marijuana law could be moreheavily penalized than violation of the Uniform Act. Footnotes and References 1. See p. 989 supra 2. STATE LAWS 13. Id at 8. Id. Id at 21 For example, compare ch. 337 [1929] NY Laws 881 with ch. 363 [1914] NY Laws 1120 See Appendix A, Tables II, III For example, in 1921 New York had repealed its general narcotics provision, ch. 708 [1921] NY Laws 2496. See note 35 at 1017-18 supra. Governor Miller of New York at that time stated: Being unable to resolve that conflict of opinion, I have deemed it the safest course to leave the subject to be governed by the Federal statute until such time at least as it shall more clearly appear in what way that statute might be wisely supplemented by the state. 48. REPORT OF THE NEW YORK STATE BAR ASSOCIATION 133 [1925](emphasis original) Commissioner Anslinger felt that the stateshad failed to do their part during this period: Notwithstanding the limited power of the Federal Government,state officers immediately became imbued with the erroneousimpression that the problem of preventing abuse of narcotic drugswas one now [after the Harrison Act] exclusively cognizable bythe National Government, and that the Federal Law alone,enforced, of course, by Federal agencies only, should representall the control necessary over the illicit narcotic drug traffic. Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State Narcotic Legislation,21 GEO. L.J. 52, 53 (1932). 9 TERRY & PELLENS 969-91. See also 1928 HANDBOOK OF THENATIONAL CONFERENCE OF COMMISSIONERS ON UNIFORM STATE LAWS ANDPROCEEDINGs 77-78 (handbooks hereinafter cited as 19- HANDBOOK]. 10 King, The Narcotics Bureau and the Harrison Act, 62 YALEL.J. 736, 738 n.12 (1953). See also Schmeckbier, The Bureau ofProhibition in BROOKINGS INST. FOR GOVT RESEARCH, SERVICEMONOGRAPH.No. 57, at 143 (1929). 11 See JOINT LEGISLATIVE COMM. TO INVESTIGATE THE LAWS INRELATION TO THE DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OF NARCOTIC DRUGS, FINALREPORT, NEWYORK SENATE Doc. No. 3 (1918): No fixed policy exists for the enforcement of the Statestatutes except in the larger cities of the State but theirenforcement has been left to the desultory or spasmodic effortsof local police officials . . . . Quoted in TERRY & PELLENS 834. See also FT. BECKER,OUTSIDERS 137-38 (1963). 12 Sandoz, Report on Morphinism to the Municipal Court ofBoston, 13 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 10, 54 (1922) (emphasisoriginal) 13 See STATE LAWS 31-34. 14 Id. at 28. 15 See SPECIAL COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE TRAFFIC INNARCOTIC DRUGS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, REPORT (1919) 16 H. ANSLINGER & W. TOMPKINS, THE TRAFFIC IN NARCOTICS159 (1953). 17. 1925 HANDB00K 977-85. 18 Id. at 975. 19 Id. at 305. 20 Id. 21 Id. at 978. 22 1928 HANDBOOK 323-33. 23 Id. at 75-78. 24 Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695-1703. 25 1928 HANDBOOK 325. 26 Id. at 76-77. 27 Id. at 77. 28 1929 HANDBOOK 332-40. 29 Id. at 83. 30 1930 HANDBOOK 485-97. 31 The provision, which made an exemption for medicinal orscientific use, read in part as follows: Section 12. (Cannabis Indica, Cannabis Americana and CannabisSativa.) No person shall plant, cultivate, produce, manufacture,possess, have under his control, sell, prescribe, administer,dispense or compound cannabis indica, cannabis americans, orcannabis sativa, or any preparation or derivative thereof, oroffer the same for sale, administering dispensing or compounding. . . . Id. at 493. 32 Id. There is no evidence of what objections had beenraised. The authors feel certain that the dissenters werebirdseed and hemp growers who also objected to the passage of theMarihuana Tax Act. See pp. 1054, 1059 infra. 33 1930 HANDBOOK 126-27. 34 1931 HANDBOOK 390-402. 35 Id. at 398-99. 36 Id. at 127-28. 37 1932 HANDBOOK 95-107. 38 Id. at 326. 39 See Tennyson, Uniform State Narcotic Law, I FED. B. AssnJ., Oct. 1932, at 55; Illicit Drug Traffic, 2 FED. B. ASS'N J.208-09 (1935) (indicating that the simple amendments formarijuana were designed by the Bureau so that other drugs couldbe added in the same way). 40 1932 HANDBOOK 95-107. 41 Id. at 107. 42 From our own computations, the total time spent by all theCommissioners discussing this Act from 1927 to 1932 could nothave exceeded one hour. Moreover, the small number of statespresent at the time of the roll call, as compared with the 48that voted on the Uniform Machine Gun Act the day before,indicates that concern for this Act was less than overwhelming. 43 Tax, Act Hearings 25-26. 44 See H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 135 (1963). 45 NEW YORK CITY MAYOR'S COMMITTEE ON MARIHUANA, REPORT,reprinted in THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 277-307 (D. Solomon Ed. 1966)[hereinafter cited as LAGUARDIA REPORT]. 46 id. at 292-94. The following exchange from the Hearings onthe Marihuana Tax Act indicates the low cost of the drug in 1937: Mr. Thompson: What is the price of marijuana? Mr. Anslinger: The addict pays anywhere from 10 to 25 centsper cigarette. In illicit traffic the bulk price would be around$20 per pound. Legitimately, the bulk is around $2 per pound. Tax Act Hearings 27. 47 Tax Act Hearings 20. 48 Mandel, Hashish, Assassins and the Love of God, 2 ISSUES INCRIMINOLOGY I49 (1966). 49 N.Y. Times, Oct. 7, 1928,  2, at 4, col. 6. 50 There is only one article even vaguely related to marijuanalisted prior to 1935 Our Home Hasheesh Crop, LITERARY DIGEST,Apr. 3, 1926, at 64. See H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 141 (1963). 51 From 1923 to 1935 there were only thirteen short articlesrelated in any way to marijuana in the New York Times, eventhough New York City had banned marijuana as early as 1914 andthe state legislature had acted in 1927. 52 BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, TRAFFIC IN OPIUMAND OTHER DANGEROUS DRUGS 59 (1937). See also H. BECKER,OUTSIDERS 140 (1963). 53 N.Y. Times, July 24, 1936, at 6, col. 3. 54 In 1923 the New York Times, in a short article, reported:"The latest habit forcing drug . . . marijuana, which issmoked in a cigarette-was exhibited" at a women's clubmeeting. N.Y. Times, Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. 55 N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 1934,  4, at 6, col. 3. 56 Id., Sept. 15, 1935, s 4, at 9, col. 4. 57 Tax Act Hearings 32. 58 Gomila, Marijuana-A More Alarming Menace to Society ThanAll Other Habit Forming Drugs, quoted in Tax Act Hearings 32-33.See also Gusfield, On Legislating Morals: The Symbolic Process ofDesignating Deviance, 56 CALIF. L. REv. 54, 69 (1968). 59Dickson, Bureaucracy and Morality: An Organizational Perspectiveon a Moral Crusade, 16 SOCIAL PROB. 143 (1968). 60 H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 137-45 (1963); see T. DUSTER, THELEGISLATION OF MORALITY 17-19 (1970). 61 King, The Narcotics Bureau and the Harrison Act, 62 YALEL.J. 736, 737-39 (1953). 62 E.g., Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State NarcoticLegislation, 21 GEo. L.J. 52 (1932); Tennyson, Uniform StateNarcotic Law, I FED. B. ASS'N J., Oct. 1932. at 55 (Mr. Tennysonwas Legal Advisor, Bureau of Narcotics). 63 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 193 1, at 37, col. 2. 64 It seems that if there were any public concern at all aboutthe Uniform Act and its adoption, it should appear at those timesin mention of the bill, marijuana or narcotic drugs in general.We used the papers of the larger cities under the assumption thatthey would usually contain the fullest and most accurate accountof the business of state legislatures. 65 VA. HOUSE JOUR. 324 (1934). 66 VA. SENATE JOUR. 300-01 (1934). 67 Any manufacturer or manufacturers of cigarettes who shallemploy opium, marihuana, loco weed, or any other sedative,narcotic or hypnotic drug, like chemical or substance, either inthe tobacco used or paper wrappers of cigarettes, cigars, tobaccoor any otherwise undiluted foodstuff or beverage, other than thatadvertised, sold and used as a drug or medicine, shall be guiltyof a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not lessthan one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, orconfined in jail not less than six months nor more than twelvemonths, or both, for each offense. Ch. 268, [1934] Va. Acts ofAssembly 411 (H.B. 236). 68 Ch. 246, [1910] Va. Acts of Assembly 358 (codified asamended VA. CODE ANN. 18.1-345,-346 (Supp. 1970)). 69 On March 11, 1934, the day after the prohibition of use ofopium in cigarettes was amended to include marijuana, theRichmond Times-Dispatch did not mention the action, and anarticle entitled "Bills Passed by Assembly" did notmention any marijuana or narcotic laws. Richmond Times-Dispatch,Mar. 11, 1934, at 4, col. 2. A March 12, six-column article,entitled "Vital Measures Passed in Busy 1934 Assembly"also did not mention either the narcotics legislation or themarijuana amendment. id., Mar. 12, 1934, at 1, col. 2. 70 Id., Feb. 7, 1934, at 4, col. 1. 71 Id., Mar. 6,1934, at 2, col. 5. 72 VA. HOUSE JOUR. 827 (1936); VA. SENATE JOUR. 498 (1936). 73 Ch. 212, [19361 Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 74 Richmond Times-Dispatch, Mar. 1, 1936, at 12, col. 3. 75 The Newark Star Ledger was surveyed from May 20 to June 10,193 3, a period surrounding the passage of the statute, ch. 186,[1933] N.J. Acts 397, on June 5, 1933. On the day of the signingof the bill, there appeared a short article noting that theUniform Narcotic Drug Act had become law. Newark Star Ledger,June 5, 1933, at 2. 76 The statute, ch. 2096, [1934] R.I. Acts101, was approved April 26, 1934. The Providence journal wassurveyed from April 10 to April 28, 1934, and on April 12 thereappeared five sentences on the Uniform Act. providence journal,Apr. 12, 1934, at R. On April 21, the law was described in ashort article summarizing the business of the legislativesession. Id., Apr. 21, 1934, at 7. Neither article mentionedmarijuana. 77 The Salem Oregon Statesman in the period from February 8 toFebruary 28, 1935, had only one article dealing with drugs. SalemOregon Statesman, Feb. 21, 1935, at 2, col. 2. 78 The Uniform Act was passed in West Virginia on March 8,1935. Ch. 46, [1935] W. Va. Acts 179. The Charleston Daily Mail,which carried detailed legislative news, was surveyed from MarchI to March 20, 1935. On March 1, the legislature reconvened undera special calendar including the Uniform Act. During this period,the Act attracted little attention except for an editorial onMarch 7. Charleston Daily Mail, Mar. 7, 1935, at 10, co]. 1. Thebill was mentioned in passing in two other stories on upcominglegislation, and in a report that a federal judge criticized WestVirginia's failure to enact the Act. Id., Mar. 6, 1935, at 6,col. 4. 79 The Louisville Herald Post was surveyed from April 15 toJune 15, 1934. The marijuana section of the Uniform Act becameeffective on June 14, 1934. Ch. 142, [1934] Ky. Acts 562. Theonly reference to the Act was Louisville Herald Post. June 6,1934, at 10. 80 Id. 81 Charleston Daily Mail, Mar. 7,1935, at 10, col. 1. 82 Id., Mar. 11, 1935, at 1, col. 1, reports: "In theconfusion of the closing hours Saturday night the legislaturepassed many bills, many of them unread and unprinted and notunderstood." 83 In Missouri, the passage of the Uniform Act was attended bypressure on the legislature stemming from a hysteria campaign inthe St. Louis Star Times which contained 5 major articles urgingthe outlawing of marijuana and presenting lurid case studies ofthe evils of the drug. These articles were quoted in the Tax ActHearings. See St. Louis Star Times, Jan. 17-Feb. 19, 1935. 84 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 1931, at 37, col. 2(recording Commissioner Anslinger's statements on the need foruniform state laws to regulate marijuana). 85 In the Missouri case, the legislature, in response to thescare stories in the St. Louis Star Times, took only 10 days topresent the law, hold quick hearings, and unanimously pass theanti-marijuana legislation. 86 INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION 1893-94, REPORT: MARIJUANA (J.Kaplan ed. 1969). 87 Id. at 264. 88 Id. at vi. 89 Quoted in Marijuana Smoking in Panama, 73 THE MILITARYSURGEON 274 (1933). 90 Id. at 279. 91 Fossier, The Marijuana Menace, 84 NEW ORLEANS MEDICAL &SURGICAL J. 247 (1931). 92 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.POLICE Sci. 252 (1931). 93 Id. at 256. 94 See Tax Act Hearings 23-24, 37. 95 100 JA.M.A. 601 (1933). 96 Bromberg, Marijuana Intoxication: A Clinical Study ofCannabis Sativa Intoxication, 97 Am. J. PSYCHIATRY 303 (1934). 97 Id. at 309; see Facts and Fancies About Marijuana, LITERARYDIGEST, Oct. 24, 1936, at 7-8. This presentation begins bydigesting Dr. Bromberg's article for laymen: It is clear from this study [of 2,216 criminals convicted offelonies] that in this region the drug is a breeder of crime onlywhen used by psychopathic types in whom the drug allows theemergence of aggressive, sexual or antisocial tendencies. . . .It is quite probable that alcohol is more responsible as an agentfor crime than is marihuana. The article continues: The following facts stand out in social and medical reports: 1. Marihuana is not a habit-forming drug, as is heroin oropium. 2. It prolongs sensations; it is in high favor as anaphrodisiac. 3. It is the most inexpensive of drugs; marihuana cigarettesusually selling at from three to twenty-five cents each. The article then describes the effects of marijuana: After smoking from one to three "reefers," if onehas not been told what to expect, the first effects of the drugpass almost unnoticed-nothing, perhaps, but a slight twitching ofmuscles of the neck, back or legs. The mind remains calm andclear. Suddenly, without apparent cause, a chance remark . . .sends the subject into a spasm of violent laughter. Becoming calm again, while the drug continues to exert itsweird effects, the smoker finds ideas crowding through his brainwith bewildering rapidity; those around him become slow-dull. Noris the language of his own tongue swift enough to keep pace withhis lightning thoughts. Soon the self-esteem of the smoker begins to grow in likeproportion. . . . Paradoxically, trifling discomforts become unbearable evils;the flare of a match near-by brings a resentment that isimmediately transformed into an overwhelming desire for revenge.But before the "reefer man" could possibly climb to hisfeet, or even reach a hand for a gun or knife, new thoughts havecome crowding in.... Above all other distinguishing effects of marihuanaintoxication is the fact that all normal conceptions of time andspace are lost. As in the split-second dream that seems to last the nightthrough, time seems of interminable length; the clock standsstill for days. Vision, too, takes on new concepts. Inconsiderable distancesbecome tremendous.... Yet, throughout the intoxication, there is constant awarenessthat the strange fancies rushing through the mind are notnatural, but purely the effects of the drug; unlike theopium-cater, he is acutely conscious of those about him. He hasmany of the sensations of the gay "drunk" at the ball. Describing a pot-party: There is little noise; windows are shut, keeping the smell ofsmoking weeds away from what might be curious nostrils. Nor is there any of the yelling, dashing about, playing ofcrude jokes or physical violence that often accompany alcoholicparties; under the effects of marihuana, one has a dread of allthese things. 98 Ch. 86, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly 81. 99 Ch. 212, [1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 100 Id. 101 Ch. 86, S 20, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly 90. 102 Ch. 212,  I (c), [ 1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 362. Thepenalty for violation of ch. 268, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly411, which prohibited the use of marijuana in the manufacture ofcigars and cigarettes, was confinement in jail for from 6 to 12months and/or a fine of from $100 to $1000. 103 Ch. 186,  12, [1933] N.J. Laws 41 1. 104 Ch. 2096, S 14, [19341 R.I. Acts III. 105 Id.  15. 106 Ch. 142, [1934] Ky. Acts 562. 107 Ch. 46,  2 3, [1935] W. Va. Acts 192. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B23-23IA031-000655-B037-297http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlr4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112459 text/html 44103HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:24:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:55 GMTContent-length: 43885 Passage of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** V. PASSAGE OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 The first assertion of federal authority over marijuana usewas the Marihuana Tax Act, passed in 1937. The obvious question,from a historical point of view, is why such legislation wasthought to be necessary, especially after the brushfire passageof the Uniform Act and related legislation in every state in theprevious few years. Enforcement difficulty and public hysteriaare two reasons which have been propounded for the federalaction. We subscribe to a third, one which we rejected withrespect to the uniform acts-Congress was hoodwinked by theFederal Bureau of Narcotics. A. State Enforcement of the Uniform Law One of the primary arguments in support of the Marihuana TaxAct was that the legislation was required to permit andfacilitate adequate enforcement of the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct.1 Initial examination of enforcement statistics after passageof the Uniform Act suggests that marijuana seizures and arrestsin most states rose dramatically. However, we should be careful to note at the outset theinadequacies of most drug statistics, which, especially duringthis period, do not permit conclusive analysis regarding theextent of enforcement. Reporting officials frequently do not differentiate among thedrugs. Different jurisdictions employ different measures ofenforcement-number of arrests, convictions, kilograms of the drugseized, or number of seizures; even where the same measures areused, statistics are often compiled for different time frames. Inaddition, changes in the definitions in the laws-such as a changefrom considering cannabis as only the flowering top of the plantto considering it the whole plant-can wildly distort thestatistics from year to year. To add to the confusion,enforcement agencies can manipulate the data for their own uses;if they must appear to be attacking the drug problem or to needmore resources, they can change radically the statisticalappearance of the enforcement problem by using, for example,arrests as their enforcement measure. Finally, the mere passageof prohibitive legislation will in itself be reflected in theenforcement data. This is especially important for our study ofenforcement patterns in the states before passage of theMarihuana Tax Act. As one commentator has explained: A point that should be obvious but that is sometimes overlooked is that there are no official statistics relating to violations of a drug, law until the drug law is enacted. To compare official preenactment and postenactment data is to compare nothing to something, and naturally drug use will appear to rise.2 For all these reasons, the drug statistics from the period ofthe 1930's must be used somewhat hesitantly to support anycontention about the extent of state enforcement before theenactment of Marihuana Tax Act. With this caveat in mind, weshall proceed, nevertheless, to do so. Although Commissioner Anslinger testified at the hearings onthe Tax Act that state officials frequently asked for federalassistance 3 it appears from the Federal Bureau's own statisticsthat state and municipal agencies were proceeding with vigor tostamp out marijuana use.4 We do not have fully accurate data, butthere are indications that both New York and Louisiana weremoving against marijuana use. In 1934, the New York policediscovered a large field of marijuana growing near the BrooklynBridge. In making a related raid, the police also seized 1,000marijuana cigarettes.5 In 1935, the police burned a marijuanacrop found growing on the grounds of the Welfare Islandpenitentiary.6 Throughout 1936, the narcotics division of the NewYork police found and destroyed several marijuana crops growingin and around the city.7 Fragmentary figures are available on lawenforcement in Louisiana which indicate there were 219 arrests onmarijuana charges in New Orleans alone from 1930 until April of1936.8 In Louisiana as a whole for 1936 over 1,195 pounds of bulkmarijuana were seized.9 This evidence suggests that state authorities in areas wheremarijuana use had become common at all were dealing fairlyeffectively with the trade in the drug. Although some states mayhave hoped that passage of a federal law dealing with marijuanawould reduce the enforcement burden on state and local police andbring additional federal services and money,10 the law cannotreally be justified as filling an enforcement void. Nevertheless,this was one of the most effective arguments advanced byCommissioner Anslinger in the halls of Congress. B. Public Hysteria or Continued Public Ignorance? Some observers have attributed passage of the Tax Act topublic hysteria.11 In support of this contention they show thatthere was a marked increase in the number of titles dealing withmarijuana in the Readers' Guide to Periodical Literature from1936 until 1939, compared with the total absence of articles onthis subject in preceding years.12 It should be noted, however,that only seven articles treating marijuana or hashish appearedfrom 1920 to August 1937, when the Tax Act was passed.13 Withrespect to medical opinion, the AMA Journal presented an articleopposing the enactment of the Tax Act and arguing, as did theirrepresentative at the Tax Act hearings, 14 that existing statelaws were sufficient if properly enforced.15 It seems the national media and medical opinion were far fromhysterical at the time the Tax Act passed. There were a few localnewspaper campaigns against the drug, but they tended to peakabout two years before the passage of the Act and were isolatedinstances of public support for the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act.16Moreover, these atypical state scares did not draw nationalattention. In fact, whatever publicity the "marijuana problem"received during this period was attributable to CommissionerAnslinger and his office, who conducted an active educationalcampaign for federal legislation. They prepared press stories onthe dangers of the drug and traveled around the countrydisseminating propaganda.17 Despite these efforts, however,public knowledge of the marijuana proposals was minimal at best.The New York Times contained nine references to marijuana fromJanuary 1936 until it reported on August 3, 1937,18"President Roosevelt signed today a bill to curb traffic inthe narcotic, marihuana, through heavy taxes ontransactions." As in prior years, marijuana was still not a matter of publicattention, and the so-called "problem" and the federalproposal to cure it went virtually unnoticed by most of theAmerican public. At the same time, however, the"educational" campaign conducted by the Bureau toinform the Congress of the dimensions of the "problem"was highly successful. In this sense, the Bureau itself createdthe "felt need" for federal legislation; the Bureau-andnot public hysteria which it was unable to arouse-was the majorforce behind the Tax Act. We assign to the Bureau theinstrumental role with respect to passage of the Tax Act eventhough we did not do so with respect to the Uniform Act. Sosuccessful were the Commissioner's efforts in the Congress thatthe hearings before the House Ways and Means Committee and thefloor debate on the bill are near comic examples of derelictionof legislative responsibility. C. The Tax Act Hearings Note from Cliff Schaffer: Interested readers may referto the full text of the hearings for the Marihuana Tax Act, andrelated documents, also on this site. Although the Marihuana Tax Act was modeled after the HarrisonAct, marijuana was not simply included in the earlier actprimarily for three reasons. First, the importation focus of theHarrison Act was inappropriate for marijuana because there weredomestic producers.20 Second, since cannabis had been removed from the United StatesPharmacopoeia and had no recognized medicinal uses, the varietyof medical exceptions in the Harrison Act were inapplicable.21Third, even though the Supreme Court had upheld the HarrisonAct's prohibition against purchase by unregistered persons of thedesignated drugs, there was some uncertainty whether the earlier5-4 decision22 would be followed. Accordingly, the Marihuana TaxAct imposed a prohibitive tax of $100 an ounce on the designatedtransactions, rather than prohibit the purchases directly.23 The brief three days of hearings on the Act24 present a casestudy in legislative carelessness. At no time was any primaryempirical evidence presented about the effects of the drug, andthe participating congressmen seem never to have questioned theassumed evils. Furthermore, the only real concerns seem to havebeen that farmers would be inconvenienced by having to kill aplant which grew wild in many parts of the country, and that thebirdseed, paint and varnish, and domestic hemp industries wouldbe damaged by passage of the law.25 Finally, the one witnessappearing in opposition to the bill, Dr. William C. Woodward,legislative counsel of the American Medical Association and anearly and respected participant in the drafting of the UniformNarcotic Drug Act,26 was roundly insulted for his audacity indaring to question the wisdom of the Act. We reproduce in the following few pages some of the dialoguefrom the hearings, to give the reader the flavor of theseramshackle proceedings, and to allow him to understand more fullythe pyramiding of absurdity represented by the amendments of the1950's. From the hearings we extract contemporary perception ofuse patterns and harmful effects of marijuana, the quality ofmedical and other evidence presented, and a short glimpse at howthe witnesses were treated by the committee. 1. Who Were Users? The record of the hearings indicates quite clearly that theFederal Narcotics Bureau was anxious for the committeemen tobelieve marijuana use was a relatively new phenomenon that was onthe increase in America.27 Once again, marijuana use and theMexican minority were closely linked: "The Mexican laborershave brought seeds of this plant into Montana and it is fastbecoming a terrible menace, particularly in the counties wheresugarbeets are grown."28 Again, also, marijuana waspresented as the agent by which the underworld class hoped toenslave American youth.29 The youth of the marijuana users wascontrasted with the increasing age of the usual opiate addict.Perhaps most interestingly for later developments, CommissionerAnslinger succinctly noted that heroin addicts and marijuanausers came from totally different classes and that the use of onedrug was unrelated to use of the other: Mr. Anslinger. This drug is not being used by those who have been using heroin and morphine. It is being used by a different class, by a much younger group of people. The age of the morphine and heroin addict is increasing all the time, whereas the marihuana smoker is quite young. Mr. Dingell. I am just wondering whether the marihuana addict graduates into a heroin, an opium or cocaine user. Mr. Anslinger. No sir; I have not heard of a case of that kind. I think it is an entirely different class. The marihuana addict does not go in that direction30 The hearings shed no more light on who was using the drug andin what numbers. 2. What's Wrong with Marijuana? If the proceedings did not shed light on the patterns ofusage, this in no way was an obstacle to unanimity on the evilsof the drug-insanity, criminality and death. Three major sourceswere relied on to support this consensus (1) a variety of horrorstories from newspapers cited by Mr. Anslinger and others aboutatrocious criminal acts committed by individuals under theinfluence of the drug;31 (2) studies by Eugene Stanley, theDistrict Attorney of New Orleans, linking the drug and thepopulation of the Louisiana jails;32 and (3) some inconclusiveexperimentation on dogs.33 As we noted earlier, the newspaperstories about crimes committed under the influence of marijuanahave two things in common: The reports are unsubstantiated, andmany of the accused invoked their use of marijuana as a defenseto the charge .34 The New Orleans report concluded: "After an exhaustiveresearch on marijuana from its earliest history to the presenttime, this drug is in our judgment the one that must beeliminated entirely." 35 What was this exhaustive research?It appears to have been nothing but quotations from the mosthysterical series of newspaper articles to appear at that time36and reports of the number of marijuana addicts to be found in theprison population.37 The relation of these figures to theconclusion that the drug must be regulated was never established. The Stanley study38 was even less well documented and evenmore outrageous in its description of the effects of marijuanause. "It is an ideal drug to quickly cut offinhibitions." 39 For this proposition Stanley relied on thestory of the Persian "Assassins" who allegedlycommitted acts of terror while under the influence of hashish.Although Stanley included in his list of references the IndianHemp Drugs Commission Report, it is clear he made little effortto catalogue the then available data but contented himself with anumber of bold and undocumented assertions. In reading thehearings, one continues to expect some report of a medical orscientific survey, and instead one finds these two reports by NewOrleans law enforcers. The contrary conclusions of the Canal Zonestudies were not even mentioned. Finally, a scientific study of the effects of marijuana waspresented, but, in keeping with the overall tone of the hearings,this was the most preposterous evidence of all. The TreasuryDepartment presented a pharmacologist who had tested the effectsof the cannabis drugs on dogs. 40 He concluded that"[c]ontinuous use will tend to cause the degeneration of onepart of the brain." 41. One paragraph later, however, this scientist stated:"Only about 1 dog in 300 is very sensitive to thetest."42 Later in the doctor's testimony, after he hadstated over and over the potential evils found from the testingon dogs, he was unable to make the crucial link between a dog'sresponse to the drug and the human response. More incredibly, asthe following exchange points out, the doctor really had noknowledge of what effect the drug had on the dogs, since he wasnot familiar with the psychology of dogs: Mr. McCormack. Have you experimented upon any animals whose reaction to this drug would be similar to that of human beings. Dr. Munch. The reason we use dogs is because the reaction of dogs to this drug, closely resembles the reaction of human beings. Mr. McCormack. And the continued use of it, as you have observed the reaction on dogs, has resulted in the disintegration of the personality? Dr. Munch. Yes. So far as I can tell, not being a dog psychologist .... 43 Dr. Woodward, the sole witness representing the AmericanMedical Association, noted the inadequacy of these medicalstatistics. We include his statement on that point in full: That there is a certain amount of narcotic addiction of an objectionable character no one will deny. The newspapers have called attention to it so prominently that there must be some grounds for their statements. It has surprised me, however, that the facts on which these statements have been based have not been brought before this committee by competent primary evidence. We arc referred to newspaper publications concerning the prevalence of marihuana addiction. We are told that the use of marihuana causes crime. But yet no one has been produced from the Bureau of Prisons to show the number of prisoners who have been found addicted to the marihuana habit. An informal inquiry shows that the Bureau of Prisons has no evidence on that point. You have been told that school children are great users of marihuana cigarettes. No one has been summoned from the Children's Bureau to show the nature and extent of the habit, among children. Inquiry of the Children's Bureau shows that they have had no occasion to investigate it and know nothing particularly of it. Inquiry of the Office of Education-and they certainly should know something of the prevalence of the habit among the school children of the country, if there is a prevalent habit-indicates that they have had no occasion to investigate and know nothing of it. Moreover, there is in the Treasury Department itself, the Public Health Service, with its Division of Mental Hygiene. The Division of Mental Hygiene was, in the first place, the Division of Narcotics. It was converted into the Division of Mental Hygiene, I think, about 1930. That particular Bureau has control at the present time of the narcotics farms that were created about 1929 or 1930 and came into operation a few years later. No one his been summoned from that Bureau to give evidence on that point. Informal inquiry by me indicates that they have had no record of any marihuana or Cannabis addicts who have even been committed to those farms. The Bureau of the Public Health Service has also a division of pharmacology. If you desire evidence as to the pharmacology, of Cannabis, that obviously is the place where you can get direct and primary evidence, rather than the indirect hearsay evidence. 44 Dr. Woodward's testimony clearly manifests the deficiencies ofthe hearings, for at no time did the congressional committee hearprimary sources of competent medical evidence before labelingcannabis the producer of crime and insanity. 3. How Dare You Dissent! Following the testimony of the Treasury Department and itswitnesses, the only witnesses who came forward wererepresentatives of legitimate industries that feared the Tax Actwould damage their businesses, because manufacture of theirproducts required some part or parts of the cannabis plant.45These witnesses were assured that the Tax Act would have littleif any impact on their operations .46 The one witness who opposed the adoption of the Act wasroundly accused of obstructionism and bad faith. Dr. Woodward,one of the chief drafters of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act,appeared on behalf of the AMA to suggest that, if there was to beany regulation of the cannabis drugs at all, it should be addedto the Harrison Act and not be the subject of this separate, andhe felt inadequately considered, legislative proposal.47 We havealready examined Dr. Woodward's skepticism on the dangers of thedrug. He added to this a thinly veiled attack on the lack ofcooperation the AMA had received from the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics.48 Finally, he advocated either assisting stateenforcement of their existing laws dealing with the drug or atmost including marijuana as a regulated and taxed drug under theHarrison Act. Either because of antipathy to the AMA or because of theaudacity of these suggestions, the Committee members savagelyattacked both Dr. Woodward and the AMA. Witness the followingexchange, starting with the doctor's answer to questions why, hehad not proposed marijuana legislation Dr. Woodward. In the first place, it is not a medical addiction that is involved and the data do not come before the medical society. You may absolutely forbid the use of Cannabis by any physician, or the disposition of Cannabis by any pharmacist in the country, and you would not have touched your Cannabis addiction as it stands today, because there is no relation between it and the practice of medicine or pharmacy. It is entirely outside of the those two branches. The Chairman. If the statement that you have made has any relation to the question that I asked, I just do not have the mind to understand it; I am sorry. Dr. Woodward. I say that we do not ordinarily come directly to Congress if a department can take care of the matter. I have talked with the Commissioner, with Commissioner Anslinger. The Chairman. If you want to advise us on legislation, you ought to come here with some constructive proposals, rather than criticism, rather than trying to throw obstacles in the way of something that the Federal Government is trying to do. It has not only an unselfish motive in this, but the), have a serious responsibility. Dr. Woodward. We cannot understand yet, Mr. Chairman, why this bill should have been prepared in secret for 2 years without any intimation, even, to the profession, that it was being prepared .49 After accusing Dr. Woodward of obstruction, evasion and badfaith, the Committee did not even thank him for his testimony.50 D. Congressional "Deliberation" and Action We noted earlier that the marijuana "problem" andthe proposed federal cure were virtually unnoticed by the generalpublic. Unable to arouse public opinion through its educationalcampaign, the Bureau of Narcotics nevertheless pushed theproposed legislation through congressional committees. TheCommittee members were convinced by meaningless evidence thatfederal action was urgently needed to suppress a problem that wasno greater and probably less severe than it had been in thepreceding six years when every state had passed legislation tosuppress it. The Committee was also convinced, incorrectly, thatthe public was aware of the evil and demanded federal action. The debate on the floor of Congress shows both the low publicvisibility of the legislation and the nonchalance of thelegislators. The bill passed the House of Representatives in thevery late afternoon of a long session; many of the members wereacquainted neither with marijuana nor with the purpose of theAct. When the bill first came to the House floor late on June 10,1937, one congressman objected to considering the bill at such alate hour, whereupon the following colloquy occurred: Mr. DOUGHTON. I ask unanimous consent for the present consideration of the bill (H.R. 6906) to impose an occupational excise tax upon certain dealers in marihuana, to impose a transfer tax upon certain dealings in marihuana, and to safeguard the revenue therefrom by registry and recording. The Clerk read the title of the bill. Mr. SNELL. Mr. Speaker, reserving the right to object, and notwithstanding the fact that my friend, Reed, is in favor of it, is this a matter we should bring up at this late hour of the afternoon? I do not know anything about the bill. It may be all right and it may be that everyone is for it, but as a general principle, I am against bringing up any important legislation, and I suppose this is important, since it comes from the Ways and Means Committee, at this late hour of the day. Mr. RAYBURN. Mr. Speaker, if the gentleman will yield, I may say that the gentleman from North Carolina has stated to me that this bill has a unanimous report from the committee and that there is no controversy about it. Mr. SNELL. What is the bill? Mr. RAYBURN. It has something to do with something that is called marihuana. I believe it is a narcotic of some kind. Mr. FRED M. VINSON. Marihuana is the same as hashish. Mr. SNELL. Mr. Speaker, I am not going to object but I think, it is wrong to consider legislation of this character at this time of night.51 On June 14 when the bill finally emerged on the House floor,four representatives in one way or another asked that theproponents explain the provisions of the Act. Instead of adetailed analysis, they received a statement of one of themembers of the Ways and Means Committee repeating uncriticallythe lurid criminal acts Anslinger had attributed to marijuanausers at the hearings. After less than two pages of debate. theAct passed without a roll call.52 When the bill returned asamended from the Senate, the House considered it once again, andadopted as quickly as possible the Senate suggestions, which wereall minor.53 The only question was whether the AMA agreed withthe bill. Mr. Fred Vinson not only said they did not object whenin fact their committee witness had dissented strenuously, but healso claimed that the bill had AMA support. After turning Dr.Woodward's testimony on its head, he also called him by anothername, Wharton.54 In summary, the Act passed the Congress with little debate andeven less public attention. Provoked almost entirely by theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and by a few hysterical state lawenforcement agents hoping to get federal support for theiractivities, the law was tied neither to scientific study nor toenforcement need. The Marihuana Tax Act was hastily drawn, heard,debated and passed; it was the paradigm of the uncontroversiallaw. E. Provisions of the Act Except for the three differences noted above, the MarihuanaTax Act is modeled directly after the earlier federal tax actregulating the opiates -the Harrison Act. As with that Act, theenforcement of the new marijuana tax was left to the Bureau ofNarcotics in the Treasury Department. Thus, as a result of the1937 statute, the jurisdiction of the Bureau was increasedsubstantially.55 The Marihuana Tax Act deals specifically with the seeds, resinand most other parts and derivatives of the plant Cannabis SativaL. The Act requires persons importing, producing,56 selling or inany other way dealing with the drug to pay an occupational taxand to register with the Internal Revenue Service. In addition,all transferees of marijuana are required to file a written orderform and to pay a transfer tax, $1 per ounce if registered and aprohibitive $100 per ounce if not registered . 57 Possession ofthe drug without a written order form constitutes presumptiveevidence of noncompliance with the Act. It is also unlawful for atransferor to transfer the drug to a person who has not securedthe order form and paid the tax. As originally enacted, section12 of the Act assessed a fine of not more than $2,000 and/orimprisonment for not more than five years for violation of eachprovision of the Act. Footnotes and References 1 The best example of this argument is contained inCommissioner Anslinger's statement to the congressional committeehearings on the Marihuana Tax Act: STATE LAWS All of the States now have some type of legislation directedagainst the traffic in marijuana for improper purposes. There isno legislation in effect with respect to the District of Columbiadealing with marijuana traffic. There is unfortunately a loopholein much of this State legislation because of a too narrowdefinition of this term. Few of the States have a specialnarcotic law enforcement agency and, speaking generally,considerable training of the regular peace officers will berequired together with increased enforcement facilities before areasonable measure of effectiveness under the State laws can beachieved. NEED FOR FEDERAL LEGISLATION Even in States which have legislation controlling in somedegree the marijuana traffic, public officials, private citizens,and the press have urged or suggested the need for nationallegislation dealing with this important problem. A partial listof States wherein officials or the press have urged the need forFederal legislation on the subject are Colorado, Kansas, NewMexico, Louisiana, and Oklahoma. The uniform State narcotic law has now been adopted by some 35States, many of these including cannabis or marijuana within thescope of control by that law. However, it has recently beenlearned that the legislative definition of cannabis in most ofthese laws is too narrow, and it will be necessary to have thedefinition amplified in amendatory legislation in most of theStates, to accord with the definition in the pending Federalbill. As is the case at present with respect to opium, cocaleaves, and their respective alkaloids, the uniform State lawdoes not completely solve the enforcement problem with respect tomarijuana but it will provide the necessary supplement to theFederal act and permit cooperation of State and Federal forces,each acting within its respective sphere, toward suppression oftraffic for abusive use, no matter in what form the traffic isconducted. The Bureau of Narcotics, under the Marijuana TaxingAct, would continue to act as an informal coordinating agency inthe enforcement of the Uniform State law, exchanging informationas between the respective State authorities in the methods ofprocedure and attempting to secure true uniformity in theenforcement of the act in the various States which have adoptedit. Tax Act Hearings 31. 2 Mandel, Problems with Official Drug Statistics, 21 STAN. L.REV. 991, 1002 (1969). This article is the most completediscussion of the present inadequacies of all official drugstatistics. 3 Tax Act Hearings 26-27. 4 The FBN statistics for 1935 through 1937 on quantities (inpounds) of harvested marijuana seized by state and municipalauthorities in the major states are as follows: 1935 1936 1937 Louisiana 20 1,196 30 Mississippi 5 1,309 * New York 372,000 1 * Ohio 17,314 431 86 Texas 216 463 20 All other states 2,232 1,972 120 TOTALS 391,787 5,372 256 BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, TRAFFIC IN OPIUM ANDOTHER DANGEROUS DRUGS 63 (1935) [hereinafter cited as TRAFFIC INOpium]; id. at 90 (1936); id. at 81 (1937); Part of the erraticquality of these figures may stem from failure to weigh only thedried flowering tops of the plants seized. For example, 256pounds seized in 1937 may represent a larger quantity of totalplants than 391,787 pounds seized in 1935. See Mandel, supra note2, at 999. 5 N.Y. Times, Oct. 18, 1934, at 4, col. 4. The article goes onto refer to "mariajuana [sic], or loco weed, which producesa pleasant, relaxed sensation when smoked, and eventually drivesthe habitual user insane 6 Id., July 17, 1935, at 8, Col. 8. 7 See id., Aug. 19, 1936, at 16, col. 3; id., July 28, 1936,at 11, col. 6. 8 See Tax Act Hearings 3 S. 9 TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 90 (1936). 10 See Tax Act Hearings 26. 11 See, eg., THE MARIHUANA PAPERS at xv (D. Solomon ed. 1966).See also H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 140-42 (1963). 12 Becker's survey of marijuana-related articles in theReaders' Guide to Periodical Literature between January 1925 andMarch 1951 indicates no articles written before July 1935, fourarticles written between July 1935 and June 1937, and seventeenwritten between July 1937 and June 1939. H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 141(1963). 13 The Readers' Guide citations are: Anslinger & Cooper,Marihuana: Assassin of Youth, Am. MAGAZINE, July 1937, at 18;Parry, Menace: Marihuana, 36 Am. MERCURY 487 (1935); Simon, FromOpium to Hash Eesh, Sci. Am., Nov. 1921, at 14; Wolf, Uncle SamFights a New Drug Menace, POPULAR SCI, May 1936, at 14; Facts andFancies About Marihuana, LITERARY DIGEST, Oct. 24, 1936, at 7;Marihuana Menaces Youth, Sci. Am., Mar. 1936, at 150; Our HomeHasheesh, Crop, LITERARY DiGEST, .Apr. 3, 1926, at 64. 14 See text at notes 47-50 infra. 15 108 JA.M.A. 1543-44 (1937). 16 See St. Louis Star-Times, Jan. 17-Feb. 19, 1935. 17 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Jan. 3, 1937, S 6, at 6, col. 4. Thearticle reported a meeting between Anslinger and the chairwomanof the New York Federation of Women's Clubs. After the meeting,the chairwoman started an all out campaign against marijuana,focusing on lobbying for the nationwide passage of statelegislation, and on an educational program aimed at educatinghigh school students on the dangers of the drug, Another New YorkTimes article described the appearance of a representative of theFederal Bureau of Narcotics at a meeting of the national Parentsand Teachers Association held in Richmond, Virginia, urging themembers of the association to help fight the menace of marijuanawhich produced in its users "a temporary sense of completeirresponsibility which led to sex crimes and other 'horrible'acts of violence." N.Y. Times, May 4, 1937, at 26, col. 1. 18 Id., July 24, 1936, at 6, col. 3; id., July 29, 1936, atII, col. 6; id., Aug. 14, 1936. at 12, co]. 3; id., Aug. 19,1936, at 16, col. 3; id., Oct. 4, 1936, S 1, at 3, col. 3; id.,Oct. 28, 1936, at 27, col, 6; id., Jan. 3, 1937,  6, at 6, col.4; id., Mar. 22, 1937, at 24, col. 1; id., May 4, 1937, at 26,col. 1. 19 Id., Aug. 3, 1937, at 4, col. 5. 20 Compare Tax Act Hearings 13-14 (testimony of ClintonHester, Office of the General Counsel of the Treasury Department)with State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15 (1931). It should beasked whether the information at congressional disposal changedso drastically between 1937 and 1956 as to justify the statutorypresumption enacted at that time, 21 U.S.C. 5 176a (1964),providing that possession of marijuana was presumptive evidenceof knowing concealment of illegally imported marijuana. 21 Tax Act Hearings 13-14. Earlier state statutes,particularly Virginia's, had taken great pains to outline medicalexemptions from the marijuana prohibition. See p. 1040 supra. 22 United States v. Doremus, 249 U.S. 86 (1919). 23 Tax Act Hearings 13-14. 24 The hearings, including all material not actively discussedbut merely read into the record, cover only 124 pages. 25 Tax Act Hearings 77-86; see State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955,136 So. 15 (1931). 26 See pp. 1030-32 supra. 27 See Tax Act Hearings 30-3 1. 28 Id. at 45. 29 Quoting Dr. Walter Bromberg, Mr. Anslinger stated: Young men between the ages of 16 and 25 are frequent smokersof marihuana; even boys of 10 to 14 are initiated (frequently inschool groups); to them as to others, marihuana holds out thethrill. Since the economic depression the number of marihuanasmokers was increased by vagrant youths coming into intimatecontact with older psychopaths. Tax Act Hearings 24. See also id. at 32-35, 39, 45. 30 Id. at 24. 31 Id. at 22-23. 32 Id. at 32-37. 33 Id. at 50-52. 34 See id. at 22-23. It is entirely likely that some of theseparticularly lurid stores were the product of desperatedefendants, who, upon being caught red-handed in the commissionof crime, sought mitigation of their penalties by claiming to beunder the influence of the drug. See Bromberg, Marijuana: APsychiatric Study, 113 J.A.M.A. 4 (1939). Bromberg cautions,"The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the pressthat crime is caused by addiction to marihuana demands [sic]careful scrutiny, at least in this jurisdiction [New YorkCounty)." Id. at 10. 35 Tax Act Hearings 35. 36 A good example is the series run by the St, LouisStar-Times in early 1935 which featured such articles as the oneentitled "Young Slaves to Dope Cigaret Pay Tragic Price forTheir Folly" on Jan. 18, 1935. 37 See Gomila & Gomila, Marihuana-A More Alarming Menaceto Society Than All Other Habit-Forming Drugs, quoted in Tax ActHearings 32, 34. Mr. F. R. Gomila was public safety director ofNew Orleans. 38 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.Police Sci. 252 (1931), quoted in Tax Act Hearings 37-42, isbased on, and indeed is nearly a word-for-word paraphrase of,Fossier's article in the New Orleans Medical journal, supra note91 at P. 1044. As we have seen, Fossier, in reaching hisconclusions, overlooked the Panama Canal Zone study. 39 Tax Act Hearings 39. 40 0ne assumes the drug was thought to be too dangerous torisk experimentation on people. 41 Tax Act Hearings 48. 42 Id. 43 Id. at 51. 44 Id. at 92. 45 Thus, the following witnesses appeared: Hon. Ralph E.Lozier, General Counsel of the National Institute of OilseedProducts; Raymond G. Scarlett of the birdseed industry; andJoseph B. Hertzfeld, Manager, Feed Department, The PhiladelphiaSeed Co. 46 See id. at 74. 47 Id. at 87-121. 48 Id. at 87-88 ("During the past 2 years I have visitedthe Bureau of Narcotics probably 10 or more times. Unfortunately,I had no knowledge that such a bill as this was proposed untilafter it had been introduced"). 49 Id. at 116. 50 See id. at 121. There is sonic indication in Fred Vinson'squestioning of Dr. Woodward that one cause of the hostilitydirected at the witness was the growing disfavor with which theNew Deal Congress viewed the fairly conservative AMA. Vinson wasparticularly pointed when he said that the AMA was trying toobstruct here as it had with the Health Care provisions of theSocial Security Act, Id. it 102-04. 51 81 CONG. REC. 5575 (1937). 52 Id. at 5689-92. 53 Id. at 7624-25. 54 Id. at 7625. 55 See Dickson, Bureaucracy and Morality: An OrganizationalPerspective an a Moral Crusade, 16 SOCIAL PROD. 143 (1968)(relating this expansion of the Bureau's area of enforcement totheir solid support for the need of such federal legislation). 56 Section 4 (b) of the Act (now INT. REV. CODE Of 1954, 4755 (a) (2) ) gives rise to a presumption that one is a producerof marijuana within the terms of the Act if marijuana is foundgrowing on his property. 57 The Act does not prohibit possession or purchase ofmarijuana per se. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B23-24IA031-000655-B038-25http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlr5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112510 text/html 62411HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:25:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:45 GMTContent-length: 62193 A New Rationale - The "Stepping Stone" Theory Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VI. THE 1950's: HARSHER PENALTIES AND A NEW RATIONALE-THE"STEPPING STONE" THEORY The 1950's witnessed the advent of an extremist legislativepolicy with respect to drugs generally and marijuana inparticular. For the first time in our national history, there waspublic interest in narcotic drugs. Apparently there had been anincrease in narcotic drug abuse in the late 40's, and the publicmind was ripe for the FBN propaganda. In the paranoid atmosphereof the times, the call for harsher penalties was soothing.Unfortunately, marijuana was caught in the turbulence of thisera. Although the pharmacological facts about the drug werebeginning to emerge, congressional furor was aroused by the novelassertion, rejected by Commissioner Anslinger in 1937, that useof marijuana led to use of harder drugs. This new plateau ofmisinformation was to provide the base for continual escalationof penalties and proliferation of offenses throughout the decade. A. The Boggs Act and Its Progeny: The First Escalation In 1951 Congress passed the next major piece of federalnarcotics legislation-the Boggs Act .2 The importance of thislegislation is that provided much harsher penalties for all drugviolators. Also, for the first time on the federal level,marijuana and other narcotics were lumped together as a result ofthe Act's provision for uniform penalties for violators of eitherthe Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act3 or the Marihuana TaxAct.4 This indiscriminate treatment of marijuana as just anothernarcotic drug flew in the face of contemporary testimonychallenging the assumption that the hemp drugs were addictive,crime-producing, and likely to lead to insanity and death. Newtestimony that marijuana was unlikely to be addictive was buriedunder the new rationale for harsh penalties against offenders ofthe marijuana laws-that the drug inevitably is the stepping stoneto heroin addiction. Eventually, the states followed the federallead in striking out against drug violators with the samemindless fervor that characterized their anti-communistcampaigns. 1. The Problem: Increased Narcotics Use The hearings before the Subcommittee of the House Ways andMeans Committee and the floor debate show that the primary reasonfor passage of the Boggs Act was the increase in narcotic use inthe period 1948-1951. Testimony and evidence from a wide varietyof sources indicated an abrupt and substantial increase inaddiction, especially among teenagers, between 1947 and 1951.5Young people under 21 who had rarely been addicts suddenly becamea predominant group involved in addiction and narcotics crimes.6Representative Boggs, speaking during the congressional debateson his bill, enunciated a concern which was reflected in manyother quarters. After noting that there had been a 24 percentincrease in arrests for narcotics violations between 1949 and1950 and a 77 percent increase between 1948 and 1950,Representative Boggs stated: The most shocking part about these figures is the fact that there has been an alarming increase in drug addiction among younger persons. In the first- 6 months of 1946, the average age of addicted persons committed . . . at Lexington, Ky. was 37.5 years. Only 3 patients were under the age of 21. During the first 6 months of 1950, only 4 years later, the average had dropped to 26.7 years, and 766 patients were under the age of 21.... [I]n New York City alone it has been estimated that 1 out of every 200 teenagers is now addicted to some type of narcotics.7 Later he said, "We need only to recall what we have readin the papers in the past week to realize that more and moreyounger people are falling into the clutches of unscrupulous dopepeddlers . . . ." 8 Representative Boggs then proceeded to insert in the recordeleven newspaper and magazine articles dated between May 2 andJuly 16, 1951.9 The Washington Evening Star of July 16 (the dayof the debate) carried a story on the results of a mayor'scommittee report on drug addiction in New York City. According tothe newspaper, "between 45,000 and 90,000 persons in NewYork City are using illicit dope.... Based on the city'spopulation of 7,835,099, that would be 1 out of every 87 or 1 outof 174 persons." The paper indicated that the report showedan increase in addiction among teenagers, and it called for"more severe penalties for dope sellers, and for wholesalerevisions of Federal and State penal statutes relating tosale." An article in Time magazine of June 25, 1951, inserted by Mr.Boggs, related New York City School Superintendent WilliamJansen's statement that one out of every 200 high school studentsin the city was a user of habit forming drugs. The article wenton to describe the alarming increases in dope consumption"in other major cities and the ease with which school childrenobtained narcotics. Another article, in the Washington EveningStar of June 12, 1951, contained statements by a member of thestaff of the Attorney General of New York to the effect thatbetween 5,000 and 15,000 of New York City's 300,000 high schoolstudents were drug addicts. To supplement the stock figures,these articles included the testimony of witnesses who describedtheir own acts of prostitution and thievery, the loss ofeducational opportunities, the death of addicts from "hotshots," the horrors of withdrawal, and a wide variety ofother aspects of drug abuse. This evidence of increasing use of narcotics, especially amongthe young, and the fear that narcotics use would continue tospread, presented a problem that Congress felt needed a quick andeffective solution. 2. The Solution: Harsher Penalties In the same way that the congressional hearings,investigations and debates reflect the impetus for enactment ofthe Boggs Act, they also reveal the official and public consensusas to the solution-harsher penalties. Perhaps CommissionerAnslinger best described the prevailing climate when he stated: Short sentences do not deter. In districts where we get good sentences the traffic does not flourish.... There should be a minimum sentence for the second offense. The commercialized transaction, the peddler, the smuggler, those who traffic in narcotics, on the second offense if there were a minimum sentence of 5 years without probation or parole, I think it would just about dry up the traffic.10 This statement before the Committee was quoted byRepresentative Boggs during the congressional debate on his bill,along with the Kefauver Committee's recommendation that"mandatory penalties of imprisonment of at least 5 yearsshould be provided for second offenders." 11 RepresentativeBoggs indicated that his bill was to incorporate the KefauverCommittee recommendations of mandatory minimum sentences for drugpeddlers and had as its principal purpose ... to remove the powerof suspension of sentence and probation in the cases of secondand subsequent offenders against the narcotics and marijuanalaws, and to provide minimum sentences .... 12 Moreover, Representative Boggs and others supported themandatory minimum sentences because they felt some federal hadbeen lax in enforcing the narcotic laws 13 and because theybelieved harsher penalties had reduced crimes, particularlykidnapping and the white slave trade, in other areas.14Representative Edwin Arthur Hall of New York urged substitutionof his bill, which provided for minimum sentences of 100 yearsfor dope peddlers.15 Although there was some opposition to theBoggs Act, notably by Representative Celler, who thought that themandatory minimum sentence provision would be unjust foraddicts,16 the majority opinion was clearly that mandatoryminimum sentences were necessary to insure punishment ofpeddlers.17 In response to Mr. Celler's contention that youngaddicts could be subjected to long prison terms because of theloss of judicial discretion in sentencing, Representative Jenkinsstated: The enforcing officers will always have sympathy for the unfortunate consumer, especially if he is harmless. These enforcing officers are going to protect the little boys and little girls. They are not going to drag the high school boys and girls before the criminal courts until they know that they are collaborating with the peddlers18 Mr. Boggs presented a more reasonable justification formandatory minimums: [I]t is not the intention of this legislation to affect a teen-ager or any such person who has possession of narcotics. But the gentleman also knows that if we try to make a distinction between possession and peddling that we immediately open the law to all types of abuses.19 The Act as passed provided uniform penalties for violations ofthe Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act and the Marihuana TaxAct. The penalties prescribed were: First offense 2 - 5 years Second offense 5 - 10 years Third and subsequent offenses 10 - 20 years Fine for all offenses $2,000.00 The relatively low fines reflected a congressional belief thatmonetary penalties were an insignificant deterrent.20 Anessential provision of the Act removed judicial discretion insentencing by providing that upon conviction for a second orsubsequent offense the imposition or execution of the sentencecould not be suspended nor probation granted. As in the nontaxpredecessors of the Boggs Act since 1909 and the Marihuana TaxAct, possession of a narcotic drug was sufficient for convictionunless the defendant could explain the possession to thesatisfaction of the jury.21 3. Marijuana and the Boggs Act Congressional and public attention was clearly focused on hardnarcotics use, primarily the opiates. Judging from the recordedproceedings, especially the floor debate in the House, marijuanaseems to have been along for the ride, much as it had been duringenactment of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. However, here therewas a conscious decision to include marijuana violations in thenew penalty provisions. Underlying this decision weredeterminations that marijuana use had also increased during thelater 1940's, that it too was spreading to white teenagers, andthat the drug's dangers, warranted the harsh treatmentcontemplated by the Act. (a) Increased Use.-To test the allegation of an increase inmarijuana use during this period, we have used the seizure andenforcement figures used by the proponents of the legislation.These figures tend to sustain the hypothesis that marijuanatraffic increased from 1948 to 1951, following a declinethroughout the early 40's. However, the figures are alsoconsistent with other hypotheses, for example that improvedenforcement techniques and increased state-federal cooperationhad increased arrests. Federal agents of the Narcotics Bureau began vigorouslyenforcing the Marihuana Tax Act almost as soon as PresidentRoosevelt signed it into law. From October 1 to December 31,1937, alone, the FBN made 369 seizures totaling 229 kilograms ofthe drug.22 Moreover, state officials made extensive seizures either inconjunction with FBN agents or in pursuance of their newly-passedstate controls over marijuana's Marijuana seizures by federalauthorities hit their low point in 1945 when only 257 kilogramswere taken, 128 of which were seized by the FBN and the rest byUnited States Customs agents .24 At this time the FBN hadapproximately 180 agents.25 This low seizure figure suggests adecrease in marijuana use throughout the early 1940 's.26 Beginning in about 1948, however, the arrest and seizure 27figures rose dramatically, the arrest figures rising 33 percentfrom 1947 to 1948. These figures tend to corroborate theCommissioner's assertion that there was a drastic increase innarcotics use between 1948 and 1951 28 and to justify thesimultaneous calls for amendment of the narcotics and marijuanalaws.29 On the other hand, these figures could reflect increasedor I improved enforcement. For example, in 1949 the FBN had begunto encourage the largest cities to form special narcotics squadsto deal especially with the drug problem.30 By 1951, however,only New York and Los Angeles had formed the separate policedetail the FBN had requested .31 Thus even if one were tempted totry to correct for improvements in the law enforcement machinery,the seizure figures for the late 40's and 50's do sustain thenotion that the traffic in marijuana increased from 1948 to 1951. (b) Youthful Users.-As with the hard narcotics, Congress wasespecially alarmed by the alleged spread of marijuana to whiteteenagers and school children. Militating against thisproposition is evidence that marijuana use was not widespreadamong the young as late as 1944. In that year, the famous LaGuardia Report reached the following conclusions among others:Marijuana use was widespread in the Borough of Manhattan buttended to be limited to certain areas, notably Harlem; themajority of marijuana smokers were Negroes and Latin-Americans,and marijuana smoking was not widespread among school children.32 The La Guardia study portrays marijuana use in this period asa rather casual adjunct to ghetto life. Since it was not costly,this euphoriant was well within the reach of ghetto residents. Itappears that throughout the early 40's marihuana use in the Westas well as in the East continued to be associated with the ethnicminorities, especially in the inner city.33 The fear that marihuana use would spread to white teenagers isone that has recurred since the earliest legislative cognizance.In fact, it was probably a factor in the early opium laws .34 Wehave been unable to confirm whether the fear was justified atthis time, but in light of the documentation of increasednarcotics use among the young, we shall presume the same usepatterns to be true of marihuana. (c) The Danger: A New Rationale.-The FBN had begun itseducational campaign for harsher marihuana penalties immediatelyafter passage of the Tax Act." In the early years, thecampaign was particularly effective with judges. For example, inone of the first cases under the Tax Act, a Colorado judgestated: I consider marihuana the worst of all narcotics-far worse than the use of morphine or cocaine. Under its influence men become beasts, just as was the case with [the defendant]. Marihuana destroys life itself. I have no sympathy With those who sell this weed. In the future I will impose the heaviest penalties. The Government is going to enforce this new law to the letter.36 The crime, pauperism and insanity rationale was acceptedunquestioningly as late as 1951.37 Under this rationale, harsherpenalties were certainly as imperative for marijuana offenders asthey were for opiate offenders. However, in a paper filed as anexhibit to the hearings38 on the Boggs Act, Dr. Harris Isbell,Director of Research at the Public Health Service hospital inLexington, Kentucky, exploded the traditional rationale. Hestated that marijuana was not physically addictive.39 Although hepostulated a definition of addiction which amounts to nothingmore than chronic intoxication 40 and noted the possibility of"temporary psychoses" in "predisposedindividuals," Isbell's description of marijuana wasextraordinarily favorable. Before the Kefauver Committee hetestified: Marijuana smokers generally are mildly intoxicated, giggle, laugh, bother no one, and have a good time. They do not stagger or fall, and ordinarily will not attempt to harm anyone. It has not been proved that smoking marijuana leads to crimes of violence or to crimes of a sexual nature. Smoking marijuana has no unpleasant after-effects, no dependence is developed on the drug, and the practice can easily be stopped at any time. In fact, it is probably easier to stop smoking marijuana cigarettes than tobacco cigarettes. In predisposed individuals, marijuana may precipitate temporary psychoses and is, therefore, not an innocuous practice with them.41 Dr. Isbell's statements that marijuana does not cause aphysical dependence were supported by other doctors, 42 prisonofficials,43 and perhaps most significantly by the statement of anumber of narcotics addicts .44 Despite this testimony the legislators approved greatlyincreased penalties for marijuana users. The crucial reason forthis severe treatment can be seen in the following colloquyduring the House subcommittee hearings: Mr. Boggs. From just what little I saw in that demonstration, I have forgotten the figure Dr. Isbell gave, but my recollection is that only a small percentage of those marijuana cases was anything more than a temporary degree of exhilaration .... Mr. Anslinger. The danger is this: Over 50 percent of those young addicts started on marijuana smoking. They started there and graduated to heroin; they took the needle when the thrill of marijuana was gone.45 Many others -doctors ,46 crime prevention experts,47 policeand narcotics bureau officials48 -testified to the link betweenmarijuana use and ultimate heroin addiction. Representative Boggshimself summed up this novel danger of marijuana in one of thefew statements even to mention marijuana in House floor debate: Our younger people usually start on the road which leads to drug addiction by smoking marijuana. They then graduate into narcotic drugs-cocaine, morphine, and heroin. When these younger persons become addicted to the drugs, heroin, for example, which costs from $8 to $15 per day, they very often must embark on careers of crime . . . and prostitution . . . in order to buy the supply which they need.49 The passage of this new Federal Act marked a significant shiftin rationale for the illegal status of marijuana; that statusbecame more entrenched by the indiscriminate lumping of marijuanawith the other narcotic drugs. 4. The State Response: Mindless Escalation While the Boggs Act was still pending in Congress, the Bureauof Narcotics encouraged the states to modify their existingnarcotic and marijuana legislation to enact "penaltiessimilar to those provided for in the Boggs bill [which] would beof material assistance in the fight against the narcotictraffic." 50 Seventeen states (including Virginia) and theTerritory of Alaska responded by passing "little BoggsActs" by 1953, and eleven other states increased theirpenalties by 1956. In 1951, seven states and the Territory of Alaska passedpenalty provisions similar to those contained in the BoggsAct.,51 In addition, nine other states amended their drug laws toprovide for more severe penalties, but the provisions wereneither uniform nor identical to those provided for under thefederal measure. 52 In 1952, four more states, includingVirginia, amended the penalty provisions of their drug laws tobring them in line with the Boggs Act.53 Six more states followedsuit in 1953.54 Finally, in 1955 and 1956 two states, Ohio andLouisiana respectively, enacted penalty provisions which weresubstantially more severe than those passed previously in anyJurisdiction.55 The Virginia "little Boggs Act" was signed into lawon April 1, 1952 ,56 after having passed both housesunanimously.57 The measure was regarded as routine, and as one ofthe "less controversial" proposals to come before thelegislature during the 1952 session.58 It cleared the House on aday when bills were being passed "at the rate of about one aminute during some periods" 59 and won Senate approvalduring the final rush to complete business in the waning hours ofthe 1952 General Assembly. The Act produced three basic changes in Virginia's scheme ofnarcotics control. It added marijuana to those drugs whose salewas forbidden under the state's version of the Uniform NarcoticDrug Act; it created the new substantive crime of sale to aminor; and it provided for harsher penalties for violations ofthe drug laws.60 Prior to 1952, the Virginia anti-marijuana provision wasseparate from those provisions governing the sale of"hard" drugs. But the 1952 Act repealed this provisionand included marijuana under the state's general narcotic controllaw. As a result, a person illegally selling marijuana becamesubject to the same penalties imposed upon a person legallyvending such drugs as heroin, morphine and cocaine .61 The heart of the 1952 Act was the provision for stifferpenalties for the violation of Virginia's general narcotic lawsprohibiting the sale of drugs without a prescription. For thefirst offense, the penalty was imprisonment in the penitentiaryfor not less than three nor more than five years plus a fine ofnot more than $1,000. For the second offense, the penalty wasimprisonment for not less than five nor more than ten years and afine of not more than $2,000. For the third and succeedingoffenses, the penalties were fines of not more than $3,000 andimprisonment for not less than ten nor more than twenty years. The 1952 Act also made it a felony to sell, barter, peddle,exchange or otherwise dispense marijuana or any other narcoticdrug to a minor. Any person found guilty of such offense wassubject to imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years normore than thirty years, no part of which could be suspended, anda fine of not more than $ 1,000 for the first offense, $2,000 forthe second offense and $3,000 for the third and subsequentoffenses. Such a provision exemplifies the increasedsophistication of anti-narcotic legislation during the 1950's.Thus, the continued escalation of penalties for drug lawviolators was followed in Virginia. Moreover, despite the publicconcern and attention in the national media, in Virginia it isplain that the 1952 amendments to the narcotic laws passedvirtually unnoticed in the press .62 B. The Late 1950's: Another Escalation of the Penalties Whether because use had decreased or because the propagandistshad accomplished their main mission, the narcotics problemdropped almost entirely from public view after the Boggs Act waspassed. Nevertheless, state and federal police authorities, armedwith data suggesting that the strengthening of the drug laws hadat least halted the increase in drug use, pressed for furtherincreases in penalties in order entirely to root out the drugmenace. 63 Without significant debate or public interest,Congress responded by passing the Narcotic Control Act of 1956.64 Although the legislators paid even less attention to marijuanathan they had in 1951, the precedent there established ofclassifying marijuana with hard narcotics resulted in aproliferation of marijuana offenses and a further increase inpenalties. In some ways, this legislation represents thehigh-water mark of uninformed public policy regarding marijuana.In almost every respect, the provisions of the Act and thelegislative motivation bear absolutely no rational relation tomarijuana's pharmacology and to the drug's actual use and trafficpatterns. I. Provisions of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956 Public Law 728, an act intended to make more effective controlof the narcotic drugs and marijuana, was approved on July 18,1956. It amended the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and theNarcotic Drugs Import and Export ACt65 primarily in the directionof increasing still further the penalties for violation of thoseacts and proliferating the scope of federal control over the use,possession and sale of narcotic drugs and marijuana. The new law raised the potential fine for all narcotics andmarijuana offenses to $20,000 66 and increased the mandatoryminimum sentences for offenses in the prescription, registrationand possession categories to two, five and ten years forsuccessive offenses.67 No distinction was made between addictsand traffickers with regard to these types of violations.Violations of the sale, transfer and smuggling provisions of theAct carry a minimum sentence of five years for first offenses andten years for all subsequent offenses. 68 In this connection theAct created a new offense by prohibiting illegal importation ofmarijuana and forbidding knowing receipt, concealment, purchase,sale, and facilitation of transportation or concealment of suchillegally, imported marijuana .69 Simple possession was bystatute sufficient evidence of guilt to convict.70 Thisprovision, now 21 U.S.C.  176a, paralleled a similarimportation provision for narcotics originally passed in 1909. In addition, any sale or transfer of any drug by an adult to awas made punishable by a minimum ten-year sentence.71 Finally,the Act made suspension, probation and parole unavailable to alloffenders except those convicted of a first offense forpossession, prescription or registration.72 In addition to the increases in offenses and penalties, thelaw contained wide variety of provisions relating to enforcement.Customs and Narcotics Bureau agents were authorized to carryweapons and to make arrests without a warrant on belief that adrug violation had been committed .73 The Government was allowedto appeal unfavorable decisions suppressing evidence74 and tocompel testimony from witnesses by a grant of immunity.75 In aconcession to those legislators who favored a wiretappingprovision, the new law created a category of offense based on theuse of communications instrumentalities in violation of the druglaws.76 This provision carried penalties of a minimum two-yearsentence and up to a $5,000 fine. The Act required that citizenswho are drug users and drug law violators must register with theimmigration authorities upon entering or leaving the UnitedStates .77 The Act also amended the Immigration and NationalityAct to provide for deportation of alien drug users and drug lawviolators .78 2. Marijuana-Along for the Ride The Narcotic Control Act of 1956 was premised on the samebeliefs as was the Boggs Act. Few if any of the legislatorsrecognized that marijuana was in any way different from thephysically addictive narcotics.79 The stepping stone concept wasnow so widely accepted that only once during the extensivecongressional debates on the House and Senate versions of thebill was the subject of marijuana as a separate substance evenraised. In a statement reflecting both ignorance of the basiccharacteristics of marijuana and naive acceptance of the steppingstone concept, Senator Daniel, Chairman of the Senatesubcommittee that investigated the drug problem, describedmarijuana: That is a drug which starts most addicts in the use of drugs. Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some of the worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to the habit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then to the final destruction of the persons addicted.80 Because Congress bought the FBN's propaganda lock, stock andbarrel, it is not surprising that there was no dissent from theproposition that harsher penalties were the means to eliminateillicit use and sale of all drugs.81 3. Trafficking Patterns The 1956 Act reflected an unsupported conception of the natureof the marijuana traffic. Under the assumption that"peddlers" of all drugs, marijuana included, arecontrolled by organized crime, the Act assessed extremely heavypenalties for sale, especially to minors. For example, the HouseWays and Means Committee report noted that "narcotictraffickers ... are in most cases well organized professionalracketeers." 82 Similarly, in recommending prohibition ofprobation or suspension of sentence for first-offender peddlers,the House subcommittee had asserted that if the first offenderpeddler problem was not solved, there would eventually be"large scale recruiting of our youth by the upper echelon oftraffickers." 83 While the reference to organized crime was undoubtedly validwith respect to hard drugs, the assumption that marijuana trafficwas controlled by large-scale racketeers was completelyunsupported. The marijuana distribution pattern today is fardifferent than the distribution pattern for "hard"drugs. On college campuses today, the marijuana seller is likelyto be a smoker who has a small amount he wants to sell. Unlessone is to believe that organized crime has abdicated adistribution role to "amateurs," it is difficult toimagine that it controlled the distribution of marijuana in 1956.Accordingly, the 1956 Act's widely divergent treatment of saleand use of marijuana may not have been justified at the time ofenactment, and it certainly makes little sense today. 4. Origin and Use A related misconception about the marijuana trade concerns thenew importation offenses. Underlying the presumption of knowingconcealment of smuggled marijuana arising from possession are twofindings that the mainstay of marijuana traffic is imported fromMexico and that possessors are likely to be aware of that fact.Even in 1956, such findings were dubious.84 As to the presumptionof importation, Commissioner Anslinger's estimate that 90 percentof all marijuana seized by federal authorities had been smuggledfrom Mexico85 was grossly misleading. The Federal Bureau ofNarcotics had practically abandoned the responsibility formarijuana control to increasingly effective state narcoticssquads and to the Customs agents.86 Of course, federal figurestaken alone would suggest a high percentage of importation.Furthermore, the Commissioner's conclusion was inconsistent withan essential premise of the Tax Act87 and with other materialsbefore the Congress,88 all of which emphasized the large degreeof domestic cultivation. As to the possessor's knowledge, the underlying assumptionagain was that there was an organized trade pattern so that eachuser knew where his drug came from. As we know, marijuana wasthen a casual adjunct to ghetto life. It was a social, ratherthan an economic, phenomenon limited almost exclusively tounemployed or menially employed members of racial minorities inthe center cities.89 As applied to such a class of people, thepresumption is farcical.90 5. Enforcement Patterns Although the proliferation of federal offenses suggests on itsface that state enforcement was inadequate to cope with marijuanatrade or that increased use of the drug presaged increasednarcotics addiction, nothing could be farther from the truth.Considering marijuana alone, the 1956 legislation was passed inresponse to no need at all. The enforcement statistics confirmour hypothesis that marijuana was simply "along for theride." First, as we noted above, federal arrests declined continuallyafter 1952.91 Although attributable in part to increased stateenforcement92 and to a conscious FBN decision to concentrate onnarcotics, the figures do suggest a decline in or at least astabilization of marijuana use by the middle fifties, even inareas in which narcotics use continued unabated. Second, theclass of users does not seem to have changed at all during thisperiod. Arrest statistics still indicate that use was centered inthe ghetto areas of major cities93 in California, Texas,Louisiana, Michigan, New York, and Illinois.94 However, becausestatistics were not refined according to race, age, sex and ofteneven the drug used,95 we cannot state categorically that therewas no change in use patterns. 96 6. The Epitome of Irrationality: Virginia's 1958 Amendment In 1958, Virginia's Uniform Drug Act was further amended tomake the "possession of illegally acquired narcotic drugs[which included marijuana] in any quantity greater thantwenty-five grains, if in solid form, or eight ounces, if inliquid form," a crime punishable by a fine of not more than$5,000 and imprisonment for not less than twenty nor more thanforty years .97 The effect of this enactment was to provide apenalty for illegal possession that was more than twice as severeas the penalty for unlawful sale and one and one-half times morestringent than that for sale to a minor. It is incredible thatdespite the extreme harshness of this penalty, themeasure passed both houses of the General Assembly with but onedissenting vote, and no mention was made of it in the RichmondTimes-Dispatch during the period of February 14 to April 7, 1958. In conclusion, the Federal Narcotic Control Act of 1956 andsubsequent state legislation reflect the same basic congressionaland public misconceptions about the nature and dangers ofmarijuana that characterized the early fifties. Even moreunchanged, and in fact strengthened by results under the BoggsAct, was the assumption that the key to the solution of thenarcotic drug problem was the imposition of harsher penalties onboth users and traffickers in illicit drugs. Classification ofmarijuana with narcotic drugs was now a foregone conclusion. Infact, legislators seemed less aware that marijuana was a distinctsubstance than they had been in 1951. Footnotes and References 1 Between 1937 and 1951, the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act wasamended to change the definition of cannabis from the floweringor fruiting tops of just the female plant to include thecorresponding parts of the male plant. See 1942 HANDBOOK 172-73. 2 Act of Nov. 2, 1951, ch. 666, 65 Stat. 767. 3 21 U.S.C.  174 (1964). 4 26 U.S.C.   4741-76 (1964). 5 Hearings Before the Special Senate Committee to InvestigateOrganized Crime in Interstate Commerce, 82d Cong., 1st Sess., pt.14, exhibit 1, at .131, 240-41, 266 (1951) [hereinafter cited asKefauver Committee Hearings). Senator Kefauver stated at the June26, 1951, session of the hearings: Illegal drug use has reached epidemic proportions, accordingto information secured by this committee from different parts ofthe country. One of the most alarming aspects is the reportedincrease in addiction among the younger generation, some ofschool age. Id., pt. 14, at 235. See also N.Y. Times, June 19, 1951, at25, col. I ("the present wave of juvenile addiction struckus with hurricane force in 1948 and 1949, and in a short time hadthe two Federal hospitals bursting at the seams") (statementof Commissioner Anslinger). 6 A 57 year-old addict witness, who had started smoking opiumaround 1912, stated that he had never seen significant use ofdrugs by young people until recently and theorized that marijuanawas the cause. Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 382. 7 97CONG. REC. 8197 (195 1). 8 Id. at 8198. 9 Id. at 8198-8204. 10 Id. at 8198 (as quoted by Representative Boggs). See alsoKefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 430-31 (testimony ofCommissioner Anslinger). 11 97 CONG. REC. 8198 (1951). 12 Id. at 8196. 13 See id. at 8197, 8207. One of the most critical statementson this point came from Representative Harrison of Virginia who,after noting that narcotics laws violations had been increasing"only" in those jurisdictions where federal judges hadfailed to impose adequate sentences on recidivists, stated:"Where the judiciary is abusing its discretion, it is theduty of the law-making body to limit the discretion in order thatthe public may be protected." Id. at 8211. 14 Id. at 8207. 15 Id. at 8209. 16 Id. at 8210. 17 Representative Celler suggested that harsh mandatorysentences would have "two results: grand juries will refuseto indict and petit juries will refuse to convict." Id. at8206. 18 Id. at 8207. 19 Id. at 8206. 20 Id. at 8197. 21 Representative Keating Questioned the constitutionality ofthe provision. Id. at 8206. Apparently Keating acceptedRepresentative Harrison's statement that the language had been inthe statutory predecessors for years and had been passed on bythe Supreme Court. Id. at 8211. 22 TRAFFIC IN Opium 80 (1937). For a full and effectivediscussion of the flaws in these drug statistics from 1937 untilthe mid 1940's due to a confusion over what parts of themarijuana plant were to be weighed in determining how much of thedrug had been seized, see Mandel, Problems with Official DrugStatistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991, 998-99 (1969). 23 The following figures are available from 1936 to 1941.After 1941 the FBN ceased publication of the number of seizuresby state and municipal authorities: Year Number of seizures Amount seized 1935 unreported 195+ tons 1936 377 386 tons 1937 335 116 Kg. 1939 289 22,807 Kg. 1940 433 71,129 Kg. 1941 193 19 Kg. TRAFFIC IN Opium 63 (1935); id. at 57 (1936); id. at 81(1937); id. at 80 (1939); id. at 73 (1940); id. at 38 (1941). Thegreat discrepancy in these numbers may be one reason the FBNceased their publication in 1941. 24 Id. at 80 (1945). 25 Hearings on Dep'ts of Treasury and Post OfficeAppropriations for 19S1 Before a Subcomm. of the House Comm. onAppropriations, 81st Cong., 2d Sess., pt. 1, at 128 (1950). 26 The figures on the amount seized by federal agents from1939-1945 are as follows: Year FBN No. of Kgs. Seized Customs No. of Kgs. Seized 1939 419 63 1940 495 100 1941 396 12 1942 289 44 1943 150 168 1944 247 78 1945 128 129 TRAFFIC IN Opium 78 (1939); id. at 72 (1940); id. at 37(1941); id. at 49 (1942); id. at 42 (1943); id. at 34 (1944); id.at 23 (1945). 27 The figures for the period 1946-1951 are as follows: Year Seized No. of Arrests for Violations of Marijuana Laws Year No. of Kgs. Seized FBN Customs 1946 293 331 953 1947 307 466 911 1948 422 1023 1278 1949 384 1165 1643 1950 323 933 1490 1951 447 558 1177 TRAFFIC IN Opium 23, 27 (1946); id. at 23, 29 (1947); id. at23, 28 (1948); id. at 22, 26 (1949); id. at 29, 33 (1950); id. at25. 29 (1951). 28 See Teen-Age Dope Addicts New Problem?, U.S. NEWS &WoRLD REPORT, June 29, 1951, at 18 (interview with CommissionerAnslinger). 29 See text at note 10 supra. 30 See Teen-Age Dope Addicts New Problem?, supra note 28, at19. 31 Anslinger, The Facts About Our Teen-Age Addicts, READERSDigest, Oct. 1951, at 139. 32 The conclusions of the LaGuardia Report are discussed in THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 277-410(D. Solomon ed. 1966). The thirteen conclusions on the sociologyof marijuana use are so significant we include them in full: From the foregoing study the following conclusions are drawn: 1. Marihuana is used extensively in the Borough of Manhattanbut the problem is not as acute as it is reported to be in othersections of the United States. 2. The introduction of marihuana into this area is recent ascompared to other localities. 3. The cost of marihuana is low and therefore within thepurchasing power of most persons. 4. The distribution and use of marihuana is centered inHarlem. 5. The majority of marihuana smokers are Negroes andLatin-Americans. 6. The consensus among marihuana smokers is that the use ofthe drug creates a definite feeling of adequacy. 7. The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead toaddiction in the medical sense of the word. 8. The sale and distribution of marihuana is not under thecontrol of any single organized group. 9. The use of marihuana does not lead to morphine or heroin orcocaine addiction and no effort is made to create a market forthese narcotics by stimulating the practice of marihuana smoking. 10. Marihuana is not the determining factor in the commissionof major crimes. 11. Marihuana smoking is not widespread among school children. 12. Juvenile delinquency is not associated with the practiceof smoking marihuana. 13. The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects ofmarihuana smoking in New York City is unfounded. Id. at 307. 33 The New York trend was also typical of Los Angeles.California Division of Narcotic Enforcement, Marijuana-Our NewestNarcotic Menace, April 11 1940, at 12. See also Note, Youth andNarcotics, 1 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 445, 453 (1954) (reporting abreakdown by race of narcotics arrests by the Oakland policedepartment). 34 For example, in 1895 New York had passed a statute, ch.1041, 5 1, [1895 ] N.Y. Laws 972, requiring instruction in publicschools on the effect of narcotics. 35 For full accounts of the FBN "educationalcampaigns" up through the present day, see TRAFFIC IN Opiumfrom 1937 to the present. For the full exposition of the FBN'sposition on the drug user as a criminal before he becomes anaddict, see Recidivism on Narcotic Law Violators, in Traffic inOpium for each year. 36 Judge J. Foster Svmes of Denver, Colorado, quoted inTRAFFIC IN OPIUM 57 (1937). 37 See, e.g., G. CREIGHTON, NARCOTICS: THEIR LEGITIMATE ANDILLICIT USE (I 95 1). 38 Hearings an H.R. 3490 before the Subcomm. on Narcotics ofthe House Comm. on Ways and Means. 82d Cong., 1st Sess. 147(1951) [hereinafter cited as Boggs Act Hearings). 39 Dr. Isbell's paper stated: Any definition [of addiction] which makes dependence anessential feature will also not include intoxications with suchsubstances as cocaine, marijuana, and amphetamine. becausedependence on these substances is no more marked than isdependence on tobacco and coffee and yet, in some ways,intoxication with cocaine or marijuana is more harmful than isaddiction to morphine. Furthermore, definitions which excludecocaine and marijuana from the list of addicting drugs wouldcause endless confusion because, in common parlance and legally,both drugs arc regarded as addicting. Id. at 147-48. 40 Id. at 148. 41 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 119. 42 Id. at 136. See also Boggs Act Hearings I 01. 43 Boggs Act Hearings 96 44 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 73, 101, 109(statements of three addicts). See also id. at 190, 204 forstatements by addicts to the effect that upon Moving frommarijuana to hard drugs they did not know that the Latter wereaddictive. The implication is clear that marijuana is notaddictive. See id. at 91. 45 Boggs Act Hearings 206. 46 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 133. 47 Boggs ActHearings 105. 48 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 449; Boggs ActHearings 62. 49 97 CONG. REC. 8197-98 (1951). The linkage of marijuana useto heroin was also supplied by sonic of the testimony by addictsthemselves. Of 27 addicts interviewed in part 14 of the KefauverCommittee Hearings, 15 testified that they had started their druguse with marijuana. This figure is misleading because asubstantial majority of the 12 who had not used marijuana wereaddicts because of illness or were older addicts who had begunusing drugs before marijuana was readily available. See KefauverCommittee Hearings, pt. 14, at 11, 29, 54, 62, 71, 84, 93, 99,104, 108, 153, 157, 160, 162, 167, 171, 182, 189, 194, 203, 211,216, 220, 367, 380, 432, 436. Approximately 5 of the addictwitnesses indicated that marijuana did in fact lead to the use ofthe harder drugs but only one gave definite reasons why hethought this transition inevitably took place. One male addict,after stating that the average age of marijuana smokers was 13 or14, stated: You would very seldom find a person smoking marijuana who doesjust that, he keeps on, and he gets to the point where he doesnot have the same drive or feeling that he first had, and it islike a stepping stone, he graduates to heroin. Kefauver CommitteeHearings, pt. 14, at 199-200. Note that among many of these addicts curiosity and peer grouppressure was the primary factor in starting them into the use ofhard drugs. Id. at 12, 32, 94, 109, 254. Moreover, RepresentativeBoggs introduced some mystery into his statements during theHouse debates by stating: A study in February of 1950 of 602 case reports indicates that53 percent . . . started their addiction to drugs by reason ofassociation with other addicts, and 7 percent of them started onmarijuana. 97 CONG. REC. 8197 (1951). This study is cited on the samepage with Representative Boggs' statement that our young peopleusually start on the road to drug addiction by smoking marijuana. 50 TRAFFIC IN Opium 6 (1950). 51 Alabama, Indiana, Maryland, New Jersey, Oklahoma, Tennesseeand West Virginia. Id. at 8 (1951). 52 Connecticut, Illinois, Louisiana, Michigan, New York,Pennsylvania, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. Id. at 8-9. 53 Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky and Virginia. Id. at 6 (1952). 54 Delaware, Iowa, Minnesota, Nebraska, Pennsylvania andWyoming. Id. at 9 (1953). 55 The Ohio law, approved June 16,1955, provided for imprisonment of any one found guilty ofillegally selling narcotic drugs for a period of not less thantwenty nor more than forty years. Id. at 7 (1955). The Louisianameasure, adopted the following year, provided severe prisonsentences without parole, probation or suspension for the illegalsale, possession or administration of a narcotic drug. Sentencesranged from a five year minimum to a ninety-nine year maximum.Id. at 28 (1956). 56 Ch. 451, [1952) Va. Acts of Assembly 736. 57 The bill, H.B. 132, passed the House 65-0 on February 23,1952, and the Senate 34-0 on March 7, 1952. 58 Richmond Times-Dispatch, Mar. 2, 1952, 5 2, at 1, col. 6. 59 Id., Feb. 24, 1952,  2, at 5, col. 3. The House passedfifty bills and advanced thirty-five more during its session ofFebruary 23, 1952. Id. 60 Ch. 212, [1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 61 Ch. 451, [1952] Va. Acts of Assembly 736. 62 See also Proffit, An Analysis of the Missouri Narcotic DrugLaws, 17 Mo. L. REV. 252 (1952), in which the author shows thatnarcotic hysteria was closely linked to the general hysteria and"Red Scare" of the early fifties: "The opinion hasbeen advanced that the recent upsurge in consumption [of drugs]is fostered by Communists in an effort to undermine the morals ofour youth." Id. at 252-53. He cites a Missouri official whoso testified before a state legislative committee. For more ofthe same, see W. OURSLER & L. SMITH, NARCOTICS: AMERICA'SPERIL 266 (1952). The Missouri case parallels the Virginia datain that great public concern is expressed about the possiblespread of narcotics addiction but little if any separate noticewas given marijuana. Everywhere the narcotics evil was linked byveiled references to international communism, especially that ofChina, the traditional home of the opium habit. 63 Hearings on Illicit Narcotics Traffic Before the Subcomm.on Improvements in the Federal Criminal Code of the Senate Comm.on the judiciary, 84th Cong., 1st Sess. 57 (1955) [hereinaftercited as Daniel Committee Hearings]; see H. ANSLINGER & W.OURSLER, THE MURDERERS (1962). 64 Ch. 629, 70 Stat. 567. 65 Ch. 202, 42 Stat. 596 (1922). 66 Ch. 629,   103, 105-06, 108, 70 Stat. 568, 570, 571(codified at 26 U.S.C.  7237 (1964); 21 U.S.C.  174, 176a,184a (1964)). 67 Id.  103, 70 Stat. 568 (codified at 26 U.S.C.  7237(1964)). 68 Id. 69 Id.  106, 70 Stat. 570 (codified at 21 U.S.C.  176a(1964)). 70 Id. (declared unconstitutional in Leary v. United States,395 U.S. 6 (1969)) 71 Id.  103, 70 Stat. 568 (codified at 26 U.S,C.  7237 (b)(1) (1964)). The statute also provided that a seller peddlingheroin to a minor may be subject to a sentence of lifeimprisonment imposed by a court, or to a death sentence imposedby a jury. Id.  107, 70 Star. 571 (codified at 21 US.C.  176b(1964)). 72 Id. S 103, 70 Stat. 569 (codified at 26 U.S.C. 7237(d)(Supp. 111, 1966)). 73 Id.  104, 70 Star. 570 (codified at 26 U.S.C.  7607(1964)). 74 Id.  201, 70 Star. 573 (codified at 18 U.SC. S 1404(1964)). 75 Id., 70 Star. S74 (codified at 18 U.S.C. S 1406 (1964)). 76 Id., 70 Star. 573 (codified at 18 U.S.C. 5 1403 (1964) ). 77 id., 70 Stat. 574 (codified at 18 U.S.C.  1407 (1964)). 78 Id. S 301, 70 Stat. 575 (codified at 8 U.S.C.  1182(a)(5), (23) (1964)). 79 The House Subcommittee on Narcotics, which produced whatbecame the essentials of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956,revealed its knowledge of the distinction between marijuana andnarcotics solely by a footnote to the major heading"Narcotics" which stated in fine print that the termnarcotics included marijuana. See U.S. CODE CONG. & Am News3294 (1956). 80 102 GONG. REC. 9015 (1956). 81 Representative Boggs, father of the Boggs Act and Chairmanof the Subcommittee on Narcotics of the House Ways and MeansCommittee, stated that '[e]ffective steps to eliminate theunlawful drug traffic requires ... the imposition of severepunishment by the courts." Id. at 10689. The subcommittee,which had set out to determine the effect of the Boggs Act onnarcotics traffic, U.S. CODE CONG. & AD. News 3291 (1956),began its recommendations with calls for further increases in thepenalties for narcotics law violations. Id. at 3309. In fact, thesubcommittee felt that this was the only way to eliminate thedrug menace, and recommended that educational programs on theevils of narcotics not be instituted in the schools for fear ofexciting the curiosity of young people. Id. at 3305. Both theHouse Ways and Means Committee report and the subcommittee reportare filled with statements to the effect that harsher penaltiesare the most effective weapons in the war against illicitnarcotics. Id. at 3281-3303 passim. The Ways and Means Committeeconclusion was succinct: "Experience with the Boggs law . .. has clearly demonstrated the efficacy of severe punishment inreducing the illicit commerce in drugs." Id. at 3286. Finally, Senator Daniel, speaking for the Senate subcommitteeinvestigating the drug situation in the United States, found"it absolutely necessary for the Congress of the UnitedStates to strengthen the hands of our law enforcement officersand provide higher penalties if we are to stop the narcoticstraffic in this country." 102 CONG. Rec. 9014 (1956). Hissubcommittee also recommended the kind of across-the-boardincreases in penalties that the Act eventually contained. 82 U.S. CODE CONG. & AD. News 3283 (1956); see id. at3302. 83 Id. at 3304. 84 In holding unconstitutional the presumption of knowledgethat marijuana was smuggled, the Supreme Court in Leary v. UnitedStates, 395 U.S. 6 (1969), relied on the change in use patternsfrom 1959 to 1967. We think the presumption was unconstitutionalwhen passed in 1956, both as to importation and knowledge. 85 Daniel Committee Hearings 18. 86 The decline in the number of FBN arrests and seizures isdirectly related to the increase in local and state enforcementpersonnel. This thesis is supported by data from California wherestatewide arrests soared while federal arrests remained stable.Bureau of Criminal Statistics, California Dep't of Justice, Crimein California (1956). See also A. LiNDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THELAW 238 (1963). One commentator has suggested that except for theyears immediately after the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act,when the Bureau wanted to concentrate on its newly acquiredenforcement field, the FBN arrest data show clearly its emphasison the hard narcotics. Mandel, Problems with Official DrugStatistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991, 1019-20 (1969). 87 See note 20 at p. 1053 supra. 88 Written materials inserted into the record of the Senatehearings included the testimony of an experienced federal Customsofficial that high quality marijuana was being grown near theTexas cities of Laredo and Brownsville. Daniel Committee Hearings3488-89. In addition, the Attorney General of Ohio noted thatmarijuana may grow unnoticed along roadsides and vacant lots inmany parts of the country." Id. at 4814. Also, a bulletinissued by the Philadelphia Police Academy recited that"[plenty of marijuana is found growing in this city."Id. at 599. 89 Blum, Mind-Altering Drugs and Dangerous Behavior: DangerousDrugs, in THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 21, 24 (1967); Bouquet, Cannabis, 3 U.N. BULL. ONNARCOTICS, Jan. 1951, at 22, 32-33. 90 This is especially true with respect to the young and blackminorities. The presumption has validity only as applied torecently immigrated Mexicans. Cf. Chein, The Status ofSociological and Social Psychological Knowledge ConcerningNarcotics, in NARCOTIC DRUG ADDICTION PROBLEMS 146, 155 (R.Livingston ed. 1963). Mr. Chein reports a shift in drug use from1930-1960 from old to young and a continued increase in thepercentage of drug users who are Black or Spanish-speaking. 91 The number of federal arrests for marijuana violations fellfrom 1288 in 1952 to 169 in 1960. TRAFFIC IN Opium 26 (1952); id.at 69 (1960). 92 By 1954, many major states and cities had special narcoticssquads. See Daniel Committee Hearings 13 -14, 1 10. 93 Cf. TRAFFIC IN Opium 66 (1956); id. at 41 (1959). The FBNcharts show clearly the extraordinary incidence of drug abuseamong Blacks, Mexican-Americans and other minority communities. 94 Daniel Committee Hearings, exhibit 7, at 267-71. Localarrests in those six states accounted for 2,822 of the 3,205marijuana arrests made by local law enforcers in 1954. 95 For example, the statistics in TRAFFIC IN Opium seldom evendistinguish among the drugs involved, and the FBI Uniform CrimeStatistics frequently report all drug related arrests together,with no delineation of the type of drug used or the nature of theoffender. 96 Chein, supra note 90, at 152, suggests that whateverpatterns of drug use existed in the fifties were merelycontinuations of patterns observed in the thirties. 97 Ch. 535, (19581 Va. Acts of Assembly 675. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B23-25IA031-000655-B038-54http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlr7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112537 text/html 42800HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:25:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:31 GMTContent-length: 42582 Marijuana Users in the Courts: 1930-1965 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VII. MARIJUANA USERS IN THE COURTS: 1930-1965 Having studied the evolution of legislative hostility tomarijuana from a regional phenomenon with racial overtones to anationwide paranoia, it is worthwhile to consider the fate ofmarijuana users in the courts during this evolutionary period.After the courts had summarily rejected the substantiveconstitutional arguments, appeals in marijuana cases tended tofocus on three contentions particularly germane to drugviolations: procedural objections arising from interrelatedstatutory schemes on the state and federal levels punishingessentially the same conduct; objections to police conductintrinsic to victimless crimes; and objections to sufficiency ofevidence at trial. Like their legislative colleagues, state andfederal translated what they knew of the drug's mythical effectsinto overt hostility. Coupled with the traditionally conservativetreatment afforded the rights of criminal defendants, especiallyin state prosecutions, this judicial hostility producedever-lengthening sentences and few reversals. A. Statutory Fantasies: The Complications ofFederal Legislation 1. Quadruple "Jeopardy" and the "KillerWeed" When Congress passed the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937, marijuanahad already been included in the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act andevery state had enacted some form of marijuana prohibition.1 Inaddition to its ostensible revenue-raising function, the Act wasobviously designed both to deter further use of the drug 2 and tofacilitate enforcement of the state laws.3 The statute assuredthe availability to state prosecutors of the order forms filedwith the IRS at the time of payment of the tax. 4 Congress hadthought that the order forms and registration requirements woulddevelop an "adequate means of publicizing dealings inmarihuana in order to tax and control the trafficeffectively."5 Thus, after 1937, possession of marijuana without filing thetransfer form and paying the federal tax constituted a violationof both state and federal law;- yet filing the form and payingthe tax would probably not have eliminated the buyer's exposureto prosecution under state law. Indeed, compliance would probablyhave readily identified the buyer to state officials. To thisunfairness the courts paid no heed, noting that exposure to stateand federal prosecution for the same act did not constitutedouble jeopardy7 and that the fifth amendment did not protectdefendants from prosecution for violation of state law.8 After passage of the 1956 federal narcotic drug legislation9possession of marijuana constituted at least one, and often two,additional crimes. First, the Narcotic Drugs Import and ExportAct was amended10 in 1956 to punish directly illegalimportation11 of marijuana or other dealings in the drug withknowledge that it had been illegally imported. Since merepossession was sufficient evidence to convict under the Act, 12possession without registration and order form now constitutedthree crimes, and compliance with the filing and tax provisionswould have exposed the defendant to liability under state law andunder the importation provision if the original importation wasillegal. Again the courts saw no fifth amendment violation.13Second, another provision of the 1956 package required everyperson addicted to or using narcotics or convicted of a violationof the narcotics or marijuana laws punishable by over one year'simprisonment to register upon leaving the country. 14 Designed toaid the Government in identifying potential smugglers. thestatute was upheld, as a strict liability offense, 15 against amultitude of constitutional challenges. 16 Since penalties formarijuana possession almost uniformly exceeded one year'simprisonment during this period, a first offense possessionconviction by either sovereign triggered the registrationprovision. 2. Statutory Presumptions Because the federal statutes punished sale and possession ofmarijuana only indirectly, each had to bridge the gap betweenthose acts and the technical crimes-tax violations andimportation-related acts. As a bootstrap from the federal taxingpower to a federal police power, Congress chose presumptions.Thus, under the Marihuana Tax Act, possession plus failure toproduce the required forms was presumptive evidence of thecriminal act-failure to pay the tax17 -and the courts had notrouble upholding this provision. 18 In addition, under theImport and Export Act possession of marijuana constitutedpresumptive evidence of illegal importation and of defendant'sknowledge of such importation.19 Against a rash of attacks on the rationality of thispresumption, the lower federal courts20 noted that the SupremeCourt had upheld the same statutory language in the originalFederal Import and Export Act with respect to opium 21 and thatthere was sufficient general knowledge that most marijuana wasimported from Mexico to make the presumption rational. Althoughthe Ninth Circuit at one time indicated that a defendant couldrebut the presumption by showing that the marijuana in hispossession was manicured and therefore more likely to have beendomestically grown,22 that court later held that such proof wasinsufficient and that the defendant must also show actualdomestic production. 23 B. Attacks on State Legislation Most attacks on the state statutes focused on the vagueness ofstatutory terms-marijuana, however spelled, or cannabis or IndianHemp24 -both as a scientific matter and in terms of commonexperience.25 Predictably, however, few state courts were of amind to inhibit legislative proscription of the "killerweed." Due in part to greatly exaggerated conceptions aboutthe effects of the drug26 and in part to the ease with which themature plant is processed for the outlawed purposes,27 the courtsconstrued these statutory definitions as broadly as possible 28despite the traditional rule of strict construction of criminalstatutes. With the progressive increase in the severity of penaltieswhich accompanied adoption of the Uniform Act in the 1930's and1940's and the surge of amendments in the 1950's in the wake ofthe Boggs Act.29 Some problems of application arose.Interestingly enough. some courts, applied the lesser penaltywhere one of two penalties could be imposed.30 Similarly manycourts tended to impose minimum sentences until the late 1950'swhen they , too, lost all sense of proportion.31 C. Procedural Defenses and Entrapment Statutory attacks during this period tended to reflect thecomplicated interrelation of state and federal law and thescientific imprecision of legislative drafting. These attackswere usually rebuffed, and defendants, caught in a squeeze ofjudicial and legislative hostility, had few, if any, viabledefenses based on whether or not they had violated the regulatoryscheme. Both state and federal statutes merely required theprosecution to prove that the particular defendant was found inpossession of a substance which when chemically tested was foundto be marijuana. There were few tricky problems of proof, and theprosecution usually had a clear case. If these offenders werecaught dead to rights on the merits, the energetic attorney hadto look elsewhere for his defense. Fortunately, the exigencies of police practice in the field ofnarcotics law enforcement provided a defendant's attorney with anew area of attack-procedural irregularities in the arrest andapprehension of his client. The possession and sale of marijuanaepitomize the crime without a victim; neither seller nor buyer isapt to complain of the transaction. In order to promote vigorouslaw enforcement in this area, the police have had to use a seriesof undercover agents, surprise raids and often questionablesearch and arrest techniques. Because of the nature of theconduct they are trying to stifle, the police must intrude into aprivate social relationship where none of the parties wants it-thus, the police have found it essential to employ highlysecretive and often patently deceitful practices. It is nocoincidence that the vast developments in the law of criminalprocedure-especially in the fourth amendment area-have beenoutgrowths primarily of narcotics and marijuana cases. 1. Search and Seizure Today the major remedy for an illegal search is exclusion ofthe seized items as evidence. Some states and the federal courtshave used this exclusionary rule since early in the twentiethcentury. However, before the 1961 decision in Mapp v. 0hio32required all states to adopt this remedy, many state courts didnot exclude illegally seized evidence. In jurisdictions withoutthe rule, it scarcely helped the victim of an illegal search toraise the point. So, for example, in a 1945 Louisiana case, thecourt permitted introduction of marijuana seized without awarrant from defendant's room while he was out of town .33 Because of the scope permitted the searching officer, thingswere not much better in jurisdictions adhering to theexclusionary rule. In states using the rule before Mapp, thecrucial issue when the lawfulness of a search was questioned waswhether or not the search was reasonable under thecircumstances.34 One might expect, in view of the judicialhostility toward marijuana defendants, that the reasonablenessstandard provided sufficient leeway for circumvention of theexclusionary rule in more than a few cases.35 Other end runsaround the rule were developed in the federal system and in thestates purporting to apply the rule to evidence seized in anillegal search. First, courts upheld searches if there wasarguably an untainted source for seizure of the evidence. Forexample, a court might admit marijuana seized in a concededlyillegal search where a police officer saw the marijuana beforebeginning the illegal search .36 Second, in order to havestanding to assert the inadmissibility of seized items, one hadto admit the narcotics in question belonged to hirn.37 Third,courts often permitted searches pursuant to a warrant to extendfar beyond the items named in the warrant 38 under what came tobe known as the contraband theory. This theory reasoned thatcertain items could never lawfully be possessed and belonged onlyto the government; thus any seizure of these items waspermissible.39 2. Entrapment In order for federal and state agents to detect narcoticstraffic and use, it is essential that they infiltrate the drugculture. Obtaining this inside information may often involvepolice use of special employees - informers-or may require thatthe police become directly involved in the commission of thecriminal act .40 Many defendants in narcotics cases have claimedthat they were forced into sales or purchases of narcotics by thepolice or their agents. These charges led to the affirmativedefense of entrapment, first recognized in federal courts by theSupreme Court in Sorrels v. United States.41 Since that time, theprinciples of the defense, as stated in that decision, werereaffirmed by the Supreme Court in Sherman v. United States .42In Sherman, a government informer induced the defendant, who wastrying to quit his use of narcotics and was undergoing treatmentat a narcotics rehabilitation center, to resume his use andsupply the informer. The Court held that the conduct of thepolice informer constituted entrapment. The entrapment defense would seem the ideal defense tactic inmarijuana cases, because so often the defendant has beenapprehended due to some police informer or police trick .43However, the theoretical and practical outlines of the defensenarrowly restrict its scope and make it rarely successful.Moreover, because it may entail an admission that defendantcommitted the act charged 44 it is usually the last resort. From the beginning there have been two conflicting views ofthe entrapment defense. The majority view has consideredentrapment an exception to the given criminal statute on theground that the legislature could not have intended entrapment tofall within the statutory definitions of the crime. With this asthe theoretical justification of the defense, the inquiry focuseson the innocence of the defendant but for the police conduct. Thepractical question is whether the police merely supplied anopportunity for a person with a preexisting prediliction to thecriminal act. In the majority view this question of fact is to beresolved by the jury. 45 Throughout the years a substantial minority position hascontended that the entrapment defense should be considered apolice control mechanism. Under this view, the focus is on thepolice and their conduct rather than on the character of thedefendant. This rationale is premised on the court's supervisorypowers over tile administration of justice, and the question ofentrapment is one of law to be decided by the not by the jury.46 The focus of the defense on the character of the defendant andthe use of usually unsympathetic juries to decide the issue havegreatly hindered the successfulness of the entrapment defense.Since the defense must be raised affirmatively, the defendantbears a heavy burden in proving that he would not have committedthe crime but for the police inducement. Thus, in Gilmore v.United States47 the defendant was unable to carry the burden ofproving that he would not have otherwise committed the marijuanaoffense. A government agent approached the defendant andrequested marijuana, but the jury found no entrapment and thecourt could not declare that there was entrapment as a matter oflaw. With the entrapment defense, as with illegal searches, thecourt has a known lawbreaker before it and for this reason isreluctant to free him unless there is an overwhelming reason todismiss the charges, As a California court stated, It is not theentrapment of a criminal upon which the law frowns . . . . "48 The focus upon the defendant and his mental state, rather thana focus on the government enforcement practices and theirpossible effect of creating a particular crime, places anincredible burden on the defendant to try to convince the jurythat he is otherwise blameless. The use of informers and specialagents who become friendly with those suspected of dealing inmarijuana, and the use of this friendship to try to purchasemarijuana, often by supplying the cash,49 are bound to have adetrimental effect on the lay enforcement officers as well as toassure a slight increase in the supply of marijuana which wouldotherwise not have entered the trade. Nevertheless, the defenseas presently structured remains virtually impossible for thedefendant to raise with any real hope of success. D. The Pro Forma Trial When the marijuana defendant had exhausted his motions fordismissal or suppression of the evidence and was brought totrial, he was usually in deep trouble, faced with judicialhostility, lax methods of identification, and loose standards ofproof. Convictions were rarely reversed for any reason andespecially not for insufficient evidence. And penalties, nomatter how harsh, were never set aside. The first line of defense in the marijuana trial ofteninvolved the defendant's claim that the substance seized from himwas not really marijuana. In general, the state had no difficultyproving the substance to be marijuana. In the important case,expert evidence of chemical tests may have been introduced,50 butmore commonly courts permitted the testimony of policeofficers,51 undercover agents and other lay witnesses52 to besufficient to create a question of fact for the jury to decide.53 Thus, when chemical evidence was not introduced, juries werestrongly inclined to believe the policeman or a disinterestedprosecution witness as against the defendant.54 This ease of identification combined with the uncriticalacceptance of uncorroborated testiniony,55 produced what amountedin fact to a very low standard of proof. Thus, in a Californiacase, People v. Janisse,56 the conviction was upheld on thetestimony of teenage boys, though the defendant's co-workerstestified for an alibi. The evidence of rookie police officerswho later failed their civil service exams57 has been acceptedover the word of the defendant. Finally, even the testimony ofwitnesses who stand to benefit only from the conviction of thedefendant has been accepted without corroboration, whether thebenefit was indirect58 or direct.59 The wisdom of allowing suchtestimony by itself to be legally sufficient for a conviction isdoubtful. Although in theory the state must prove the defendant'spossession was knowing,60 through the use of circumstantialevidence the state usually encountered few problems in meetingits burden of proof. The state was permitted to usecircumstantial evidence to link the defendant to a quantity ofmarijuana, but where only circumstantial evidence existed theremust have been an instruction to the that all other reasonableinferences of innocence had been overcome.61 For example,behavior such as running away from police, if marijuana was foundalong the path run, was sufficient to link the defendant topossession 62 though mere proximity without other guilty behaviorwas not enough to prove possession. 63 Finally, judicial hostility to the "morallydepraved" marijuana user was so strong that often judgescondoned inflammatory statements by the prosecution to the juryabout the nature of the drug and its users. Indeed, some judgesthemselves often participated in these highly emotionalstatements. For example, one judge in instructing a juryannounced: Marijuana is a vicious, demoralizing substance that robs a person of morality honor, integrity, decency, and all the virtues that are the foundation of good character and good citizenship. The Government is constantly engaged in an effort to stamp out traffic in this and in narcotic drugs. Officers of the Government are employed in this effort usually and are entitled to credit for their loyalty and integrity.64 In the same way, direct aspersions toward a defendant'scharacter were tolerated .65 For instance, courts overlookedprosecution comments that the defendant sold his drugs near a'junior high school" or that drug use among teenagers mustbe stopped .66 In sum, then, defendants in marijuana cases had greatdifficulties at trial during this period. Easy identificationmethods, jury acceptance of uncorroborated testimony, use ofcircumstantial evidence to prove defendant's possession wasknowing, and the 'judicial participation in inflammatorystatements to the jury made defense success at trial a virtualimpossibility. Footnotes 1 See p. 1034 supra. 2 See, e.g., Hearings on H.R. 006 Before a Subcomm. of the SenateComm. on Finance, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 5-7 (1937); H.R. REP. No.792, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 1-3 (1937). 3 See Leary v. United States, 395 U.S. 6, 26-27 (1969). 4 26U.S.C.  4773 (1964). 4 H.R. REP. No. 792, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 2 (1937); S. REP.No. 900, 7Sth Cong., 1st Sess. 3 (1937). 5 With minor exceptions, the Marihuana Tax Act requires alltransactions in marijuana to be carried out by written orderform. 26 U.S.C.  4741-44 (1964). It is unlawful for atransferor to transfer except by such form obtained by thetransferee, 26 U.S.C. S 4742 (1964), and for the transferee toacquire, transport or conceal marijuana without filing thetransfer form, registering with the IRS and paying the applicabletransfer tax. 26 U.S.C.  4744 (a) (1964). For heretoforeunregistered persons, that tax is $100 an ounce. 26 U.S.C. 4741 (1964). Since marijuana was excised from the United StatesPharmacopoeia, there have been few legitimate transactions byregistered persons. THE PRESIDENTS COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENTAND ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, REPORT: THE CHALLENGE OF CRIME INA FREE SOCIETY 214 (1967). Since .the tax is otherwiseprohibitive, the Act is in effect almost entirely a criminal law;the crime is having anything to do with marijuana-possession,sale, acquisition or importation-since proof of possessioncoupled with failure, after reasonable notice and demand by theSecretary of the Treasury or his delegate, to produce thetransfer form is "presumptive evidence" of guilt. 26U.S.C.  4744(a) (1964). 7 Cf. Abbate v. United States, 359 U.S. 187 (1959); Bartkus v.Illinois, 359 U.S. 121 (1959); United States v. Lanza, 260 U.S.377 (1922). One state court held, as an interpretation of statelegislative policy rather than under constitutional compulsion,that acquittal of a federal marijuana possession charge wouldconstitute a defense to the same state charge. State v. Wortham,63 Ariz. 148, 160 P.2d 352 (1945). 8 See Leary v. United States, 383 F.2d 851, 870 (5th Cir.1967), revd, 395 U.S. 6 (1969); Haynes v. United States, 339 F.2d30, 31-32 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 380 U.S. 924 (1965). 9 See pp. 1077-78 supra. 10 21 U.S.C.  176a (1964). 11 Importation "contrary to law` was that in violation ofthe Marihuana Tax Act, 26 U.S.C. S 4755 (1964), or the CustomsAct, 19 U.S.C. S 1496-97 (1964). 12 See note 19 infra and accompanying text. 13 See, e.g., Rule v. United States, 362 F.2d 215 (5th Cir.1966), cert. denied, 385 U.S. 1018 (1967). 14 18 U.S.C.  1407 (1964). 15 Application of the statute was particularly harsh. Eventhough defendant, found guilty of a drug offense and sent to theCalifornia Youth Authority for several months, had been told uponrelease that his record was clean, the court held that he hadviolated the statute by failing to register. Adams v. UnitedStates, 299 F.2d 327 (9th Cir. 1962). 16 See Palma v. United States, 261 F.2d 93 (5th Cir. 1958');Reyes v. United States, 258 F.2d 774 (9th Cir. 1958); UnitedStates v. Eramdjian, 155 F. Supp. 914 (S.D. Cal. 1957). Thecourts struggled mightily with arbitrariness, vagueness, right totravel, self incrimination, and equal protection arguments, butupheld the statute. But cf. Russell v. United States, 306 F.2d402 (9th Cir. 1962) (gun registration requirementunconstitutional since it required admission of presumptivelyunlawful possession). 17 26 U.S.C. S 4744 (a) (1964). 18 E.g., Manning v. United States, 274 F.2d 926 (5th Cir.),rcv'd on other grounds on rehearing, 280 F.2d 422 (5th Cir.1960). This provision was early interpreted not to require governmentagents to request the transfer form at the time of arrest, thecourts holding that possession of the form was an affirmativedefense. E.g., Hill v. United States, 261 F.2d 483 (9th Cir.1958); Hensley v. United States, 160 F.2d 257 (D.C. Cir.), cert.denied, 331 U.S. 817 (1947). 19 21 U.S.C.  176a (1964). 20 Leary v. United States, 383 F.2d 851, 869 (5th Cir. 1967),rev'd, 395 U.S. 6 (1969); Borne v. United States, 332 F.2d 565(5th Cir. 1964); United States v. Gibson, 310 F.2d 79 (2d Cir.1962); Claypole v. United States, 280 F.2d 768 (9th Cir. 1960);Butler v. United States, 273 F.2d 436 (9th Cir. 1959); Caudillov. United States, 253 F.2d 513 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 357 U.S.931 (1958). 21 Yee Hem v. United States, 269 U.S. 178 (1925). 22 Caudillo v. United States, 253 F.2d 513 (9th Cir.), cert.denied, 357 U.S. 931 (1958). Implying that the presumption ofimportation was a rule of evidence, not of substantive law, thecourt noted that imported marijuana was ordinarily composed ofmixed twigs and stems since the growers waited until maturitybefore harvesting. In the United States, on the other hand,growers avoided police detection by picking individual leavesbefore the plant matured, Since appellant possessed mixed twigsand stems, the court upheld application of the presumption; theclear suggestion, however, was that the presumption would not beapplied to manicured marijuana. 23 Costello v. United States, 324 F.2d 260 (9th Cir. 1963),cert. denied, 376 U.S. 930 (1964). 24 Use of the Latin word "cannabis" was challengedas an unconstitutionally vague definition of the prohibitedsubstance in People v. Oliver, 66 Cal. App. 2d 431, 152 P.2d 329(Dist. Ct. App. 1944), on the basis of an early holding that theuse of Latin to define a sex crime was unconstitutionally vague,Ex parte Lockett, 179 Cal. 581, 178 P. 134 (1919) (fellatio andcunnilingus). -In rejecting the vagueness argument, the courtheld that "cannabis" was later explained in the statuteby the use of the word "marijuana" and that the twowords were synonymous. See People v. Martinez, 117 Cal. App. 2d701, 256 P.2d 1028 (Dist. Ct. App. 1953) ("Indian Hemp"not unconstitutionally vague); cf. People v. Johnson, 147 Cal.App. 2d 417, 305 P.2d 82 (Dist. Ct. App. 1957)("lophophora" not unconstitutionally vague reference topeyote). 25A related issue was whether the charge of possession of"marijuana" was specific enough where there werestatutory exceptions to protect the bird seed and hempindustries. The general rule was that the state need not allegethat the parts possessed were not within the statutoryexceptions. E.g., Simpson v. State, 129 Fla. 1279 176 So. 515(1937). Contra, People v. Sowrd, 370 111. 140, 18 N.E.2d 176(1938'). 26See, e.g., Simpson v. State, 129 Fla. 127, 131, 176 So. 515,517 (1937) (marijuana causes erotic hallucinations, loss ofsense, false conviction, loss of values, a general weakening ofpowers, making it dangerous to mind and body). In Commonwealth v.LaRosa, 42 Pa. D. & C. 34, 36-37 (Fayette County Dist. Ct.1941), the court stated: The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the plant whichrender it highly dangerous to the mind and body, upon which itoperates to destroy the will, to produce imaginary delectablesituations, and gradually to weaken the physical powers, residein a sticky resin of great narcotic power that pervades theentire plant .... 27 State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15(1931). 28 See State v. Hall, 41 Wash. 2d 446, 249 P.2d 769 (1952);Commonwealth v. LaRosa, 42 Pa. D. & C. 34 (Fayette CountyDist. Ct. 1941). LaRosa held that the statute, passed two yearsearlier, created a duty to cut down marijuana plants before theycould seed and that defendant had no right to plant marijuanaeven if he meant to cut the plants before maturity. Defendant'sconviction for possession of two thousand mature plants and onehundred fifty thousand immature plants was accordingly affirmed. 29 See pp. 1074-75 supra. 30 E.g., State v. Economy, 61 Nev. 394, 130 P.2d 264 (1942). 31 This was particularly true in the Southwest, where usecases were more numerous and appeals more frequent. Indicative ofthis trend are the following Texas cases in chronological order:Gonzales v. State, 108 Tex. Crim. 253, 299 S.W. 901 (1928) ($25fine); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209, 58 S.W.2d 534 (1933)(5-year sentence reversed); Horton v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 237,58 S.W.2d 833 (1933) (2-year sentence reversed); Spangler v.State, 135 Tex. Crim. 36, 117 S.W.2d 63 (1938) 1-year sentenceaffirmed); Ramirez v. State, 135 Tex. Crim. 442, 125 S.W.2d 597(1938) (3-year sentence affirmed) (possession of a crop of 300plants); Fawcett v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 14, 127 S.W.2d 905(1939) (2-year sentence reversed); Anderson v. State, 137 Tex.Crim. 461, 131 S.W.2d 961 (1939) (5-year sentence affirmed)(defendant tried to dispose of marijuana in station house);Martinez v. State, 138 Tex. Crim. 51, 134 SW.2d 276 (1939)(6-year sentence reversed); Carrizal v. State, 138 Tex. Crim.103, 134 S.W.2d 287 (1939) (2-year sentence affirmed); Lufkin v.State, 144 Tex. Crim. 501, 164 S.W.2d 709 (1942) (2-yearaffirmed); Cornelius v. State, 158 Tex. Crim. 356, 256 S.W.2d 102(1953) (2-year sentence affirmed); Sparks v. State, 159 Tex.Crim. 111, 261 S.W.2d 571 (1953) (2-year sentence reversed); Raov. State, 160 Tex. Crim. 416, 271 S.W.2d 426 (1954) (2-10 yearsentence); Brewer v. State, 161 Tex. Crim. 28, 274 S.W.2d 411(1954) (8-year sentence affirmed); Torres v. State, 161 Tex.Crim. 480, 278 SW.2d 853 (1955) (3-year sentence affirmed); Gomezv. State, 162 Tex. Crim. 30, 280 SW.2d 279 (1955) (5-25 yearsentence affirmed); McWhorter v. State, 163 Tex. Crim. 318, 291SW.2d 329 (1956) (2-3 year sentence affirmed); Crosco v. State,164 Tex. Crim. 257, 298 S.W.2d 134 (1957) (2-year sentenceaffirmed); Garcia v. State, 166 Tex. Crim. 482, 316 S.W.2d 734(1958) (life sentence affirmed); Sherr2d v. State, 167 Tex. Crim.119, 318 SW.2d 900 (1958) (13-year sentence reversed); Leal v.State, 169 Tex. Crim. 222, 332 S.W.2d 729 (1959) (75-yearsentence affirmed) (one prior conviction); King v. State, 169Tex. Crim. 34, 335 S.W.2d 378 (1959) (7-year sentence affirmed);Locke v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 361, 334 S.W.2d 292 (1960)(15-year sentence affirmed); Massiate v. State, 365 S.W.2d 802(Tex. Crim. App. 1963) (life sentence affirmed) (two priorburglary convictions). 32 367 U.S. 643 (1961). 33 State v. Shotts, 207 La. 898, 22 So. 2d 209, cert. denied,326 U.S. 730 (1945). 34 See, e.g., United States v. Rabinowitz, 339 U.S. 56 (1950).The Court here upheld the search of a one-room office on thegrounds that the search was incident to a lawful arrest, and saidthat the scope of such searches must turn on the reasonablenessof the search considering all the underlying circumstances. 35 Cf. Anderson v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 461, 131 S.W.2d 961(1939). See also Lea) v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 222, 332 S.W.2d729 (1959), holding it reasonable for a policeman to searchdefendant's shorts where he suspected from an informer's tip thatthe "out of the ordinary bulge" in defendant's pantsconcealed marijuana. 36 Ramirez v. State, 135 Tex. Crim. 442, 125 SW.2d 597 (1938).Eventually, courts began to allow the admission of illegallyseized evidence if there was any untainted source whatsoever.Thus, where defendant testified that the police had foundmarijuana in a dresser drawer in his house, the court permittedthe state to introduce the marijuana based on the untaintedsource of defendant's own statements in court. Rao v. State, 160Tex. Crim, 416, 271 S.W_2d 426 (1954). 37 See Connolly v. Medalie, 58 F.2d 629 (2d Cir. 1932). Inthat case judge Learned Hand wrote: Men just wince at admitting that they were the owners, or inpossession, of contraband property; may wish at once to securethe remedies of a possessor, and avoid the perils of the part;but equivocation will not serve. If they come as victims, theymust take on that role, with enough detail to cast them withoutquestion. The petitioners at bar shrank from that predicament;but they were obliged to choose one horn of the dilemma. Id. at 630 38 See King v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 34, 335 SAV.2d 378(1959). Here the Texas court held, with one dissent, that asearch warrant for the premises of the husband authorized asearch of the wife's bag in the house; her conviction for thematerials found in the bag was affirmed, In the field of search incident to an arrest, courts went evenfarther. Thus, a Texas court affirmed a conviction based upon thearrest and search of a defendant, even though the police officeradmitted he had arrested the defendant solely for the purpose ofsearching him. The officer ostensibly arrested the defendant fora knife fight, but later admitted that he had arrested himbecause he suspected him of possession of marijuana. The courtnoted that the defendant was unable to give any authority for hiscontention that the state should be bound by the officer'sstatement as to the purpose of the arrest. Gonzales v. State, 160Tex. Crim. 548, 272 S.W.2d 524 (1954). 39 It had been held that contraband may be seized in a searchincident to arrest although the items taken had no relationshipto the crime for which the arrest was made. Harris v. UnitedStates, 331 U.S. 145 (1947). overruled, Chimel v. California, 395U.S. 752 (1969). 40 THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 8. See also MASS PRODUCTION JUSTICE AND THE CONSTITUTIONALIDEAL 52-53 (C. Whitebread ed. 1970). 41 287 U.S. 435 (1932). 42 356 U.S. 369 (1958). 43 See A. LITTLE, DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT (1967). 44 See Henderson v. United States, 237 F.2d 169, 172 (1956);State v. Taylor, 375 S.W.2d 58, 62 (Mo. 1964). But see People v.Perez, 62 Cal. 2d 769, 401 P.2d 934, 44 Cal. Rptr. 326 (1965)(Traynor, C.J.). 45 Sherman v. United States, 356 U.S. 369, 377 & n.8(1958) (Warren, GJ.). 46 Id. it 378 (Frankfurter, J., concurring); Sorrells v.United States, 287 U.S. 435, 453-59 (1932) (Roberts, J.,dissenting). 47 228 F.2d 121 (5th Cir. 1955), See also United States v.Davis 272 F.2d 149 (7th Cit. 1959). Davis was not strictly anentrapment case; the government agents had arranged for thetransportation of a hag of marijuana front Texas to Chicago. Thedefendant argued that the agents' activities were illegal, andfor that reason, the government was estopped from prosecuting himand that the evidence was inadmissible. The trial court foundthat the defendant had arranged for the deal and instructed thejury to acquit if the agents had illegally caused theimportation. As in Gilmore, the jury was not willing to condemnthe police, 48 People v. Branch, 119 Cal. App. 2d 490, 494, 260 P.2d 27,30 (Dist. Ct. App. 1953), where the police had their witness callthe defendant and ask to buy some marijuana and then accompaniedthe witness to the defendant's home. 49 See People v. Williams, 146 Cal. App. 2d 656, 304 P.2d 100(1956); Commonwealth v. Jones, 46 Dauph. 300 (Dauphin County,Pa., Dist. Ct. 1938). 50 See, e.g., People v. Agajanian, 97 Cal. App. 2d 399, 218P.2d 114 (Dist. Ct. App. 1950); People v. Oliver, 66 Cal. App. 2d431, 152 P.2d 329 (Dist. Ct. App. 1944); Valdez v. State, 135Tex. Crim. 201, 117 S.W.2d 459 (1938). 51 McWhorter v. State, 163 Tex. Crim. 318, 291 S.W.2d 329(1956). 52 People v. Sanchez, 197 Cal. App. 2d 617, 17 Cal. Rptr. 230(Dist. Ct. App. 1961); People v. Haggard, 181 Cal. App. 2d 38, 4Cal. Rptr. 898 (Dist. Ct. App. 1960); People v. Janisse, 162 Cal.App. 2d 117, 328 P.2d 11 (Dist. Ct. App. 1958). Even minors whoreceive the marijuana from the defendant are competent toidentify the substance. People v. Sanchez, supra. 53 See Hernandez v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 343, 129 S.W.2d 301(1938). 54 See, e.g., cases cited at note 52 supra. 55See, e.g., People v. Ballejos, 216 Cal. App. 2d 286@ 30 Cal.Rptr. 725 (Dist. Ct. App. 1963); People v. Johnson, 99 Cal. App.2d 559, 222 P.2d 58 (Dist. Ct. App. 1950). overruled, People v.Perez, 62 Cal. 2d 769, 401 P.2d 934, 44 CA Rptr. 326 0965)(Traynor, C.J.). See also People v. Sanchez, 197 C21. App, 2d617, 17 Cal, Rptr. 230 (Dist. Ct. App. 1961); People v. Alinnns,110 Cal. .@,\pp. 2d 310, 242 P.2d 331 (Dist. Ct. App.), ccrt.dcnied, 344 U.S. 846 (1952). 56 162 CA App. 2d 117, 328 P.2d 11 Misr. Ct. App. 1958) (itwas not too improbable that defendant would have given marijuanaaway to a near stranger). But see People v. MacCagnan, 129 Cal.App, 2d 100, 276 P.2d 679 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (evidence of theprice admitted to show the unlikelihood that defendant was giventhe marijuana). 57 People v. Gebron, 124 C21. App, 2d 675, 208 P.2d 1068(Dist. Ct. App. 1954). 58 People v. Mimms, 110 Ca]. App. 2d 310, 242 P.2d 331 (Dist.Ct. App.), cert. denied, 344 U.S. 846 (1952). 59 People V. JA7irlSton, 46 Ca]. 2d 151, 293 P.2d 40 (1956)(witnesses against defendant for sale to minor were due to go ontrial themselves); People v. Ballejos, 216 Cal. App. 2d 286, 30Cal Rptr. 725 (Dist, Ct. App. 1963) (agent alleged to be paid bygovernment if successful was only witness against defendant). 60 See People v. Carrasco, 159 Cal. App. 2d 63, 32i P.2d 129(Dist. Ct. App. 1958), People v. Antista, 129 Cal. App. 2d 47,276 P.2d 177 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (defendant never reportedhaving previously used marijuana and apartment used by many otherpersons); People v. Candiotto, 128 Cal. App. 2d 347, 275 P.2d 500(Dist. Ct. App. 1954); People v. Savage, 128 Cal. App. 2d 123,274 P.2d 905 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (maid found marijuana wrappedin napkins two days after a party held to be insufficientevidence) (trial judge held to be prejudiced); Fawcett V. State,137 Tex. Crim. 14, 127, S.W.2d 905 (1939) (reversed for failureto give instruction on ignorance as a defense). 61 Gonzales v. People, 128 Colo. 522, 264 P.2d 508 (1953);State v. Walker, 54 N.M. 302, 223 P.2d 943 (1950). 62 Perez v. State, 34 Ala. App. 406, 40 So. 2d 344 (Ct. App.1949) (paper in apartment matched paper on marijuana). See alsoPeople v. Rodriguez, 151 Cal. App. 2d 598, 312 P.2d 272 (Dist.Ct. App. 1957) (defendant knowingly helping owner move marijuanais sufficient for possession). 63 People v. Miller, 162 Cal. App. 2d 96, 328 P.2d 506 (Dist.Ct. App. 1958) (reversible error to introduce marijuana founddown the street from the defendant's apartment without furtherproof of defendant's ownership) - In Sherrad v. State, 167 Tex.Crim. 119, 318 S.W.2d 900 (1958), defendant's conviction wasreversed for the failure of the prosecutor to connect the paymentto the defendant with the later payment to another defendant whomade delivery of the marijuana to the agent. The court noted thatdefendant had been charged as the principal, and that no proof ofany conspiracy had been made. See also People v. Vasquez, 135Cal. App. 2d 446, 287 P.2d 385 (Dist. Ct. App. 1955) (defendantchargeable with transporting, not possession, where he toldco-defendant to throw marijuana away and co-defendant did not doso). 64 Lake v. United States, 302 F.2d 452 (8th Cir. 1962). 65 See, e.g., People v. Sykes, 44 Cal. 2d 166, 280 P.2d 769,cert. denied, 349 U.S. 934 (1955) (evidence of defendant'sactivities as a pimp admissible in a trial on charge of marijuanasale to minor in order to prove that there was a plot tosubjugate both the body and mind of the minor) (Traynor, CJ,dissented, stating that the evidence was prejudicial and of noprobative value); Escamilla v. State, 162 Tex. Crim. 346, 285SW.2d 216 (1955) (permissible for prosecutor to call defendant apeddler and then to withdraw statement); People v. Salo, 73 Cal.App. 2d 685, 167 P.2d 269 (Dist. Ct. App. 1946); Medina v. State,149 Tex, Crim. 249, 193 S.W.2d 196 (1946) (no error to calldefendant a dealer in marijuana in possession trial). 66 Torres v. State, 161 Tex. Crim. 480, 278 S.W.2d 85 3 (1955). 67 People v. Head, 108 Cal. App. 2d 734, 239 P.2d 506 (Dist.Ct. App. 1952). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B23-26IA031-000655-B038-73http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlr8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112548 text/html 44984HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:25:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:20 GMTContent-length: 44766 The Public Discovers The Truth About Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VIII. THE PUBLIC DISCOVERS THE TRUTH ABOUT MARIJUANA We need not belabor the point, but sometime after 1965the wisdom of the marijuana laws suddenly became dinner-tableconversation in most American middle-class homes along with theIndochina war and campus dissent. Many sons and daughters, andeven mothers and fathers, of the middle class had tried the drug,and those who had not were certainly familiar with"pot" and the law. The medical profession finallycommenced a research effort to determine who was right-the userwho said the drug was a harmless pleasant euphoriant or thelawmakers, who by their actions had condemned it as a noxiouscause of crime, addiction and insanity. A. Marijuana and the Masses Although marijuana arrests arid seizures hit their all-timelow point in 1960,1 the middle and late sixties witnessed arevolution in marijuana use. Vast numbers of people have recentlyadopted the drug as their principal euphoriant; however, by allestimates, the new users are the sons and daughters of the middleclass, not the ethnic minorities and ghetto residents formerlyassociated with marijuana.2 Student marijuana use is now socommon that it has been associated in the public eye with theoverall campus life style.3 Accompanying the growth of widespreadmarijuana use on campus has been an increasing experimentationwith the drug by intellectuals, professors, young professionalsand members of several other social groups who would never haveconsidered using the drug ten years ago.4 Dr. Stanley F. Yolles, former Director of the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, testifying before a Senatesubcommittee, said, "A conservative estimate of persons inthe United States, both Juvenile and adult, who have usedmarihuana, at least once, is about 8 million and may be as highas 12 million people."5 Other estimates have run as high astwenty to twenty-five million users.6 This vast increase in thenumber of people using marijuana seems to have begun in the earlyand middle sixties. It is likely that this new use pattern wasinitially precipitated by the publicity surrounding the LSDexperimentation of Doctors Alpert and Leary at Harvard in 1963.7As a growing segment of the academic fringe began to preachconsciousness-expansion, students began to find marijuanaavailable on campus. From that point the phenomenon snowballed.As more novice marijuana users reported no ill effects from itsuse, more students tried it, and in turn those who used andenjoyed the drug began to "turn on" those who had not.By 1970, some campuses reported that over seventy percent of thestudent body were users.8 More recently, marijuana use spreadbeyond the student subculture; reportedly its use has becomecommon even among young professionals on Wall Street.9 Moreover,since it is readily available and widely used in Vietnam,marijuana has become popular with many soldiers.10 3 See, e.g., R. DEBoLD& R. LEAF, LSD,MAN AND SOCIETY(1967); R. GOLDSTEIN, ONE IN SEVEN: DRUGS ON CAMPUS (1966); K.KENNISTON, THE UNCOMMITrED: ALIENATED YOUTH INAMERICAN SOCIETY(1967); D, LOURIA, THEDRUG SCENE (1968); L. SIMMONS & B.WINEGRAD, IT'S HAPPENING (1967). 4 See Malabre, Drugs on the Job, Wall St. J., May 4, 1970, at1, Col. 6. This article deals not only with drug use byprofessionals but also details the increasing trend of drug useon the job. 5 Hearings Before the Subcomm. to Investigate juvenileDelinquency of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary, 91st Cong., 1StSess. 267 (1969) [hereinafter cited as Narcotics LegislationHearings]. 6 Id. at 268. 7 See R. DEBOLD & R. LEAF, LSD, MAN AND SOCIETY 130-31(1967). 8 TIME, Sept. 26, 1969, at 69; Yale Daily News, Jan. 14, 1970. 9 Malabre, supra note 4. 10 D. LOURIA, THE DRUG SCENE 10 (1968). The general public is clearly aware that there has been both avast increase in the number of users and a shift from lower- tomiddle-class use of the drug. These great changes in the natureof marijuana use have had important social consequences. First,with the sharp rise in the number of users and the tendency ofmarijuana users to share common life styles and often politicalopinions, the drug has become associated ill the past few yearswith a major counter-culture, Many proponents of thatcounter-culture have contended that the illegal status ofmarijuana -which puts large numbers of people oil the wrong sideof the criminal law-is the most significant unifying andrecruiting agent for the New Left and the other political andsocial causes of the late sixties." Some New Left leadershave gone so far as to oppose reduction in the penalties formarijuana possession because they feel severe penalties aid theirrecruiting ends by making marijuana users outraged against asociety that overacts so strongly to a nonexistent danger."We feel the general disrespect for marijuana laws may be causinga dangerous disrespect for all laws in a sizeable segment of thepopulation. The credibility of government suffers on all issueswhen its handling of the use of this drug seems to so many so farremoved from reality. This opinion is supported by the increasingmedical evidence that the dangers of tile drug are de minimus. Secondly, the new middle-class use of marijuana has inducedthe first significant medical inquiry into the nature of thedrug; has spawned increasing numbers of challenges to theconstitutionality of marijuana laws and penalties, and hasspurred the passage of more lenient legislation. One commentator has stated: Nobody cared when it was a ghetto problem. Marijuana -well, itwas used by jazz musicians or the lower class, so you didn't careif they got 2-to-20 years. But when a nice, middle-class girl orboy in college gets busted for the same thing, then the wholecommunity sits up and takes notice. And that's the name of thegame today. The problem has begun to come home to roost-in allstrata of society, in suburbs, in middle-class homes, in thecolleges, suddenly, the punitive, vindictive approach wastouching- all classes of society. And now the most exciting thingthat's really happening is the change in attitude by the people.Now we have a willingness to examine the problem, as to whetherit's an experimentation, or an illness rather than "anevil." With this change I think we can come to a morerational approach to methods of drug control.13 Without doubt, the new class of users has successfullydemanded more favorable attention from the legislatures and thecourts than the lower class could have attracted. In fact, eventhe slightest circumscription of the reach of a state marijuanalaw is now national news.14 A third result of the widespread use of marijuana has been asubstantial challenge to the traditional picture of the nationalmarijuana trade. Over the past three decades, law enforcementofficials continued to convince legislators that the traffic inmarijuana was controlled by professional criminals.15 Confrontedwith this portrait of the marijuana trade, legislators naturallystereotyped the "seller" as the vicious criminalpushing his wares for high profit and felt that extraordinarilyharsh penalties were justified for sellers.16 From several recentstudies it appears that the structure of marijuana traffic bearslittle or no relation to the traditional stereotype. In a recentsurvey of 204 users it was found that 44 percent had sold tofriends at least once. Many casual users sell to leave themselvesenough profit to cover the amount of their own use. 17 The studyfurther finds that even at the very top, profits are too smalland the product too bulky to interest the criminal class thatprobably underwrites sales of heroin and other "harddrugs." 18 Thus even at the top, amateurs-composed generallyof the students, young professionals and soldiers who constitutethe users-are the main source of the drug.19 It is also importantto note that marijuana is typically sold by the ounce20 ratherthan by the cigarette as was traditionally assumed. Thus, eventhe relatively casual experimenter was likely to have at least anounce of the drug in his possession. B. Enforcement of the Marijuana Laws:1960-1970 As a result of the rapid spread of marijuana use, fullenforcement of the marijuana laws has become impossible.21 By1967 the Federal Bureau of Narcotics had 299 agents, roughly 50more than in 1956.22 In the same period the use of marijuanaprobably increased 1,000 fold. It seems obvious from both FBNstatistics and the best available state and local statistics thattwo enforcement patterns emerged in the sixties: concentration on"sellers" and selective enforcement. Since 1960 the FBN and major state and municipal narcoticsquads have concentrated on the larger sellers. In the earlysixties this trend was less pronounced,23 but by 1968 theCommissioner of the FBN said that 75 percent of federal marijuanaarrests were of dealers and that even the remaining 25 percentwere sellers but were charged with possession as a result of pleabargains. Statistics from California show the same concentrationon sellers nevertheless the California bureau found that most ofthese sellers were young and first offenders.26 Thus, at least by1968 it became clear that sellers were quite often neophytes. At the same time that the police have abandoned fullenforcement for concentration on dealers, enforcement of the lawshas remained necessarily haphazard and somewhat selective. Sincemarijuana use has become so common, there are certain student andhippy communities in which the police could arrest nearlyeveryone. Here the problem of selective enforcement necessarilyarises-the police arrest those they dislike for other reasons,either political disagreement or suspicion of use of other drugs.This inevitable practice, although perhaps not consciouslyplanned, has brought outcry from some victimized communities.27This policy-if not a policy by the police at least a perceptionby the hippies-of selective enforcement has provided themincreased impetus toward the anti-establishment life style theyhave adopted. Their attitude is aggravated when the police engagein particularly aggressive tactics, such as use of informers, totrap the offenders. 28 By 1970, the unenforceability of the marijuana laws was mostclearly evidenced by the failure of President Nixon's OperationIntercept which was designed to seal off the Mexican border andthe supply of marijuana coming into the United States fromMexico.29 Both national and international tensions led to thefailure of the "Noble Experiment." By now, themarijuana trade is so scattered and at the same time sofragmented (with no real hierarchy in the trade) that theunenforceability of these laws has reached Prohibitionproportions. C. Emergence of Medical Opinion One of the most significant causes of widespread middle-classuse of marijuana was the lack of any medical proof of theallegedly evil effects of its use. In fact, what authoritativestudies had been conducted up to this time were inconsistent withthe assumptions underlying anti-marijuana legislation. In thissituation, users viewed themselves as experimenters with a mildeuphoriant, not criminals endangering themselves or society atlarge. The inevitable consequence was increased medical inquiryinto the effects of the drug, beginning in about 1967.31 Concurrently, the National Institute of Mental Healthsignificantly Increased its funding for grants and contracts formarijuana research.32 Despite this intensified inquiry, uncertainty about theeffects of the drug persists. There are several major researchobstacles responsible for continued absence of reliable research.After outlining the impediments to conclusive findings, we shallextract from the existing studies the present state of medicalknowledge. 1. Research Obstacles The major obstacle is the nature of the marijuana plantitself. Marijana is a derivative of the plant Cannabis Sativa,commonly denoted the hemp plant. It is classified as a dioeciousplant, that is, the male reproductive parts are on one individualplant and the female parts are on another. The differentiation ofthe male and female plants is exceedingly significant because thechemical compounds responsible for the euphoric effect ofmarijuana are found primarily in the sticky resin that covers theunfertilized female flowers and adjacent leaves. The male plantmay contain a small amount of this active resin, but it is grownmainly for hemp fiber.33 The hemp plant yields three rough grades of intoxicatingsubstances, the least potent of which is "marijuana."34 Yet, because the classifications are imprecise, confusion isengendered by attributing to "marijuana" the effectsproduced by the excessive use of the more potent forms ofcannabis.35 In addition, the psychic potency of the plant differsdepending upon where the marijuana is grown, 36 and uponcultivation variables such as occurrence of fertilization andtime of harvesting: If the male plants are not removed and fertilization occurs, the female plants which carry the main intoxicating properties are considerably weakened in that respect. In addition, unless harvesting is carried out immediately before the blossoming of the flowers there is further weakening and variation in the potency of the produce.37 It is interesting to note in this connection that themarijuana used in the United States is among the weakest in theworld.38 These factors frustrate the creation of a standardizeddosage in any given experiment and preclude the comparison of theresults of independent studies.39 In addition to the problems engendered by the great variancein potency and dosage, meaningful marijuana research alsoinhibited by differences in means of consumption. Sincestandardized doses are generally considered impossible if thedrug is smoked,40 most studies, including the La Guardia Report,are based upon oral administration of marijuana to the subjects.Yet smoking is the method of consumption among nearly allAmerican users. Furthermore, standardized dosage is not evenassured by the oral method since "little is known about thegastrointestinal absorption of the highly water-solublecannabinals in man." 41 Finally, "there is considerableindirect evidence from users that the quality of the intoxicationis different when marijuana or its preparations are ingestedrather than smoked. In particular, ingestion seems to cause morepowerful effects . . . . " 42 2. Current Medical Knowledge It is perhaps best to begin with the medical data concerningthe traditional allegations about marijuana. (a) The Myths.-First, it is universally accepted among medicalauthorities that marijuana is not physically habit-forming.43Although some researchers have asserted that a psychologicaldependence may result from continued use of the drug, thishypothesis has not been established and its relevance has beenquestioned. One authority has noted that "habituation tomarihuana is not as strong as to tobacco or to alcohol." 44Another has commented that "[a] psychological dependence anddesire for the drug may occur, but this is inconsistent and isnot uncontrollable.... Perhaps the dependence is even less thanthe dependence on cigarettes." 45 Second, there is no evidence whatsoever that the use ofmarijuana has a direct relationship to the commission of crime.One commentator has noted that " during the high themarihuana user may say things he would not ordinarily say, but hegenerally will not do things that are foreign to his nature. Ifhe is not normally a criminal, he will not commit a crime underthe influence of the drug." 46 In fact, it is entirelylikely that the characteristic passive reaction to the use ofmarijuana tends to inhibit criminality. A recent study has shownthat juvenile "potheads" tend to be nonaggressive andto stay away from trouble.47 Similarly, there is no scientificevidence for the proposition that marijuana is an aphrodisiac. Ithas been suggested to the contrary that the most potent form ofcannabis, pure ganja, has the reverse effect, being taken byIndian priests to quell the libido.48 Finally, the evidence is at best inconclusive regarding thecontention that use of marijuana leads to the use of"hard" narcotics. Some of the early studies claiming tohave established a valid connection were scientificallyunreliable. One authority has observed in this regard: Supposedly scientific studies of this problem have been conducted in the past, such as the one done in a deprived area of a large city where the use of heroin was widespread, and indicating that many users of marijuana went on to the use of more hazardous drugs. I am sure that without previous marijuana, the use of such drugs in that environment would be just as high, and that if such a study were done on a college population, it would be found that the subsequent use of "hard" drugs would be negligible.49 Referring to a presidential task force investigation, anotherauthoritv has commented: It is true that the Federal study showed that among heroin users about 50% had had experience with marijuana- the study also found, however, that most of the heroin addicts had been users of alcohol and tobacco. There is no evidence that marijuana is more likely than alcohol or tobacco to lead to the use of narcotics.50 On the basis of the available information, most authoritieshave concluded that there is no scientific basis for the theorythat the use of marijuana is a causal factor in the use of"hard" narcotics.51 In any event, as a matter of commonsense, it would appear that the phenomenon in dispute is verycomplex, including both individual personality features andenvironmental factors. As one commentator put it "Several ofthe studies indicate that the precious statistics have beenmisleading and exaggerated." Whether or not the propositioncan be scientifically established, there is probably a slightlygreater chance that an individual who has used marijuana could goon to opiates, but statistically this is not . . . an importantsocial consideration."52 Thus, it appears that none of the traditional allegationsabout marijuana has been scientifically established, that itsalleged addictive qualities have been disproved, and that theoverwhelming weight of authority disputes its allegedly crimeproducing and stepping stone tendencies. We will now brieflysurvey the medically recognized effects of the drug, physical,psychomotor and psychological. (b) Physical Effects.-The acute physical effects of marijuanaare the subject of much debate. Various studies have reacheddifferent conclusions. Nearly all authorities, however, are inagreement that the bodily symptoms accompanying the"high" are very slight. The most commonly noted effectsare a slight rise in blood pressure, conjunctival vascularcongestion, slight elevation in blood sugar, urinary frequencyand an increase in pulse rate.53 In general, these acute symptomsare relatively short-lived, and there are no known lastingphysical effects.54 On the other hand, there is evidence thatprolonged smoking could lead to "marijuana bronchitis,"and that communal smoking has the tendency to encourage thespread of communicable diseases. (c) Psychomotor Effects.-Varying results have also beenreported in studies of the acute effects of marijuana uponpsychomotor functions. Although the researchers have sometimesfound some slight impairment in performance tests,55 there isapparently no general depressing or stimulating effect on thenervous system and no influence on speech and coordination.56 Inthe most recent study, Doctors Well, Zinberg and Nelson of theBoston University School of Medicine found that marijuana usersare able to compensate nearly 100 percent for whatever adverseeffects may result on ordinary psychomotor performance. 57 Such findings suggest that marijuana is not likely to be acausal factor in driving accidents, a hypothesis that issupported by a recent simulated driving test comparing theperformance of subjects under the influence of marijuana andalcohol.58 There seems to be no contention in the medical fieldthat there are any lasting effects from marijuana in thepsychomotor area. The Well study reported that noticeable effects"were diminished between 30 minutes and I hour, and theywere largely dissipated 3 hours after the end of smoking. Nodelayed or persistent effects beyond 3 hours were observed orreported." 59 (d) Psychological Effects.-The acute psychological effects ofthe use of marijuana are more complex. At the outset, it can bestated with certainty that "marijuana is definitelydistinguishable from other hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD, MIT,mescaline, peyote, and psilocybin. Although it produces some ofthe same effects, it is far less potent than these other drugs.It does not alter consciousness to nearly so great an extent asthey do nor does It lead to increasing tolerance to the drugdosage." 60 Furthermore, the subjective effects of cannabisare dependent upon the personality of the user, his expectations,and the circumstances under which the drug is taken, as well aslearning to smoke marijuana properly.61 There is general agreement about the pleasurable psychologicaleffects. Users uniformly experience greatly enhancedperception-whether real or delusory-of visual, auditory, tasteand touch effects, increased sense of humor or hilarity, feelingsof well-being or wonderment, and distorted time and spaceperceptions.62 In this connection, it is interesting to note thateven the pleasurable phenomena are dependent on individualcircumstances, particularly ivlicii the drug is taken for thefirst time. Many, if not most, people do not become"high" on their first exposure to marijuana, even if itis smoked correctly.63 The probable explanation for this curiousphenomenon is that repeated exposure to marijuana reducespsychological inhibition, as part of, or as a result of, alearning process.64 Medical knowledge is most tentative with reference to adversepsychological effects. Recent studies, however, have vehementlydisputed an earlier tendency to attribute psychoses and severepanic reactions to marijuana use.65 As Dr. Well has noted: Because reliable information about the acute effects of marijuana has been as scarce within the medical profession as without, many of these reactions have been misinterpreted and incorrectly treated. For example, simple panic states, which doubtless would be properly diagnosed in other circumstances, are often called "toxic psychoses" when doctors elicit immediate histories of marijuana use.66 Medical experts now generally agree that the possibility ofdepression, panic and psychoses depends entirely on thecircumstances of use and the personality of the user.67 In hismost recent study, Dr. Weil concluded that "serious adversereactions are uncommon in the 'normal' population,"68 butnoted three exceptions. First, simple depressive reactions whichrarely occur in regular users may occur in novices who approachtheir initial use ambivalently.69 Second, the most frequentadverse reaction is apprehension, more often described asanxiety, and sometimes reaching a degree of panic. Again, suchreactions are closely related to the attitude of the user and tothe social setting.70 The social setting also influences thefrequency of panic reactions, suggesting again that thisphenomenon correlates with the degree of reluctance with whichpeople approach initial use of the drug: In a community where marijuana has been accepted as a recreational intoxicant, they may be extremely rare (for example, one per cent of all responses to the drug). On the other hand, at a rural Southern college, where experimentation with the drug may represent a much greater degree of social deviance, 25 per cent of persons trying it for the first time may become panicked.71 The panicked person normally believes that he is either dyingor losing his mind, and simple reassurance will end most suchreactions.72 The reaction normally is short-lived, but it may beprolonged by an attitude encouraging the underlying fears.73 Inshort, "panic reactions . . . seem more nonpharmacologicthan pharmacologic."74 Third, psychotic reactions occur rarely, if at all, in normalusers,75 and occur mainly in persons with a low psychosisthreshold or a history of psychosis76 or hallucinogenic drugexperimentation.77 Even in such cases, marijuana is a precipitantrather than a primary cause of this type of reaction 78 whichlasts at most a day or two.79 Footnotes 1 TRAFFIC IN Opium 69 (1960). 2 In reporting the marijuana arrests of Robert Kennedy, Jr.,and R. Sargent Shriver, Jr., Walter Cronkite noted that"This case is not unusual; more and more parents across thenation find themselves going to court with their children on drugcharges. It's becoming an incident of modern living." CBSEvening News, Aug. 6, 1970, See also J. Rosevear, Pot: A HANDBOOKOF MARIHUANA 117-31 (1967); TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 2, 40 (1966). 11 Perhaps the best statement the authors have yet encounteredto this effect was made by Jerry Rubin, one of the Chicago Seven,in Charlottesville, Virginia, on May 6, 1970, when he said:"Smoking pot miles you a criminal and a revolutionary-assoon as you take your first puff. you are an enemy ofsociety" See also J. Rubin. Do It! (1970). 12 Wash. Post, Feb. 24, 1970, at III, col. 3. 13 N.Y. Times, Feb. 15, 1970,  6 (Magazine), at 14(statement of Dr. Stanley Yolles). 14 See, e.g., Wash. Post, May 16, 1970, at A3, col. 8(reporting a Minnesota Supreme Court decision holding thatpossession of small amount of marijuana does not necessarilyjustify conviction). This case is discussed at P. 1122 infra. 15 N.Y. Times, Oct. 19, 1969,  4, at 8, col. 2. 16 Narcotics Legislation Hearings 4 (statement of SenatorDodd). 17 Goode, The Marijuana Market, 12 Colum. F., Winter 1969, at7. 18 Id. at 8. 19 Hearings Before the Subcomm. to Investigate JuvenileDelinquency of the Senate Comm. on the judiciary, 90th Cong., 2dSm. 4510 (1968) [hereinafter cited as Juvenile DelinquencyHearings]. At these hearings, former Commissioner of the Bureauof Narcotics, Henry Giordano, stated: "We have not seen anyevidence of criminal syndicates such as the Mafia being involved[in the marijuana trade]." Id. 20 Goode, supra note 17, at 4, 5. See also Leary, thePolitics, Ethics, and Meaning of Marijuana, in The MARIHUANAPAPERS 121 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 21 See Los Angeles Times Dec. 4, 1967, s. 2 at 6, col. 1(statement by Los Angeles Police Chief). 22 See Mandel, Problems with Official Drug Statistics, 21Stan. L. Rev. 991, 1021 n. 114 (1969). 23 See TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 72 (1960); id. at 65 (1961) id at 78(1963) Hearings on Depts of Treasury and Post Office and the Executive Offic Appropriations for 1969 Before a Subcomm. Of the Hose Comm. On Appropriations, 90th Cong. 2d sess., pt. 1, at 624 (1968) 25 The state of California has kept excellent statistics since1959. In 1968. as a typical year of the late sixties, the policeseized over 30,000,000 grams of marijuana of all kinds in only10,000 arrests. The larger amount seized relative to the numberof arrests seems to indicate the concentration on dealers. BUREAUOF CRIMINAL STATISTICS, DEPT OF JUSTICE, STATE OF CALIFORNIA,DRUG ARRESTS AND DISPOSITIONS IN CALIFORNIA 41, 43 (1968) 26 Id. at 37-39. 27 See Fort, Social Problems of Drug Use and Drug Policies, 56CALIF. L. Rev. 17, 23 (1968). See also H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 159(1963); T. DUSTER, T14E LEGISLATION OF MORALITY: LAW, DRUGS ANDMORAL JUDGMENT (1970). 28 See LITTLE, DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 1313 -15 (1967);Project, Marijuana Laws: An Empirical Study of Enforcement andAdministration in Los Angeles County, 15 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 1507,1522-31 (1968). 29 TIME, Sept. 26, 1969, at 70. 30 One commentator has charged that those most knowledgeableabout marijuana have "dodged" the topic. Kaplan, TheSpecial Case of Marihuana (Or, It's the Doctor's Fault), 9 J.CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 349, 351 (1969). 31 At the end of 1968 there existed only four known studies onhuman subjects conducted by Americans. See Weil, Zinberg &Nelson, Clinical and Psychological Effects of Marihuana in Man,162 SCIENCE 1234, 1235 (1968) [hereinafater cited as Weil Study].The previous lack of concern with marijuana call also be observedby 211 examination of the number of articles appearing in medicalperiodicals. During the decade between 1942 and 1951, only sixarticles dealing with the subject are listed in the index formedical journals. Eleven reports were noted as being published inthe next ten years. From 1962 to 1966, an average of threematerials per year were available. It was not until 1967 that thesubject became of sufficient interest to occupy the time of areasonable number of medical authors. In that year, elevenarticles appeared in medical periodicals. By 1968, this numberhad increased to 30, and in 1969 more than 60 articles dealingwith the topic of human marijuana consumption have appeared. Inother words, more than three times the number of articlesappeared in the last three years than in the 25 preceding years. 32 In Fiscal year 1967, NIMH obligated $786,000 for marihuanaresearch grants and contracts. Comparable figures for 1968 and1969 respectively were S1,239,000 and $1,330,000. In Fiscal year1970, if funds are available, the institute proposes to obligate$2,550,000 to support grant and contract studies of marihuana,which means that there will have been a more than three-foldincrease for support of these studies in the last fouryears." Statement by Dr. Roger 0. Egcberg, AssistantSecretary for Health and Scientific Affairs, M.S. Dep't of HEW,before the Select Committee oil Crime, U.S. House ofRepresentatives (mimeographed press release). 33 Weil Study 1234. 34 The three substances are charas-pure unadulterated resinthat has been scraped from the leaves and flowering tops of thefemale plant; hashish or ganja-an agglomeration of femaleflowering tops and stems with whatever resin is attached to theirsurfaces, thought to contain about 40% resin; and marijuana-a lowpotency preparation consisting of dried mature leaves andflowering tops of both male and female plants, thought to containbetween 5 and 8% resin. Schwarz, Toward a Medical Understandingof Marihuana, 14 CAN. PSYCHIATRIC ASS'N J. 591, 592 (1969). 35 As long as the term marihuana is used indiscriminately torefer to cannabis of all kinds and potencies, confusion willcontinue. . . . In this country some of the vigorous opponents ofmarihuana seem to foster this confusion by attributing to any useof marihuana the effects produced primarily by the excessive useof the more potent forms of cannabis in an attempt to preserve astrongly negative public image of marihuana. H. NOWLIS, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 93 (1969). 36 "The major botanical feature of the plant is theextreme variability in its appearance, characteristics andproperties when grown in different geographical and climaticcondition." Schwarz, supra note 34, at 591. In the UnitedStates and Mexico, for example, the production of the more potentforms is relatively uncommon, and there appears to be no demandfor them. J. ROSEVEAR, POT: A HANDBOOK OF MARIHUANA 31-33 (1967). 37 Schwarz, supra note 34, at 592. 38 Zunin, Marijuana: The Drug and the Problem, 134 MILITARYMED. 104, M. 7 (1969). According to the author, several factorscontribute to this phenomenal: (1) The amount of resin found inthe flowering tops markedly decreases as the plants are grown inmore temperate areas. It is estimated that the resin content ofIndian cannabis is 20%; Mexican 15% or less; that grown inKentucky 8%; and that found in Wisconsin 6% or less. (2) The activity of the resin in the female is greatly reducedif fertilized by the male. In this country, because of aninability to distinguish between the two plants, inattention tocultivation and lack of knowledge, the female plants arefertilized. (3) The resinous content is highest prior to"going to seed" of the female plant. The marijuana inthis country has gone to seed prior to harvesting. (4) The male plant contains little or no resin content. Inthis country, the male plant is indiscriminately mixed with thefemale plant in the final preparation. (5) The most active portion of the plant is the flowering top.In this country, preparations of marijuana are composed primarilyof leaves, twigs, and seeds which are crushed. (6) The potency of marijuana decreases with time. It isreduced at the end of one year, markedly reduced at the end oftwo years, and nonexistent at the end of three years. Inaddition, it keeps better in cold, dry climates. Most of themarijuana in the United States is several months to several yearsold by the time it has been harvested and has passed through thesmuggling operation. 39 Given the above variations in the plant and in its productsand extracts, together with the continuing ignorance of itschemistry it is not surprising that it is virtually impossible tomake direct comparisons between the various studies on theeffects on human beings who are even more individually variable. Schwarz, supra note 34, at 593. Recently. what is believed to be the active ingredient inmarijuana has been isolated and synthesized. However, thissubstance denominated (THC), is only available for research invery limited quantities. Weil Study Furthermore, it has not beenproven that THC is the sole ingredient contributing to theeffects caused by marijuana. 40 "[M]any pharmacologists dismiss the possibility ofgiving marihuana by smoking because, they sav, the dose cannot hestandardized." Weil Study 1235. 41 Id. 42 Id. 43 "-There is now an abundance of evidence that marihuanais not an addictive drug. Cessation of its use produces nowithdrawal symptoms, nor does a user feel any need to increasethe dosage as he becomes accustomed to the drug." Grinspoon,Marihuana 221 Sci. Am. 17, 21 (1969). 44 Id. 45 Zunin, supra note 38, at 108. 46 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 22. 47 McGlothlin & West, The Marihuana Problem: An Overview,125 Am. J. PSYSH. 370, 372-73 (1968). This supports the findingof the La Guardia Report that marijuana is not a direct causalfactor in criminal misconduct, but that the "high"leads to sociable attitudes. 48 THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 44 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). Sincemarijuana has a tendency to produce drowsiness, it is difficultto see how it could lead to an act of violent sex. J. ROSEVEAR,supra note 36, at 61. See also La Guardia Report, in THEMARIHUANA PAPERS 296-97 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 49 Radoosky, Marijuana Foolishness, 280 NEW ENG. J. MED. 712(1969). 50 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 21-23. 51 THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 13-14 (1967); Council on Mental Health and Committee onAlcoholism and Drug Dependence, Dependence on Cannabis(Marijuana), 201 JAM.A. 368-71 (1967). 52 Zunin, supra note 38, at 108. 53 L. GOODMAN & A. GILMAN, THE PHARMACOLOGICAL BASIS OFTHERAPEUTICS ch. 16 (3d ed. 1965). Nausea, vomiting and diarrheahave also been reported, but it is felt that these symptoms aremainly the result of oral administration. Grinspoon, supra note43, at 20. Increased appetite and dryness of the mouth are alsosaid to be common. 54 Usually the reports of chronic ill effects are to be foundin Eastern studies of individuals using the stronger hashish orpure resinous substances over prolonged periods of time and arecomplicated by the immeasurable effects of many other social,economic, personality and cultural factors. Schwarz, supra note34, at 595. 55 Tests by Robert S. Morrow in the 1930's revealed that evenlarge doses of marijuana did not affect performances on tests ofthe speed of tapping or the quickness of response to simplestimuli. Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 20. "The drug didaffect steadiness of the hand and body and the reaction time forcomplex stimuli." Id. The most recent study in this area wasdone by Andrew Weil, Norman Zinberg and Judith Nelson of theBoston University School of Medicine. Their conclusions were thatregular users of marijuana may show some slight degree ofimpairment in performance tests, but that the aptitude of thesubjects may even improve slightly after smoking marijuana. WeilStudy 1242. Marijuana-naive subjects tended to show someimpairment in performance. Id. 56 N.Y. Times, May 11, 1969, 6 (Magazine), ' at 92, Col. 2. 57 We were struck by the difficulty of recognizing when asubject is high unless he tells you that he is . . . . It seemspossible to ignore the effects of marihuana on consciousness, toadapt to them, and to control them to a significant degree. Id. 58 Comparison of tbe Effects Of Marijuana and, Alcohol OnSimulated Driving Performance 164 SCIENCE 851 (1969) (concludingthat subjects under a "social marijuana high" showed nosignificant differences from control subjects in accelerator,brake, signal, steering, and total errors). In addition,"unlike alcohol drinkers, most pot smokers studiously avoiddriving while high." J. ROSEVEAR, supra note 36, at 135. 59 Weil Study 1238. 60 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 19. 61 H. NOWLIS, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 96-101 (1969). 62 L. GOODMAN & A. GILMAN, supra note 53, at ch. 16;Dependence on Cannabis (Marijuana), supra note 51, at 368-71. 63 Weil Study 1241; Wash. Post, May 24, 1970, at A26, col. 1. 64 "The subjective responses of our subjects indicatethat they had imagined a marihuana effect to be much moreprofoundly disorganizing than what they, experienced." WeilStudy 1241. This subjective control over the effects extended asfar as the reporting of no effects when in actuality the subjecthad received a large dose. Id. 65 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at23-24. 66 Weil, Adverse Reactions to Marijuana, 282 NEW ENG. J. MED.997 (1970). 67 See, e.g., Schwarz, supra note 34, at 595; Weil, supra note66. 68 Weil, supra note 66, at 997. 69 Marihuana depressions I have seen have occurred mainly inobsessive-compulsive persons who are ambivalent about trying thedrug or who invested the decision to experience marihuana withgreat emotional meaning. In interviewing these patients, I havethought that they used marihuana as an excuse for lettingthemselves be depressed, not that their depressions werepsycho-pharmacological. Id. at 998. 70 Dr. Weil has stated that "panic reactions occurredmost often among novice users of marijuana-frequently olderpersons who are ambivalent about trying the drug in the firstplace." N.Y. Times, May 1, 1970, at 18C, col. 2. 71 Id. These panic reactions may emulate acute psychoses inhospital emergency wards "where the patient may feeloverwhelmed, helpless and unable to communicate hisdistress." Weil, supra note 66, at 998. 72 Id. 73 N.Y. Times, May 1, 1970, at 18C, col. 3. 74 Weil, supra note 66, at 1000. 75 Dr. Weil is of the opinion that "all adverse reactionsto marihuana should be considered panic reactions until provenotherwise," id. at 998, and that he has never seen a toxicpsychosis following the smoking of marijuana by a normal user.Id. at 9199. 716 Id. at 1000. 7-7 Id. at 999-1000. 78 H. Nowlis, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 96-101 (1969);Schwarz, supra note 34 at 595. 79 McGlothlin & West, The Marijuana Problem: An Overview,125 Am. J. Psych. 370,372 (1968). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B23-27IA031-000655-B038-97http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlr9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112605 text/html 45637HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:25:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:08 GMTContent-length: 45419 Marijuana Legislation Clashes with Judicial Skepticism1965-70 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II IX. MARIJUANA LEGISLATION CLASHES WITH JUDICIAL SKEPTICISM ANDEMERGING VALUES - PIECEMEAL JUDICIAL RESPONSE: 1965-1970 The dramatic increase in marijuana use during the latter1960's and the consequent increase in prosecution1 were mattersof high public visibility. Judicial response at both the trialand appellate levels was influenced by a combination of powerfulforces, none of which had been present in the preceding years.The 1960's saw a revolution in the law of criminal procedure, andin few areas were police practices more suspect than in theenforcement of the drug laws. The latter part of the decadewitnessed widespread dissent against the political and legalsystems; this protest milieu gave an added dimension to marijuanause as more and more people smoked, oftentimes overtly, in orderto defy a seemingly ignorant law. Faced with this unusualconjunction of widespread political and social eccentricity, thecourts-institutional protectors of political deviants-wereinevitably pressed into institutional sympathy for socialdeviants. A third force was the revitalized judicial interest inthe value of privacy in a highly automated, technologicalsociety; more and more people went to the courts to questionlongstanding governmental prohibitions against essentiallyprivate decisions and acts-homosexuality, abortion, contraceptionand drugs. Together with the well-publicized medical skepticismabout the soundness of the nation's drug laws, particularly thoseregulating marijuana, these forces moved the courts to scrutinizeenforcement practices and consider a new wave of constitutionalobjections to state and federal marijuana legislation. A. Multiple Offenses: Untying the Statutory Knots 1. Federal Developments In the major decision during this period, the United StatesSupreme Court voided the federal provisions most often employedto prosecute the possessor (buyer) of marijuana. In the first armof Leary v. United States,2 the Court held that the FifthAmendment relieves unregistered buyers of any duty to pay thetransfer tax and to file the written order form as required bythe Marihuana Tax Act.3 The Court reasoned that, since filingsuch a form would expose a buyer to liability under state law,under the occupational tax provisions of the Tax Act, and perhapsunder the marijuana provision of the Import and Export Act,4 thefiling provisions violated the fifth amendment guarantees againstself-incrimination. On the other hand, the Court held in a latercase that the fifth amendment does not relieve the marijuanaseller of the duty to confine his sales to transferees who arewilling to comply with the order form requirements.5 Similarly,the Eighth Circuit recently held6 that Leary does not compelinvalidation of Tax Act section 4755(b), which prohibits theinterstate transportation of marijuana, because a convictionunder that section is not really a conviction for falling toregister and pay the occupational tax and, even if it were,registration under section 4753 is not necessarily incriminatingas was the written order form requirement struck down in Leary .7 The second arm of Leary reversed the long line of decisions8upholding the presumption of knowing concealment of illegalimportation arising from possession under section 176a of theImport and Export Act.9 The Court held that, in light of the casewith which marijuana was domestically cultivated and the numberof users, the presumption of know1edge could not rationally bedrawn from possession.10 it could not be said "withsubstantial assurance that the presumed fact [knowing concealmentof illegally imported marijuana] is more likely than not to flowfrom the proved fact [possession] on which it is made todepend."11 Although there is authority to the contrary,12the Ninth Circuit has held this part of Leary retroactive,thereby invalidating all prior Section 176a convictions in whichthe defendant did not admit knowledge and the was instructed asto the applicability of the statutory presumption .13 A serious dispute remains as to what the Government will haveto prove in subsequent prosecutions under section 176a. Assumingthat the entire provision does not violate the privilege againstself-incrimination,14 it is likely that the prosecution will haveto prove actual knowledge of illegal importation in the future.15Since it is highly improbable that such proof will beforthcoming, section 176a has probably been rendered useless asapplied to possessors. It should be clear that the entire seriesof decisions under the Tax Act and section 176a has an air ofunreality about them because Congress probably has Article Ipower directly to prohibit possession and sale of marijuana andhas now exercised that power in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970.16 This new legislation,although stopping short in some respects, discards many of thefictions perpetuated by earlier legislation. The Leary decisionwas at least partially responsible for forcing Congress torationalize the federal role in the drug field, particularly withrespect to marijuana. Another manifestation of judicial dissatisfaction with theextreme nature of existing drug legislation is the apparentreversal of the trend of decisions upholding the strict liabilityof one-time drug offenders, users and addicts for failure toregister when leaving the country.17 The Ninth Circuit held thephrase "uses narcotic drugs" unconstitutionallyvague.18 Taking a more direct approach, the Second Circuit foundknowledge of the registration requirement to be an element of thecrime.19 Thus construed, the statute precludes any due processchallenge to the sufficiency of the notice.20 Although aself-incrimination issue remains, 21 the Second Circuit'sdecision removed the most serious defect in the statute, one thathad become intolerable as the number of marijuana convictionsescalated in the late 1960's. 2. State Developments The erosion of the archaic federal criminal statutes formarijuana-related offenses has been accompanied by a similar,albeit limited, development on the state level. The major issuein state litigation concerns so-called "drug-proximity"offenses which are generally employed as plea-bargaining tools orto prevent the release of a suspect when evidence was 1 illegallyseized or when the evidence is insufficient to secure aconviction under the substantive drug offense. Typical ancillaryoffenses are loitering in the common areas of a building for thepurpose of unlawfully using or possessing any narcotic drug;22loitering in public by a user, addict or convicted drug offenderwithout lawful employment;23 presence in an establishment wherenarcotic drugs are dispensed;24 and presence of a user or drugoffender in a private place where drugs are kept.25 The decisional trend seems to point to the unconstitutionalvagueness of simple loitering and vagrancy statutes.26 Because ofthe nexus between narcotics and crime, however, the courts arestruggling to redefine narcotics-proximity statutes to avoid thevagueness objection.27 It might appear that where "goodaccount" provisions give the arresting police officer toomuch discretion the statute will fal1.28 On the other hand,courts generally avoid vagueness objections based on lack ofnotice by reading in knowledge elements wherever neccssary.29Because of the tenuous relation between marijuana and crime, thecourts should construe "narcotics" in such statutes notto include marijuana. Similar restriction of marijuana-related offenses has beenaccomplished by holding that charges of possession and sale willnot both lie where the only possession is incident to sale,30 andby tightening the requirements of specificity in the indictmentregarding the proscribed parts of the plant.31 B. Procedural Objections to Enforcement Practices The law of criminal procedure underwent a major revolution inthe 1960's. The Bill of Rights was applied piece by piece to thestates through the fourteenth amendment. The Supreme Courtfocused its concern on protecting the rights of the criminaldefendant. The earlier philosophy had been that, so long as thedefendant's rights at trial were guaranteed, the Court shouldnot, and did not need to, intrude into the pretrial stages of thecriminal process. For a variety of reasons it became clear in the1960's that in a system where between 75 and 90 percent of alldefendants bargain and enter guilty pleas, rights must be assuredwell before trial if they are to have any real meaning to theaverage person caught in the net of the criminal process. Thus,step by step the Court began to regulate police practices-search,arrest and interrogation techniques-and the conduct of the earlystages of the criminal process. This substantial change inattitude meant that more marijuana defendants could successfullyraise procedural objections. 1. Search and Seizure The most important development for the marijuana offender hasbeen the close judicial scrutiny of police searches as a resultof Supreme Court rulings under the fourth amendment. Morestringent standards have been established for the police toobtain search warrants32 and the proper scope of searchesincident to a lawful arrest has been narrowed substantially. 33 Although courts have refused to exclude any evidence that wasin plain sight when seized, such as a bag of marijuana in aschool satchel voluntarily opened by a student,34 or marijuanathrown out of window by a defendant trying to dispose of it,35they have narrowed the permissible time and area in which a carmay be searched .36 Moreover, the difficult standing problem posed by therequirement that one had to admit possession or ownership of theseized property in order successfully to challenge the search wasalleviated in cases involving group arrests by permitting allthose on the premises to challenge a given search.37 The new requirements for procuring search warrants led to anumber of technical defense victories. For example, searches ofdefendants' residences were successfully challenged in twoMontana marijuana cases38 because the warrants were issued by ajustice of the peace, rather than by a district judge, asrequired by the state law. These holdings were premised on thesanctity of private residences, and they suggest a growingreluctance to countenance "reasonable" warrantlesssearches, especially of the home. Similarly, Maryland struck downthe fruits of a search of defendant's guests and theirautomobiles on the ground that the permissible search was limitedto the areas described in the warrant.39 An Illinois court hasheld that property not included in the warrant must be returnedto the defendant.40 This return to a more stringent view ofparticularity requirements of warrants stands in stark contrastto the willingness of courts to overlook these requirements inthe late fifties.41 Likewise, courts now scrutinize more closely police claims ofprobable cause for expanding the area of the search. A Californiacourt held that even though defendant was lawfully arrested,search of his luggage in a friend's apartment was justifiedneither by the friend's consent nor by the officer's having seenthe defendant swallow something.42 The search was especiallyunjustifiable since the defendant had been arrested in hisautomobile. In another California case, the presence of peculiarodors did not constitute probable cause for the search of afootlocker.43 An airline had detained the footlocker since it correspondedto a police description. The officers had smelled the marijuanaand then searched the footlocker before sending it on its way andtracing it. The California Supreme Court held that the smellalone was not sufficient cause to search without a warrant. Despite judicial narrowing of the scope of searches with orwithout a warrant, the easing of the standing requirements, andthe closer scrutiny on the probable cause issue, courts continueto permit police to enter dwellings without knocking or by forcewhere circumstances indicate such action is reasonable andnecessary. For example, a California court upheld a marijuanasearch, even though the police entered without knocking, becausethe police heard people running around inside yelling, "It'sthe police," and thought they heard a shot fired.44 Thecourt held that the statutory knocking requirement was subject toexception when there was danger of destruction of evidence anddanger to the police. Closely related to no-knock entry isforcible entry, upheld in an Illinois case45 where the policebroke into the defendant's residence when he did not immediatelyrespond to their knocks. The necessity for forced entry isessentially the same as for unannounced entry, but forced entryadds the danger of causing fright and damage. Another search area that has not been substantiallyliberalized is that of the border search. Customs officials havea much more extensive right to search than their policecolleagues. Mere suspicion is sufficient to justify a bordersearch.46 Even though the jurisdiction of customs agents endsonce entry into the country is completed,, the courts haveallowed border guards great discretion in determining whatconstitutes completed entry. In Thomas v. United States.47 theFifth Circuit held admissible evidence seized an hour and a halfafter the appellant had entered the United States because he wasonly six blocks from the border. Although there is an inevitableproblem of how far the jurisdiction of the customs agent extends,Thomas suggests c1early that it is not limited to bordercrossings. 2. Entrapment Although the majority opinions in Sorrells v. United States48and Sherman v. United States,49 remain the leading statements onentrapment, some courts have recently permitted expansion of thedefense. In California a defendant may plead not guilty and stillraise the entrapment defense in some cases. The court in Peoplev. Perez stated: To compel a defendant to admit his guilt as a condition ofinvoking the defense of entrapment would compel him to relievethe prosecution of its burden of proving his guilt beyond areasonable doubt at the risk of not being able to meet his burdenof proving entrapment.50 The defendant must, however, still raise the defense at trialto be determined as a matter of fact by the jury.51 There is noright to raise the defense in a pretrial motion to suppress theevidence.52 Most courts continue to focus on the moralculpability of the accused53 in determining whether or notentrapment has been successfully shown. Recent Arkansas,54 andNevada55 cases, however, suggest that the courts are increasinglyconcerned about the conduct of law enforcement agents, especiallyin marijuana cases. 3. Other Prosecution Practices Several major abuses, although judicially recognized, remainlargely uncorrected. Long delay between offense and arrest iscommon in narcotics offenses because the police desire to exposethe full extent of distribution and to maintain a cover for theundercover agent as long as possible. Yet any substantial delayprejudices the defendant since the prosecution continues togather evidence while the defendant may forget exactcircumstances and possibly exculpating facts. Judicial responsehas been inconsistent, focusing primarily on the purposefulnessof the delay.56 In light of the recent rejuvenation of the speedytrial requirement by the Supreme Court,57 there is some hope thatthis abuse may be corrected. A more serious abuse with which state and federal prosecutorshave been charged is politically-motivated discretionaryenforcement.58 Although the courts can do little to remedy thisstate of affairs, it forms the basis for one of our basiccontentions: The political-social overtones of the marijuanaproblem may inhibit a rational political and prosecutorialresponse and at the same time may provoke a protective judicialresponse. One judge, particularly expert with regard tocontemporary drug problems acknowledged the partial truth of thecharges of political prosecution against Hippies, long-hairs anddraft-card burning college students.59 To the extent that othertrial and appellate Judges recognize these prosecutorialtendencies, we can expect some judicial compensation either infact-finding, in sentencing, or in response to substantivechallenges to the law. It is our contention, of course, that suchjudicial reaction has already begun. C. Sufficiency of the Evidence The ease of identifying marijuana in conjunction with the useof uncorroborated testimony and circumstantial evidence continuesto require of the prosecution only a very low burden of proof.Nevertheless, appellate decisions are gradually beginning totighten these requirements, and active judicial hostility attrial has all but disappeared. Although the use of uncorroborated testimony to convictcontinues to be upheld by the courts,60 an Illinois appellatecourt has reversed a conviction because of the behavior of thetestifying officer.61 Noting that the officer had repeatedlypressured the defendant to become an informer, the court heldthat the uncorroborated testimony of this officer was notsufficient to support a conviction. The court did not make clearwhether it exercised a weight of the evidence review of the trialjudge's fact-finding, or whether it applied an exclusionaryevidence rule pursuant to its inherent powers over theadministration of criminal justice. Whatever the case, judicialperspective in the clash between marijuana defendant and policeofficer has clearly shifted. The amount of marijuana required to uphold a conviction isundergoing substantial change. The California Supreme Court heldin People, v. Leal62 that to be sufficient for conviction, theamount of narcotics must be enough for sale or consumption, therule generally applied where the statute does not specify aminimum quantity.63 In Eckroth v. State64 a Florida court ruledthat the taking of a drug from a passing pipe is not sufficientto constitute possession where the defendant did not own thepipe, the drug or the premises. Similarly, in a case thatreceived national publicity,65 the Minnesota Supreme Court fieldthat if the state defines marijuana as a narcotic, it cannotpunish possession of what could be native cannabis in amounts tooscanty to produce a "narcotic" effect. Accordingly,exiguous traces of the drug found in the crevices of defendant'sbrief case left in his mistress' car did not constitute an amountsufficient for conviction .66 Other problems remain unsolved. Circumstantial evidencecontinues to link defendants to seized marijuana. Constructivepossession was found where the defendant's daughter was theactual possessor67 and the fact that marijuana was found where aninformer said she had seen defendant smoking it the previous daywas sufficient to support the defendant's conviction.68 There isa split as to whether a conviction can be upheld where thedefendant gratuitously brings the buyer and seller together.Massachusetts upheld the conviction for possession where thedefendant's only contact with the marijuana was passing it to thestate's agent,69 ruling that the facilitation of the sale addedenough to the act of passing to allow the court to findpossession. In a similar case, however, a New York court heldthat there was not present the required involvement or concert ofaction to uphold a conviction for sale.70 Nevertheless, courtshave refused conviction on numerous occasions in which thedefendant was not linked exclusively with the marijuana that wasfound71 and have generally required an outside linking factorbefore upholding the possession.72 However, the element that cantip the scales in favor of conviction is often unrelated to thepossible possession of the marijuana. For example, a Californiacourt73 upheld the finding of possession of marijuana discoveredalong with a purse the defendants had stolen. The defendantscontended that the marijuana was not theirs and must have been inthe purse when stolen. That the defendants were thieves probablyplayed more heavily in the conviction than any evidence of theirconnection with marijuana. Where marijuana is found on the premises of the individual,possession is presumed, although the courts have read in adefense of ignorance of the presence of the marijuana.74Nevertheless, in a New Hampshire case75 the court upheld apossession conviction premised on the defendant's knowledge ofpresence of the drug on the premises even though the courtapparently believed the defendant's story that it belonged to athird party. Ordinarily there is direct corroborating evidence toindicate the defendant's knowledge.76 Along with the gradual thaw on these points in state courts,the late sixties witnessed a total absence of the outrageousjudicial participation in inflammatory statements about thedangers of the drug and its users which we saw was typical of thelate fifties. To the contrary, the appellate opinions, at least,are replete with skeptical references to the inclusion ofmarijuana in the narcotics classification .77 D. Sanction Nowhere has judicial disenchantment with the drug laws,especially marijuana, been greater than in the area ofpunishment. Preference for civil treatment of drug abuse,78disgust with severe mandatory sentencing that deprives theJudiciary of its traditional function of weighing the culpabilityof the individual offender, 79 and skepticism about a statutoryscheme which catches the user or small scale distributor andmisses the major trafficker80 have all found their way intojudicial opinions. This dissatisfaction with legislative inaction in the area ofde-escalating punishment has already begun to provoke remedial81judicial action. In a landmark decision82 receiving nationalattention,83 the Supreme Court of New Jersey recently held thatany prison sentence imposed for first-offense possession ofmarijuana for personal use "should be suspended,"84While the court based its holding on the judiciary's statutoryauthority to suspend sentences in "the best interests of thepublic as well as of the defendant,"85 and on the appellatecourt's power to review for abuse of discretion trial courtsentencing decisions, it appears that the true locus of theopinion is the Eighth Amendment. That is, the court reallydetermined that any prison sentence for first-offense possessionof marijuana for personal use is unreasonably excessive.Accordingly, the decision will be discussed in more detail in thefollowing section.86 Footnotes: 1 See pp. 1096-1 101 supra. See also People v. Patton, 264Cal. App. 2d 637, 70 Cal. Rpt. 484 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968), wherethe arresting officer testified that he had made about 1,000marijuana arrests. 2 395 U.S. 6 (1969). 3 Although Leary involved only the concealment andtransportation provision, 26 U.S.C.  4744 (a) (2) (1964), theEighth Circuit has held, correctly, that Leary also covers theacquiring provision,  4744(a) (1), "since a personobviously would have to acquire the marijuana to knowinglytransport or conceal it." United States v. Young, 422 F.2d302, 304 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 398 U.S. 914 (1970). 4 Because the "danger of incrimination under statelaw" was "so plain," the Court did not pursue theadditional question of a buyer's exposure to liability under theImport and Export Act. 395 U.S. at 16 n.14. 5 Minor vs. United States, 396 U.S. 87 (1969) 6 United States v. Young, 422 F.2d, 302 (8th Cir.), cert. Denied, 398 U.S. 914 (970) 7 "Although we need not reach the question, we feel thatthe Fifth Amendment is not violated by the insubstantial hazardsof incrimination posed by section 4753. Id. at 306 8 See p. 1086, supra 9 Anticipating the Leary decision on the  176a presumptionwas United States v. Adams, 293 F. Supp. 776 (S.D.N.Y. 1968). 10 395 U.S. at 52 53. Having found the "knowledge"presumption unconstitutional, the court avoided consideration ofthe "illegal importation" presumption. Id at 38. Theknowledge presumption has also be held invalid as applied tohashish. United States v. Maestri, 424 F.2d 1066 (9thCir. 1970) ; cf. United States v. Cepelis, 426 F.2d 134 (9thCir. 1970) (remanded for factual determination as to whetherLeary applies to hashish.) In Turner v. United States, 396 U.S. 398 (1970), the Courtupheld the presumption in 21 U.S.C.  174 (1964) (directancestor of  176a as applied to heroin but declared itirrational as applied to cocaine. It has been held that Turner isretroactive, United States v. Vallejo, 312 F. Supp. 244 (S.D.N.Y.1970). 11 395 U.S. at 30. 12 Rivera-Vargas v. United States, 307 F. Supp. 1075 (D.P.R.1969). 13 United States v. Scott, 425 F.2d 55 (9th Cit. 1970). Wethink the Ninth Circuit is right, at least with respect toconvictions secured after marijuana achieved high publicvisibility in the 1960's. Since the number of people stillincarcerated for earlier convictions is minimal, completeretroactive effect is in order. Essential to the Leary decisionwas a determination that the presumption was factuallyunsupportable; it therefore constituted a material flaw in thefact-finding process and seriously impaired the right to jurytrial. 14 Absent the written order form requirement of the MarihuanaTax Act, we do not see how prosecution under  176a involves thefifth amendment at all. Neither did the Ninth Circuit. Id. at 61. 15 See United States v. Martinez, 425 F.2d 1300 (9th Cit.1970); McClain v. United States, 417 F.2d 489 (9th Cit. 1969). Amere inference of importation is clearly not enough to sustain aconviction since it would nullify Leary. Cf. United States v.Ramos, 282 F. Supp. 354 (S.D.N.Y. 1968) (where Government failedto prove possession beyond reasonable doubt, court could notinfer knowledge of importation). It is difficult to see how theGovernment could raise an inference of knowledge without provingactual knowledge. If, however, such can be done, it is clear thatthe defendant has a right to prove that the marijuana was notimported. United States v. Espinoza, 406 F.2d 733 (2d Cir.),cert. denied, 395 U,S. 908 (1969) (retrial ordered for failure oftrial judge to allow defendant to prove that marijuana came fromCalifornia), 16 Pub. L. No. 91-513 (Oct. 27, 1970). See also Leary v.United States, 395 U.S. 6, 54 (1969) ("We are constrained toadd that nothing in what we hold today implies any constitutionaldisability in Congress to deal with the marijuana traffic byother means"). 17 See P. 1085 supra. 18 Weissman v. United States, 373 F.2d 799 (9th Cir. 1967).Struggling to confine its holding, the court distinguished anapparently contradictory case, United States v. Eramdjian, 155 F.Supp. 914 (S.D. Cal. 1957), on the ground that it involved"addiction" rather than use of narcotic drugs. 19 United States v. Mancuso, 420 F.2d 556 (2d Cir. 1970). 20 See Lambert v. California, 355 U.S. 225 (1957) (applicationof city ordinance requiring convicted felons to register withinfive days after arrival in city where there is no actual noticeor knowledge of ordinance is unconstitutional). 21 The Mancusocourt did not discuss the issue. 22 N.Y. PENAL LAW  1533 (5) (McKinney 1967). 23 D.C.CODE ANN.  22-3302 (1967). 24 Id.  22-1515(a). 25 Id.  3 3 -416 (a). 26 e.g.. Wheeler v. Goodman, 306 F. Supp. 58 (W.D.N.C. 1969),appeal docketed, 38 U.S.L.W. 3409 (U.S. Apr. 21, 1970) (No. 1273,1969 Term; renumbered No. 102, 1970 Term); Lazarus v. Faircloth,301 F. Supp. 266 (S.D. Fla.) appeal docketed, 38 U.S.L.W. 3225(U.S. Dec. 16, 1969) (No. 630, 1969 Term; renumbered No. 43, 1970Term; Broughton v. Brewer, 298 F. Supp. 260 (S.D. Ala. 1969). 27 In People v. Pagnotta, 25 N.Y.2d 333, 253 N.E.2d 202, 305N.YS.2d 484 (1969), the New York Court of Appeals upheld astatute making it illegal to loiter about any "stairway,staircase, hall, roof, elevator, cellar, courtyard, or anypassageway of a building for the purpose of unlawfully using orpossessing any narcotic drug." The court distinguished theordinary vagrancy and loitering cases on the ground that theconduct punished in the narcotics vagrancy statute is directlyrelated to the commission of crime against others: [P] rotection of innocent citizens from drug users is a verycrucial problem. As has recently been pointed out by severalnewspaper articles, in some of our poorer urban areas where druguse is high, innocent citizens are often beaten, robbed and evenmurdered by drug addicts .... It is completely reasonable andproper for the Legislature to protect these citizens fromaccidentally stumbling into the midst of such miscreants in thecommon areas of buildings. Id. at 338, 253 N.E.2d at 206, 305 N.Y.S.2d at 489. 28 Ricks v. District of Columbia, 414 F.2d 1097, 1104-05 (D.C.Cit. 1968). But cf. United States v. McClough, 263 A.2d 48 (D.C.Ct. App. 1970) (upholding statute prohibiting presence in anestablishment where defendant knows narcotics are beingdispensed). 29 e.g., United Stares v. McClough, 263 A.2d 48 (D.C. Ct. App.1970) (reading scienter provision into statute prohibiting priordrug users or offenders from being "found in any place . . .building, structure . . . in which any illicit narcotic drugs arekept"); cf. People v, Brim, 257 Cal. App. 2d 839, 65 Cal.Rptr. 265 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968) (interpreting statute outlawingknowingly being in a place where narcotics are being used ascharging defendant with intentional involvement with the unlawfuluse of marijuana). 30 State v. Duplain, 102 Ariz. 100, 425 P.2d 570 (1967);People v. Theobald, 231 Cal. App. 2d 351, 41 Cal. Rptr. 758(Dist. Ct. App. 1964). 31 See, e.g., State v. Haddock, 101 Ariz. 240, 418 P.2d 577(1966) (seeds contain no cannibin, therefore no crime charged);State v. Curry, 97 Ariz. 191, 398 P.2d 899 (1965) (marijuanarefers to the p2its of the plant containing cannabin). Contra,State v. Ringo, 5 Conn. Cir. 134, 246 A.2d 208 (Cir. Ct. 1968)(possession of seed, residue in pipes and a small package ofmarijuana); Commonwealth v. Cunningham, 35 Pa. D. & C.2d 527(0. & T. Allegheny 1964) (possession of marijuana seeds); cf.State v. Everidge, 77 N.M. 505, 424 P.2d 787 (1967) (defendantrequired to raise defense that marijuana possessed was withinstatutory exception); State v. Mudge, 69 Wash. 2d 861, 420 P.2d863 (1966) (same). 32 Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410 (1969); Aguilar v.Texas, 378 U.S. 108 (1964). 33 Chimel v. California, 395 U.S. 752 (1969) (search incidentto a lawful arrest limited to an area within immediate control ofthe suspect). See also Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). 34 People v. Bloom, 270 Cal. App. 2d 731, 76 Cal. Rptr. 137(Dist. Ct. App. 1969). 35 State NT. Garcia, 76 N.M. 171, 413 P.2d 210 (1966). 36 Preston v. United States, 376 U.S. 364 (1964). See alsoCooper v. California, 386 U.S. 58 (1967). The holdings in boththese cases are probably limited by Chimel. 37 Jones N7. United States, 362 U.S. 257 (1960). 38 State v. Kurland, 151 Mont. 569, 445 P.2d 570 (1968); Statev. Langan, 151 Mont. 558, 445 P.2d 565 (1968). 39 Haley v. State, 7 Md. App. 18, 253 A.2d 424 (1969). 40 People v. Hartfield, 94 111. App. 2d 421, 237 N.E.2d 193(1968). 41 See pp. 1089-91 supra. 42 People v. Cruz, 61 Cal. 2d 861, 395 P.2d 889, 40 Cal. Rptr.841 (1964); accord, People v. Patton, 264 Cal. App. 2d 637, 70Cal. Rptr. 484 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968). In Cruz the court statedthat it was reasonable for the officers to try to dislodge thesuspected marijuana from the defendant's mouth. 43 People v. McGrew, 103 Cal. 3d 404, 462 P.2d 1, 82 Cal.Rptr. 47 3 ( 1 969), relying on People v. Marshall, 69 Cal. 2d51, 412 11.2d 665, 69 Cal. Rptr. 585 (1968) (" 'In plainsmell,' therefore, is plainly not the equivalent of 'in plainview'" 44 People V. Clay, 273 Cal. App. 2d 279, 78 Cal. Rptr. 56(Dist. Ct. App. 1969) 45) People v. Hartfield, 94 111. App. 2d 421, 237 N.F.2d 193(1968). 46 United States v. Glaziou, 402 F.2d 8 (2d Cir. 1968), cert.denicd, 393 U.S.1121 (1969); Henderson v. United States, 390 F.2d805 (9th Cir. 1967). 47 372 F.2d 252 (5th Cir. 1967). The customs agents hadsearched the defendants belongings at the time he had entered thecountry arid had not discovered the marihuana and heroin hepossessed. They came into town and searched the defendant whenthey were notified by an informer that he was carrying thecontraband. 48 287 U.S. 435 (1952) 49 356 U.S.369 (1958) 6062 Cal. 2d 769, 776, 401 P.2d 934, 938, 44 Cal. Rptr. 326,330 (1965). The decision overturned a long series of precedents.That all justices concurred is indicative of the sentiment forchange. The court required the prosecution to disclose theidentity of the informant because he was essential to thedefenses of entrapment and lack of knowledge. The decision wasimmediately implemented in People v. Marsden, 234 Cal. App. 2d796, 44 Cal. Rptr. 728 (Dist. Ct. App. 1965). There, defendantwas repeatedly requested to furnish marijuana to a governmentagent and finally purchased and gave the agent one marijuanacigarette. The court noted that the case was close to entrapmentas a matter of law. 51 People v. Oatis, 264 Cal. App. 2d 324, 70 Cal. Rptr. 524(Dist. Ct. App. 1968), cert. denied, 393 U.S. 1108 (1969). 52 State v. Folsom, 463 P.2d 381 (Ore. 1970). 53 Commonwealth v. Harvard, 253 N.E.2d 346 (Mass. 1969);Glosen v. Sheriff, 451 P.2d 841 (Nev. 1969). 54 Peters v. State, 450 S.W.2d 276 (Ark. 1970). Here thedefendant gave some marijuana free of charge to the agent afterrepeated requests. The marijuana had been left in the defendant'sshop by others. In remanding the case for consideration by thejury whether entrapment existed the court stated: Perhaps, neither the persistent solicitation, the use of analias, the misrepresentation of the purposes for which [theagent] wanted to acquire the marijuana nor the use of friends ofappellant for an entree, standing alone, would have beensufficient to raise a fact question as to entrapment, but whentaken together along with the total lack of evidence that [thedefendant] had possessed or sold marijuana before, there was suchan issue. Id. at 278. 55 Froggatt v. State, 467 P.2d 1011 (Nev. 1970) (reversed forfailure to give entrapment instruction where policeman placed marijuana in defendant's carand then Defendant sold it to another officer). 56 Compare Jordan v. United States, 416 F.2d 338 (9th Cir.1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 920 (1970) (since three-month delaywas not purposeful, defendant must show actual prejudice), withRoss v. United States, 349 F.2d 210 (D.C. Cir. 1965) (chargesdismissed since seven-month delay found purposeful). 57 Smith v. Hooey 393 U.S. 374 (1969). 58 E.g., J. KAPLAN, MARIJUANA THE, NEW PROHIBITION 40-42(1970). 59 Oliver, Assessment of Current Legal Practices from theViewpoint of the Courts, in DRUGS AND Youth 229 (J. Wittenborned. 1969). Judge Oliver tried to minimize the seriousness of theproblem, However: I think that as judge I must be interested in what might appear to be a pattern of discriminatory law enforcement, but I . . . consider much of this talk must be viewed with the same critical eye which most other talk about drug abuse must be viewed. Id. at 233. 60 See, e.g., Winfield v. State, 248 Ind. 95, 223 N.E.2d 576(1967). 61 People v. Quintana, 91 Ill. App. 2d 95, 234 N.E.2d 406(1968). The court was greatly displeased with the continuingmisbehavior of the officer: "[The 5-8 previous arrests andshakedowns] were a high-handed display of police power whichcompletely disregarded the defendant's constitutionalrights." Id. at 98, 234 N.F.2d at 408. 62 64 Cal. 2d 504, 413 P.2d 665, 50 Cal. Rptr. 777 (1966)(heroin). 63 People v. Villalobos, 245 Cal, App. 2d 561, 54 Cal. Rptr.60 (Dist. Ct. App. 1966) (50 milligrams insufficient); see Tuttlev. State, 410 S.W.2d 780 (Tex. Crim. App. 1967) (63 milligramssufficient, enough to make a very small cigarette); People v.Hokuf, 245 Cal. App. 2d 394, 53 Cal. Rptr. 828 (Dist. Ct. App.1966) (reversible error for the court not to instruct the jurythat fragments of marijuana cannot support conviction). But seeFranklin v. State, 8 Ind. App. 134, 258 A.2d 767 (1969) (heroin),in which the court upheld a conviction for possession where thedefendant went to the hospital with an overdose. Althoughrecognizing that once the drug is inside the body there is nopossession because there is no control, the court felt that priorpossession and self-administration could be inferred. Thedecision should do much to discourage addicts from receiving anymedical treatment that might expose them to criminal penalties. 64 227 So. 2d 313 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1969). 65 See P. 1099 & note 14 supra. 66 State v. Resnick, 177 NW.2d 418 (Minn. 1970). 67 People v. Thomas, 76 Ill. App. 2d 42, 221 NE. 2d. 800(1966). 68 State v. Mantell, 71 Wash. 2d 768, 430 P.2d 980 (1967). 69 Commonwealth v. Harvard, 253 N.F.2d 346 (Mass. 1969). 70 People v. Hingerton, 27 App. Div. 2d 754, 277 N.Y.S.2d 754(1967). 71 See, e.g., State v. Oare, 249 Ore. 597, 439 P.2d 885 (1968)(one marijuana cigarette found in bathroom with two people, Homeowner convicted); People v. Van Syoc, 269 Cal. App. 2d 370, 75Cal. Rptr. 490 (Dist. Ct. App. 1969) (marijuana found onrighthand side of the dashboard in defendant's car while parkedin public lot), People v. Evans, 72 Ill. App. 2d 146, 218 N.E.2d781 (1966) (marijuana found under bar where defendant had beensitting). 72 State v. Faircloth, 181 Neb. 333, 148 NW.2d 187 (1967)(defendant had dufflebag full of marijuana between his legs in automobile); People v.Blunt, 241 Cal. App. -Id 200, 50 Cal. Rptr. 440 (Dist. Ct. App.1966) (defendant only one who had sat in back of police car whereMarijuana found). 73 People v. Irvin, 264 Cal. App. 2d 747, 70 Cal. Rptr. 892(Dist. Ct. App. 1968). 74 See Commonwealth v. Buckley, 354 Mass. 508, 238 N.F.2d 335(1968); People v. Mitchell, 51 Misc. 2d 82, 272 N.Y.S.2d 523(Sup. Ct. 1967). Contra. State v. Givens, 74 Wash. 2d 48, 442P.2d 628 (1968). 75 State v. Colcord, 109 N.H. 231, 248 A.2d 80 (1968). 76 The evidence of fragments of marijuana on the defendantoften provides this evidence, See, e.g., People v. Slade, 264Cal. App. 2d 188, 70 Cal. Rptr. 321 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968); Peoplev. Haynes, 253 Cal. App. 2d 1060, 61 Cal. Rptr. 859 (Dist. Ct.App. 1967), cert. denied, 392 U.S. 914 (1968); People v. Hurta,238 Cal. App. 2d 162, 47 Cal. Rptr. 580 (Dist. Ct. App. 1965). 77 See 1131-32 infra. 78 E.g., Oliver, supra note W. 79 See, e.g., United Sates v. Kleinhalzer, 306 F. Supp. 311(E.D.N.Y. 1969) (Weinstein, J.); Oliver, supra note 59, at 230: In most other areas of the law, however, legislatures havefreely granted judges the power and discretion within quiteflexible limitations, to determine appropriate sentences for allparticular defendants before them that may or may not, dependentupon the particular case, include commitment to a penalinstitution. . . . In the field of drug abuse, quite contrary to that experience,mandatory prison sentences apparently reflect a legislativeconviction that all drug offenders are so alike that sending allto prison is, in fact, a real solution to what must have beenviewed as a relatively simple problem. They also seem to reflecta certainty and righteousness that can hardly be said to bejustified by our present scientific knowledge. 80 For example, in Aguilar v. United States, 363 F. 2d 379 (9thCir. 1966), the court affirming the smuggling conviction of aMexican mechanic driving a car containing marijuana back to theUnited States, noted: Here was a young man with a previous clean record, and therewas no indication he was a user of narcotics or inside anarcotics ring. Apparently he was a victim of his personaleconomics. When the law gets no closer than this to the realrascal, one must wonder about the policy of it, although it bebeyond our function. Id. at 381. See also Oliver, supra note 59, at 233 81 What Justice Jackson said about adjudicative mood when thedeath penalty hangs in the balance is equally appropriate withregard to harsh marijuana penalties: When the penalty is death, we, like state judges, are temptedto strain the evidence and even, in close cases, the law in orderto give a doubtfully condemned man another chance. Stein v. New York, 346 U.S. 156, 196 (1953) 82 State v. Ward, No. A-9 (N.J. Oct. 26, 1970) 83 N.Y. Times, Oct. 27. 1970, at 1, Col. 4 84 State v. Ward, No. A-9 (N.J. Oct. 26, 1970) 85 N.J. Stat. Ann. Section 2a:168-1 (1969) 86 See pp. 1138-39 infra. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT01-B23-28IA088-000636-B009-324http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100330 text/html 14835HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:03:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:26 GMTContent-length: 14617 Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Table of Contents The Report Letter of Transmittal Introduction I. Marihuana and the Problem ofMarihuana Origins of the Marihuana Problem Visibility Perceived Threats Symbolism The Need for Perspective Historical Perspective Cultural Perspective The Search for Meaning Skepticism The Limits of Rationality Formulating Marihuana Policy Scientific Oversimplification Philosophical Oversimplification Sociological Oversimplification Legal Oversimplification The Report II. Marihuana Use and Its Effects The Marihuana User Demographic Characteristics Patterns of Use Profiles of Users Experimental Users Intermittent Users Moderate and Heavy Users Very Heavy Users Becoming a Marihuana User Parental Influence Situational Factors and Behavioral Correlates Social Group Factors The Dynamics of Persistent Use Becoming a Multidrug User Epidemiologic Studies Profiles and Dynamics Sociocultural Factors Effects of Marihuana on the User Botany and Chemistry Factors Influencing Drug Effect Dosage Method of Use Metabolism Set and Setting Tolerance Reverse Tolerance Duration of Use Patterns of Use Definition of Dependence Effects Related to Pattern Use Immediate Drug Effects Subjective Effects Bodv Function Mental Function The Intoxicated State Unpleasant Reactions Anxiety States Psychosis Conclusions ShortTerm Effects Long Term Effects Very Long Term Effects Tolerance and Dependence General Body Function Social Functioning Mental Functioning Motivation and Behavioral Change Summary III. Social Impact of Marihuana Use Marihuana and Public Safety Marihuana and Crime The Issue of Cause and Effect Marihuana and Violent Crime Marihuana and Non Violent Crime A Sociocultural Explanation Marihuana and Driving Marihuana, Public Health and Welfare A Public Health Approach The Population at Risk Confusion and Fact Assessment of Perceived Risks Lethality Potential for Genetic Damage Immediate Effects Effects of LongTerm, Heavy Use Addiction Potential Progression to Other Drugs Preventive Public Health Concerns Summary Marihuana and the Dominant Social Order The Adult Marihuana User The Young Marihuana User The World of Youth Why Society Feels Threatened Dropping Out Dropping Down Youth and Radical Politics Youth and the Work Ethic The Changing Social Scene IV. Social Response to Marihuana Use The Initial Social Response The Change The Current Response The Criminal Justice System Law Enforcement Behavior Law Enforcement Opinion The Non Legal Institutions The Family The Schools The Churches The Medical Community Summary The Public Response V. Marihuana and Social Policy Drugs in a Free Society Drugs and Social Responsibility A Social Control Policy for Marihuana Approval of Use Elimination of Use Discouragement or Neutrality Implementing the Discouragement Policy The Role of Law in Effective Social Control Total Prohibition Regulation Partial Prohibition Recommendations for Federal Law Recommendations for State Law Discussion of Federal Recommendations Discussion of State Recommendations Discussion of Potential Objections A Final Comment Addendum Ancillary Recommendations Legal and Law Enforcement Recommendations Medical Recommendations Other Recommendations Index of Contributors, Contractors and Consultants The Appendix The Technical Papers of the First Report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, March, 1972 Letter of Transmittal Members and Staff Preface Part One -- Biological Aspects I. History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant History of the Medical Use History of the Intoxicant Use II. Biological Effects of Marihuana Botanical and Chemical Considerations Factors Influencing Psychopharmacological Effect Acute Effects of Marihuana (Delta 9 THC) Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term Cannabis Users III. Behavioral and Biological Concomitants of ChronicMarihuana Smoking by Heavy and Casual Users Part Two -- Social Aspects I. Marihuana Use in American Society Surveys of Marihuana Use The Incidence and Prevalence of Marihuana Use The Future of Marihuana Why People Use Marihuana Becoming a Marihuana User Circumstances of First Marihuana Use The Marihuana User The Patterns of Marihuana Use Marihuana Use and the User: 1972 II. Marihuana and the Use of Other Drugs Empirical Data on the Escalation Process Youth Drug Use Survey Summary III. Marihuana and Public Safety Problems in Assessing the Effects of Marihuana Marihuana and Violence Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime Marihuana and Driving Part Three -- Legal Aspects I. Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco History of Marihuana Legislation History of Alcohol Prohibition History of Tobacco Regulation II. The Legal Status of Marihuana International Control The Control of Marihuana Under Federal Law Control of Marihuana at the State Level The Role of Ancillary Offenses and Constructive Possession in Controlling Marihuana Marihuana Control at the Local Level Analysis of Statutes Requiring Physicians to Report Drug Addiction III. Trafficking Patterns of Marihuana and Hashish Marihuana Traffic From Mexico Marihuana Traffic From Jamaica The Growing Hashish Traffic Part Four -- Response of the Criminal Justice System toMarihuana Use Introduction I. Enforcement Behavior at the State Level Enforcement Behavior at the Federal Level General Trends Federal Enforcement of the Marihuana Laws: 1970 III. Opinion Within the Criminal Justice System Prosecutorial Opinion Opinion of Court Officials Part Five -- National Survey I. A Nationwide Study of Beliefs, Information and Experiences Main Report Methods and Procedures Part Six -- Social Policy Aspects I. The Constitutional Dimensions of Marihuana Control Substantive Limitations on the Criminal Law Federal Preemption of Marihuana Control II. Models and Statutory Schemes for Controlling Marihuana Law and Social Policy Legal Implementations of Marihuana Control Policies Formulating a Legal Scheme Implementation of Alcohol Prohibition Marihuana and Education Drug Programs in American Education State Departments of Education Survey Commission Visits Drug Education Programs of Special Interest Marihuana Education in State Programs Surveys of College Drug Courses The Federal Government and Drug Education Research Needs and Directions Biomedical Psychosocial Legal and Law Enforcement Index of Contributors, Contractors and Consultants Research Papers Prepared for the Commission Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B23-29IA086-000619-B005-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/history.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033255 text/html 9736HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:32:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:19 GMTContent-length: 9521 Historical Research on Drugs -- Legalization,Decriminalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Historical Research on Drug Policy The history of our drug policy is one of the more fascinatingchapters in the development of America as we are today. Thissection will continue to grow and I invite everyone to makesubmissions of their favorite historical documents on thesubject. By the way, folks, in case anyone asks, we are firmlycommitted to publishing all of the historical information,regardless of which side it may favor. The History of the Drug Laws The History of the Marijuana Laws inthe United States by Charles Whitebread - A Speech to theCalifornia Judges Association 1995 annual conference Anexcellent, and funny history of how we got our current drug laws. The History of the Opium and Cocaine Laws byDavid F. Musto, MD The ForbiddenFruit and the Tree of Knowledge: An Inquiry into the LegalHistory of American Marijuana Prohibition by Professor Richard J.Bonnie & Professor Charles H. Whitebread, II -- The firstmajor study ever done of the legal history of the marihuana laws. From the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,1972 History of Marihuana Legislation History of Alcohol Prohibition History of Tobacco Regulation A Summary of Historical Events Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors, byDan Baum - A history of the drug war in modern times. Other Historical Links Hemp BC - Hemp, BritishColumbia - lots of good historical information on hemp in Canada. Drug CultureThroughout History - An interesting collection of informationregarding the history of drugs, from the earliest times to thecurrent day. Historical Articles Drug Law Timeline - Somesignificant events in the history of our drug laws The Mythical Roots of US Drug Policy:Soldier's Disease and Addicts in the Civil War by Jerry Mandel American Prohibitionists and Violence,1865-1920 - by Richard Hamm The Pure Food and Drugs Act of1906 by Thomas M. Szasz Hemp Around Their Necks -- Chapter 3of Harry Anslinger's 1961 book "The Murderers". Among other things he tells how the La Guardia Committee Report gave children a signal to light up as many reefers as they want. The Gentle, InoffensiveChinese -- from Volume II, Chapter XIII of Roughing It, byMark Twain, 1871. This is included here to help give readers anunderstanding of the racial feelings which were behind theearliest anti-opium smoking laws. Confessions of an English Opium Eaterby Thomas de Quincey -- This is the famous essay on opium fromthe early 1800's. Panic and Indifference, The Politicsof Canada's Drug Laws. P.J. Giffen, Shirley Endicott and SylviaLambert. A few samples from a book which is an excellentdiscussion of the history of Canada's drug laws. Experts Discount Marijuana as Big Factor InCrime but Drive on It Will Be Pressed This is an article from the New York Times, January 12, 1945, reporting the conclusions of the La Guardia Committee Report on marijuana. The committee found that the fears about marijuana were "unfounded" but the politicians swore to keep up the fight anyway. An "OpiumJoint" Raided. The New York Times September 28, 1891, p.2. A quaint article about the opium problem in the 19th century. Alcohol and OpiumCompared: Opinions of over 100 Physicians on the use of Opiumin China -- Compiled by William Hector Park, M.D., AmericanPresbyterian Mission Press, Shanghai, 1899 What Shall They Do to Be Saved?, Harper'smagazine 35, Aug. 1867, pp. 377-87. An article about the evils of opium addiction. The Demon of the Orient AllenS. Williams, New York: "Published by the Author," 1883Chapter IV. An American's Palace Joint Another chapter of theevils of opium. The Warfare AgainstOpium-Smoking in America Outdoor, Feb. 6, 1909, vol. 91, p275 How the Opium Habit isAcquired by Virgil G. Eaton The Popular Science Monthly 33,Sept. 1888, 663-67 An Enterprising Turk,The New York Times July 1, 1890, p. 8 This is a story about how aTurk decided to sell diluted opium and was quickly driven out ofbusiness by public exposure. In The Land of Opium.- The Immense Areas Given to the Growth of the Poppy - The NewYork Times March 29, 1896, p. 28 The Drug's History Traced from the Plant to the Pipe--The Scenes in the Indian Fields--Processes Through Which the Opium Goes--The Monopoly of Finishing for Smoking in the Hands of Chinese--View of a Lucknow Smoking Den. The San FranciscoOpium Joints -- The Review of Reviews 5 June (1892), p. 604 A lurid description of the San Francisco opium dens. It is worth noting that San Francisco had passed ordinances outlawing opium smoking in opium dens some 17 years before this article was written. The Opium Industry inAmerica by C.F. HOLDER Scientific American 1898, p. 147 Thisis a review of the opium industry as it existed in the late 19thcentury. Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? AHistorical Perspective From "Our Right To Drugs" byThomas Szasz, Praeger Publishers, NY (1992): Evidence Found of Ancient Marijuana Use:Albany (NY) Times Union, 20 May 1993 attributed to Newsday From Mr Sin to Mr Big by DesmondManderson This is a synopsis of a history of the drug laws inAustralia. It is a good demonstration of the racism behind thedrug laws. A Brief History of FederalFirearms Enforcement, Frederick S. Calhoun. Ph.D.. Historian,Federal Law Enforcement Training Center The Opium Monopoly by Ellen N. LaMotte - 1920 - An account of the opium trade in Asia in the firstpart of the Twentieth Century The Lincoln Quote - Somecommentary on a quote attributed to Abraham Lincoln. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B23-30IA087-000632-B024-214http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/GOVPUBS.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122094424 text/html 15321HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:44:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:53 GMTContent-length: 15103 Government Publications Related to Drugs and Drug Policy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Government Publications on Drugs and Drug Policy The Biggest Studies of DrugPolicy. Revised and Updated. This is a list of the major studies ofdrug policy done over the last 100 years or so. Quite aninteresting place to start your reading. Excerpt from the 1994 Crime Bill Calling for the establishment of a commission to study thedrug problem. This clause was inserted into the Crime Bill as aresult of the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy(Hoover Resolution). Drug Corruption and the FederalGovernment - A list of current Congressional Reports on thetopic. UNICOR - Prison Industries WebSite TheContras and Cocaine - Selections from the Kerry CommitteeDocument on Drugs, Law Enforcement, and Foreign Policy. Contents Department of Justice Reports DOJ Reports Psychoactive Substances and Violence -DOJ Report - Feb, 1994 This Department of Justice report was a search and summary ofall of the existing evidence on the relationship between drugsand violence. The report found that alcohol was the only drugwhich had any real connection to drug-induced violence. Nearlyall of the violence associated with illegal drugs was a result ofthe fact that the drugs are illegal, not as a result ofpharmacological effects. Past and Future Directions of theD.A.R.E. Program: An Evaluation Review, (380K - big file) DraftFinal Report by Research Triangle Institute September 1994 This is the study done by the Research Triangle Institute toevaluate the effectiveness of the DARE drug-education program inthe schools. The basic conclusion was that DARE was highlypopular with both police and the school officials, but had noreal effect on long-term drug use. PREVENTING ILLEGAL DIVERSION OF CHEMICALS:NIJ Research in Brief, November 1993 Drug Courts: Information on a NewApproach to Address Drug-Related Crime A Criminal Justice System Strategyfor Treating Cocaine-Heroin Abusing Offenders in Custody TESTING HAIR FOR ILLICIT DRUG USE NIJ,Research in Brief, January 1993 DRUG OFFENSES ACCOUNT FOR A LARGERPERCENTAGE OF JAIL INMATES - Dept. of Justice Press Release1990 Drug Courts: Proposed Ruleby the U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs THE NATION'S PRISON POPULATION GREWALMOST 9 PERCENT LAST YEAR - Press Release 8-9-95 STATE AND FEDERAL PRISON POPULATIONTOPS ONE MILLION THE NATION'S CORRECTIONAL POPULATIONTOPS 5 MILLION - 8/27/95 Drug Enforcement by Police, 1990 Federal Convictions of Public Officials, 1970- 1988 Chart -- Excerpted from THE ECONOMICS OF PROHIBITION,by Mark Thornton. Reference Source: USDoJ "Report toCongress on the Activities and Operations of the Public IntegritySection" System-Wide Strategies to Relieve JailOvercrowding Bureau of Justice Statistics Reports Bureau of Prisons Home Page Bureau of PrisonsFacts Page -- Basic stats about the Federal prison system(does not include stats on state prisons or jails. Highlights of the Crime Problem,1993 DRUGS AND CRIME FACTS, 1994 Prisoners in 1990 Prisoners in 1992 Jail Inmates 1992 Prisoners in 1994 Jails and Jail Inmates 1993-94:Census of Jails and Survey of Jails Drug Enforcement and Treatment inPrisons, 1990 Correctional Populations in the UnitedStates 1980 - 1993 Executive Summary Violent Crime: National CrimeVictimization Survey -- April 1994, NCJ-147486 Drug Enforcement Administration Reports DEA Home Page -Not much there, really. Just their copy of the publication below. How to Hold Your Own In ADrug Legalization Debate, by the DEA, November, 1994 This booklet was the result of the DEA's emergency conferencein August, 1994, in which they tried desperately to find some wayto keep from getting their butts kicked when they engaged inpublic debates on drug policy. It is a direct response to the Persuasive Strategies, andborrows from the Persuasive Strategies on several occasions. Reply to the DEA's book "HowTo Hold Your Own In a Drug Legalization Debate" In this section, I go through the arguments the DEA has raisedin their book and examine them in detail against the FederalGovernment's own evidence on the subject. In addition to missingthe point, the DEA is not telling the truth. DEA Charts on Worldwide Cocaine and HeroinProduction and Seizures -- These are the official DEA chartsof worldwide cocaine and heroin production and seizures. U.S. DRUG THREAT ASSESSMENT: 1993 DRUGINTELLIGENCE REPORT - DEA - September, 1993 This is a ratherlong document which is a comprehensive summary of the DEA's viewof the threat from drugs. COCA CULTIVATION AND COCAINE PROCESSING:AN OVERVIEW -- DEA - September 1993 This report is the DEA'soverview of the cocaine industry. The DEA Official Seal -- This is aGIF file of the DEA's official seal. International Drug Trafficking Organizationsin Mexico - Statement by: Thomas A. Constantine, Administrator,Drug Enforcement Administration, Before the: Senate ForeignRelations Committee - August 8, 1995 National Institute on Drug Abuse TheFacts on Needle Exchange - Previously unreleased FederalGovernment documents, plus background materials, on the factsabout needle exchange programs. Drugs and Violence: Causes,Correlates, and Consequences, (Very Big -- 600K!)NIDA Research Monograph 103 - 1990, For a shorter analysis, withessentially the same results, see Psychoactive Substances andViolence, above. National Clearinghouse on Alcohol and Drug Information NCADI Home Page Contains information such as the Drug Abuse Warning Network(DAWN) Reports, the Household Survey on Drug Abuse, and otherinformation. While the information contained in these surveys issignificant, it needs to be viewed carefully in light of theproblems which are encountered with any attempt to collectinformation on illegal activities. In addition, when suchinformation is reported to the media, the government officialsreleasing the information will tend to make up press reportswhich are misleading, to say the least, when compared with thefull text of the reports. Readers of these reports should readthem carefully to determine the difference between the pressrelease and the details of the report, and they should also referto the problems in collecting accurate data, discussed in the GAOreport, Drug Use Measurement. General Accounting Office Document Page Other Government Publications The Clinton Administration's InternalReviews of Needle Exchange Research RESPONDING TO DRUG USE AND VIOLENCE:HELPING PEOPLE, FAMILIES, AND COMMUNITIES A Directory andResource Guide of Public and Private Sector Drug Control Grants MARIJUANA USE GOING THROUGH THE ROOF This is a press release on the recent rise in marijuana use. PRESS BRIEFING BY DIRECTOR OFNATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY, DR. LEE BROWN February 9, 1994 --Lee Brown touting the Clinton Administration's new plan for thesame old failures. Typical political BS. AIDS CZAR KRISTINE GEBBIE COMMENDSDRUG CZAR FOR NATIONAL DRUG STRATEGY - February 9, 1994 No sooner had Lee Brown spoken the words than other officialsrushed forth to praise him for his wisdom. Ms. Gebbie quit theClinton Administration shortly thereafter because she couldn'tfind anyone who cared about the AIDS problem. REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT IN DRUG STRATEGYANNOUNCEMENT -- February 9, 1994 -- The President thought LeeBrown's plan was a good idea too. POLICE PRACTICES: DRUG FREE BLOCK PLAN ByDeputy Chief Charles W. Bennett, Jr. and Captain A. ChristineBailor, M.P.A., Richmond, VA Police Department Originallypublished in the July '94 issue of FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin This is another one of those hare-brained plans to stamp outdrugs in the community. Among other things, the police gettogether with the neighborhood residents and get them to sign acontract vowing to be drug-free. Oh well, it made them feelproductive for a while. LEGALIZATION OF ILLICIT DRUGS: IMPACTAND FEASIBILITY (A Review of Recent Hearings) REPORT OF THESELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL, 1989 These are the hearings on legalization held by CongressmanCharles Rangel in 1989. It is a good example of the thinking andarguments being used at that time. Most notable is the fact thatno real research was done, just some collecting of opinions, andmany of the members of the committee said their mind was made upbefore they heard the evidence. A Proposed Anaheim Ordinance This is a proposed ordinance for the city of Anaheim,California which would have barred people from city parks if theyhad ever been convicted of a drug offense. Just another dumb ideafrom our politicians. This one later fell to a combined lawsuitby the ACLU and NORML. Contributed by Jim Rosenfield. DRUGS AND THE INFORMATION SUPERHIGHWAY byHON. GERALD B.H. SOLOMON OF NEW YORK in the House ofRepresentatives, Thursday, October 6, 1994 A speech by Gerald Solomon. He is upset because people areusing the internet to promote drug policy reform. Free speechmust be stopped before it ruins America. DRUG DECRIMINALIZATION IN HOLLAND HASINCREASED CRIME AND ADDICTION by HON. GERALD B.H. SOLOMON OF NEWYORK in the House of Representatives Thursday, March 2, 1995 Another diatribe, full of misinformation, by Gerald Solomon.What he doesn't know about the subject has filled libraries. US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES -CONSTITUENT ELECTRONIC MAIL SYSTEM How to contact your elected representatives through e-mail.Now all you have to do is get them to listen. The U.S. House ofRepresentatives Member Directory A BRIEF HISTORY OF FEDERAL FIREARMSENFORCEMENT, Frederick S. Calhoun. Ph.D. Historian, Federal LawEnforcement Training Center America's Habit: Drug Abuse,Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime -- President's Commissionon Organized Crime, 1986 REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT ONPRESIDENT'S DIRECTIVE ON DRUG TESTING White House Press Release on Drugs 10-23-95 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B23-31IA030-000641-B026-95http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/omintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140914 text/html 14015HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:08:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:38 GMTContent-length: 13797 The Opium Monopoly -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE INTRODUCTION We first became interested in the opium traffic during a visitto the Far East in 1916. Like most Americans, we had vaguelyheard of this trade, and had still vaguer recollections of a warbetween Great Britain and China, which took place aboutseventy-five years ago, known as the Opium War. From time to timewe had heard of the opium trade as still flourishing in China,and then later came reports and assurances that it was all over,accompanied by newspaper pictures of bonfires of opium and opiumpipes. Except for these occasional and incidental memories, wehad neither knowledge of, nor interest in the subject. On our wayout to Japan, in the July of 1916, we met a young Hindu on theboat, who was outspoken and indignant over the British policy ofestablishing the opium trade in India, as one of the departmentsof the Indian Government. Of all phases of British rule in India,it was this policy which excited him most, and which caused himmost ardently to wish that India had some form ofself-government, some voice in the control and management of herown affairs, so that the country could protect itself from thisevil. Without this, he declared, his country was powerless to puta stop to this traffic imposed on it by a foreign government, andhe greatly deplored the slow, but steady demoralization of thenation which was in consequence taking place. As he produced hisfacts and figures, showing what this meant to his people-thisgradual undermining of their moral fiber and economic efficiencywe grew more and more interested. That such conditions existedwere to us unheard of, and unbelievable. It seemed incrediblethat in this age, with the consensus of public opinion sternlyopposed to the sale and distribution of habit-forming drugs, andwith legislation to curb and restrict such practices incorporatedin the laws of all ethical and civilized governments, that here,on the other side of the world, we should come upon opium trafficconducted as a government monopoly. Not only that, but conductedby one of the greatest and most highly civilized nations of theworld, a nation which we have always looked up to as being in thevery forefront of advanced, progressive and humane ideals. Soshocked were we by what this young Hindu told us, that we flatlyrefused to believe him. We listened to what he had to say on thesubject, but thinking that however earnest he might be, howeversincere in his sense of outrage at such a policy, that he must ofnecessity be mistaken. We decided not to take his word for it,but to look into the matter for ourselves. We did look into the matter. During a stay in the Far East ofnearly a year, in which time we visited Japan, China, Hong Kong,French IndoChina, Siam and Singapore, we looked into the matterin every country we visited. Wherever possible we obtainedgovernment reports, and searched them carefully for thosepassages giving' statistics concerning the opium trade-the amountof opium consumed, the number of shops where it was sold, and thenumber of divans where it was smoked. We found these shopsestablished under government auspices, the dealers obtainingtheir supplies of opium from the government, and then obtaininglicenses from the government to retail it. In many countries, wevisited these shops and divans in person, and bought opium inthem freely, just as one goes to a shop to buy cigarettes. Wefound a thorough and complete establishment of the opium traffic,run by the government, as a monopoly. Revenue was derived throughthe sale of opium, through excise taxes upon opium, and throughlicense fees paid by the keepers of opium shops and divans* -Acomplete, systematic arrangement, by which the foreign governmentprofited at the expense of the subject peoples under its rule. InEuropean countries and in America, we find the governments makingevery effort to repress the sale of habit-forming drugs. Here, inthe Far East, a contrary attitude prevails. The government makesevery effort to encourage and extend it. Two notable exceptions presented themselves. One was Japan. There are no opium shops in Japan, and theJapanese Government is as careful to protect its people from theevils and dangers of opium as any European country could be. Itmust be remembered, however, that Japan is a free and independentcountry. It has never been conquered by a European country, andperhaps one explanation as to why the Japanese are a powerful,virile people, is because Japan is the one Oriental nation thathas never been dominated by a European power, and in consequence,never drugged. The other exception is our own possession of the Philippines,which although a subject country, has never had the opium trafficestablished as part of the machinery of an alien government. On our return to America, we were greatly exercised over thesefacts which we had unearthed. We continued our researches as tothe opium traffic in the New York Public Library, and in theLibrary of Congress, in Washington, in both of which places thereis a rich and abundant literature on the subject. We obtainedready access to official blue books and government reports,issued by the British Government, and it is from these sourcesthat the material in this book is largely drawn. We were somewhathampered in our investigations by the fact that because of thewar, these blue books have not always been of recent date, someof them being two or three years old. For this reason, it has notalways been possible to give the most recent figures as to opiumconsumption and distribution in the various countries. However,we feel that we have obtained enough information to uphold ourcase, and in any event, there is no doubt that the opium traffic,as fostered by the British Government, still continues. Inlooking over the list of British colonies where it isestablished, we may find here and there a diminution in theamount of opium consumed, but this is probably due to theexigencies of war, to the lack of shipping and transportation,rather than to any conscientious scruples or moral turnover;because the revenue derived from the opium trade is precious. Insome instances, as in the case of the Straits Settlements, thelocal British Government derives from forty to fifty percent ofits revenue from this source. Yet, taken in relation to thewhole, it is not large. However valuable it may be, however largethe percentage in the case of any particular colony, it cansurely never be large enough to compensate for the stigmaattached.- It is a blot upon the honor of a great nation to thinkthat she deliberately runs her colonies on opium: No revenue,whether large or small, can be justified when coming from such asource as this. In all these blue books and official reports, the question ofthe Opium Monopoly, as it is called, is dealt with freely. Thereis no attempt to hide or suppress the facts. The subject isreported frankly and fully. It is all there, for any one to readwho chooses. How then, does it happen that we in America knownothing about Great Britain's Opium Monopoly? That the facts arenew to us and come to us as a shock? One is because of ouradmiration for Great Britain. Those who know and there are afew-hesitate to state them. Those who know, feel that it is apolicy unworthy of her. We hesitate to call attention to theshortcomings of a friend. There are other reasons also for thisconspiracy of silence-fear of international complications, fearof endangering the good feeling between the two countries,England and America. Consequently England has been able to relyupon those who know the facts to keep silent, either throughadmiration or through fear. Also the complete ignorance of therest of us has been an additional safeguard. Therefore, fornearly a century, she has been running her Opium Monopolyundisturbed. It began as a private industry, about the time ofthe East India Company, but later on passed out of the hands ofprivate individuals into the department of Opium Administration,one of the branches of the colonial government" But, loyalas we have been all these years, we can remain silent no longer.The time is now rapidly approaching when the two countries,England and America, are to become closely united. How can webecome truly united, however, when on such a great moral questionas this we stand diametrically opposed? There is still another reason why we should break silence. Thewelfare of our own country is now at stake. The menace of opiumis now threatening America, and our first duty is to ourselves.Little by little, surreptitiously, this drug has been creeping inover our borders, and to-day many thousands of our young men andyoung women are drug addicts, habituated to the use of one of theopium derivatives, morphia or heroin. The recent campaign againstdrug users, conducted by the New York Department of Health, hasuncovered these addicts in great numbers; has brought them beforeus, made us see, in spite of ourselves, that thousands of themexist and that new ones are being created daily. The questionarises, how do they obtain the drug? It was the fortune of thewriter to be present during the first week of the opening of theHealth Department Clinic for Drug Addicts, and her work consistedin taking the histories of these pitiful, abject wrecks of menand women who swarmed to the clinic in hundreds, seeking suppliesof the drug which they could not obtain elsewhere. The history ofthese patients was almost invariably the same-there was amonotony in their tragic, pathetic recital as to how they becamevictims, how they first became acquainted with the drug. As arule, they began in extreme youth, generally between fifteen andtwenty years of age, one boy having begun at the age of thirteen.In nearly every case they had tried it as a lark, as anexperiment. At "parties,' they said, when some one of thecompany would pass round a box full of heroin, inviting them tosnuff it. To snuff it, these children, very much as a small boygoes behind the barn to try his first cigarette. In manyinstances those who produced the box were peddlers, offering itas a gift at first, knowing that after a dose or two the fatalhabit would be formed and another customer created. Thesepeddlers doubtless obtained their supplies from smugglers. Butthat takes us back to our argument, namely, the part played bythat great nation which grows and distributes opium to the world.For that nation produces an oversupply of opium, far more than isneeded by the medical profession for the relief of pain. Opium isnot profitable in its legitimate use. It is only profitablebecause of the demands of addicts, men and women deliberatelydebauched, either through the legalized machinery of colonialgovernments, or through the illegal activities of smugglers. Amoral sentiment that will balk at this immense over-production,the sole object of which is to create drug victims, is the onlyweapon to fight it. In giving this book to the public, we arecalling upon that moral sentiment. We feel that we shall numberamong our staunchest supporters that great body of men and womenin England who have for years been vainly fighting the opiumtraffic. No more bitter opponents of this policy are to be foundthan amongst the English people themselves. From time to time, inParliament, sharp debates have arisen as to the advisability ofcontinuing it, and some of the greatest men in England have beensteadfastly opposed. The great Gladstone has described it as"morally indefensible." The time has now come for us,people of both countries, to unite to stop it. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-32IA030-000641-B026-124http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140925 text/html 8884HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:09:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:46 GMTContent-length: 8667 Great Britain's Opium Monopoly Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE I - GREAT BRITAIN'S OPIUM MONOPOLY In a book shop in Shanghai, we came upon a small book with anarresting title, "Drugging a Nation," by Samuel Merwin.It was published in 1908, eight years before we chanced upon it,shabby and shop worn, its pages still uncut. The people ofShanghai, the great International Settlement of this largest cityand most important seaport of China, did not have to read it.They knew, doubtless, all that its pages could disclose. We,however, found it most enlightening. In it there is thisdescription of the British Opium Monopoly: "In speaking of it as a 'monopoly' I am not employing acant word for effect. I am not making a case. That is what it isofficially styled in a certain blue book on my table which bearsthe title, 'Statement Exhibiting the Moral and Material Progressof India during the year 1905-'6,' and which was ordered by theHouse of Commons to be printed, May 10, 1907. . . . Now to getdown to cases, just what this Government Opium Monopoly is, andjust how Goes it work? An excerpt from the rather ponderous bluebook will tell us. It may be dry but it is official andunassailable. It is also short. "'The opium revenue'-thus the blue book-'is partly raisedby a monopoly of the production of the drug in Bengal and theUnited provinces, and partly by the levy of a duty on all opiumimported from native states. . . . In these two provinces, thecrop is grown under the control of a government department, whicharranges the total area which is to be placed under the crop,with a view to the amount of opium required.' "So much for the broader outline. Now for a few of thedetails: 'The cultivator of opium in these monopoly districtsreceives a license, and is granted advances to enable him toprepare the land for the crop, and he is required to deliver thewhole of the product at a fixed price to opium agents, by whom itis dispatched to the government factories at Patna and Ghazipur.' "The money advanced to the cultivator bears no interest.The British Indian government lends money without interest in noother cases. Producers of crops other than opium are obliged toget along without free money. "When it has been manufactured, the opium must bedisposed of in one way and another; accordingly: 'The supply ofprepared opium required for consumption in India is made over tothe Excise Department . . . the chests of " provision "opium, for export, are sold at monthly sales, which take place atCalcutta.' For the meaning of the curious term, 'provision opium'we have only to read on a little further. 'The opium is receivedand prepared at the government factories, where the out-turn ofthe year included 8,774 chests of opium for the ExciseDepartment, about three hundred pounds of various opiumalkaloids, thirty maunds of medical opium; and 51,770 chests ofprovision opium for the Chinese market.' There are about i4o poundsin a chest. . . . Last year the government had under poppycultivation 654,928 acres. And the revenue to the treasury,including returns from auction sales, duties and license fees,and deducting all 'opium expenditures' was nearly $22,000,000. As the blue book states, this opium is auctioned off once amonth. At that point, the British Government, as a government,washes its hands of the business. Who buys the opium at thesegovernment auctions, and what afterwards becomes of it? "Themen who buy in the opium at these monthly auctions and afterwardsdispose of it are a curious crowd of Parsees, Mohammedans,Hindoos and Asiatic Jews. Few British names appear in the opiumtrade to-day. British dignity prefers not to stoop beneath thetaking in of profits; it leaves the details of a dirty businessto dirty hands. This is as it has been from the first. Thedirectors of the East India Company, years and years before thatsplendid corporation relinquished the actual government of India,forbade the selling of its specially-prepared opium direct toChina, and advised a trading station on the coast whence the drugmight find its way 'without the company being exposed to thedisgrace of being engaged in illicit commerce."' "So clean hands and dirty hands went into partnership.They are in partnership still, save that the most nearlyChristian of governments has officially succeeded the company asparty of the first part." You will say, if the British Government chooses to deal inopium, that is not our concern. It is most emphatically ourconcern. Once a month, at these great auction sales, the BritishGovernment distributes thousands of pounds of opium, which arethus turned loose upon the world, to bring destruction and ruinto the human race. The buyers of this opium are not agents of theBritish Government. They are merely the distributors, throughwhom this drug is directed into the channels of trade.' TheBritish Government derives a certain portion of its revenue fromthe sale of opium, therefore depends upon these dealers to find amarket for it. ' They are therefore, as distributors, theunofficial agents of the British Government, through whom it issold legitimately, or smuggled around the world. In seeking toeradicate the drug evil, we must face the facts, and recognizeclearly that the source of supply is the British Government,through whose agents, official and unofficial, it is distributed. America, so they tell us, is now menaced by the drug evil. Nowthat prohibition is coming into effect, we are told that we arenow confronted by a vice more terrible, far more deterioratingand dangerous. If that is true, then we must recognize our dangerand guard against it. Some of the opium and morphia which reachesthis country is smuggled in; the rest is imported by the bigwholesale drug houses. There is an unlimited supply of it. As wehave seen, the British Government encourages poppy production,even to the extent of lending money without interest toall those who are willing to raise this most profitable crop. Themonopoly opium is sold once a month to the highest bidders, andsome of these highest bidders are unscrupulous men who must findtheir markets how and where they can. That fact, of course, is ofno moment to the British Government. It is of deepest concern toAmericans, however. To the north of us we have the Dominion ofCanada. To the south, the No-Man's Land of Mexico. At the presentmoment, the whole country is alarmed at the growing menace of thedrug habit, which is assuming threatening proportions. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-33IA030-000641-B026-142http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140933 text/html 6063HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:09:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:11 GMTContent-length: 5846 The Indian Opium Monopoly Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE II -- THE INDIAN OPIUM MONOPOLY LET us quote from another dry officialrecord, of unimpeachable veracity-the Statesman's YearBook, for1916. On page 140, under the heading of The BritishEmpire: India and Dependencies, we read: "Opium. In Britishterritory the cultivation of the poppy for the production ofopium is mainly restricted to the United Provinces, and themanufacture of the opium from this region is a State monopoly. Alimited amount is also grown in the Punjab for local consumptionand to produce poppy seeds. In the monopoly districts thecultivator receives advances from Government to enable him toprepare the land for the crop, and he is bound to sell the wholeof the produce at a fixed price to Government agents, by whom itis despatched to the Government factory at Ghazipur to beprepared for the market. The chests of manufactured opium aresold by auction in Calcutta at monthly sales. A reserve is keptin hand to supply the deficiencies of bad seasons, and aconsiderable quantity is distributed by the Indian excisedepartments. Opium is also grown in many of the Native States ofRajaputana and Central India. These Native States have agreed toconform to the British system. No 6 opiummay pass from them into British territory for consumption withoutpayment of duty. "The bulk of the exports of opium from India has been toChina. By arrangements with that country, the first one being inI907, the exports from India have been limited, and provisionmade for the cessation of the export to China when the nativeChinese production of opium shall be suppressed. The trade withChina is now practically suspended." The important things to notice in the above statement arethese: The growing of poppies, the manufacture of opium, and themonthly auction sales continue. Also, the opium trade with Chinais practically at an end. The history of the opium traffic inChina is a story complete in itself and will be dealt with inanother chapter. At present, we must notice that the trade withChina is practically suspended, but that the British Governmentis still auctioning off, once a month at Calcutta, greatquantities of opium. Where does this opium go--who are theconsumers? If not to China, then where? The same reliable authority, the Statesman's Year-Book for1918, has this to say on the subject. On page 130 we read:" Opium: In British territory the cultivation of the poppyfor the production of opium is practically confined to the UnitedProvinces, and the manufacture of opium from this region is aState monopoly. The bulk of the exported opium is at presenteither sent to the United Kingdom, or supplied direct to theGovernments of consuming countries in the Far East; a certainquantity is also sold by auction in Calcutta at monthly sales.Opium is also grown in many of the Native States of Rajputana andCentral India, which have agreed to conform to the Britishsystem." The following tables, taken from most reliableauthority, give some idea of the exports to the "consumingcountries of the Far East." Note that Japan began buyingopium in 1911-122. We shall have somethingto say about the Japanese smuggling later. Also note that it wasin 1907 that Great Britain and China entered intoagreement, the outcome to be the suppression of the opium tradein China. But see the increasing imports into the treaty ports;up till almost the very last moment British opium being pouredinto China. In the second table, observe the increasingimportation into England, (United Kingdom), synchronous with theincreased exports to Japan, which will be discussed later. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B23-34IA030-000641-B026-154http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140941 text/html 11024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:09:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:06 GMTContent-length: 10806 Japan as an Opium Distributor Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE III -- JAPAN AS AN OPIUM DISTRIBUTOR IN an article which appeared in the NewYork Times, under date of February 14, 1919, we read:"A charge that the Japanese Government secretly fosters themorphia traffic in China and other countries in the Far East ismade by a correspondent in the North China Herald in itsissue of December 21st last. The correspondent assertsthat the traffic has the financial support of the Bank of Japan,and that the Japanese postal service in China aids, although'Japan is a signatory to the agreement which forbids the importinto China of morphia or of any appliances used in itsmanufacture or application.' "Morphia no longer can be purchased in Europe, thecorrespondent writes. The seat of industry has been transferredto Japan, and morphia is now manufactured by the Japanesethemselves. Literally, tens of millions of yen are transferredannually from China to Japan for the payment of Japanese morphia.. . . "In South China, morphia is sold by Chinese peddlers,each of whom carries a passport certifying that he is a native ofFormosa, and therefore entitled to Japanese protection. Japanesedrug stores throughout China carry large stocks of morphia.Japanese medicine vendors look to morphia for their largestprofits. Wherever Japanese are predominant, there the tradeflourishes. Through Dairen, morphia circulates throughoutManchuria and the province adjoining; through Tsingtao, morphiais distributed over Shantung province, Anhui, and Kiangsu, whilefrom Formosa morphia is carried with opium and other contrabandby motor-driven fishing boats to some point on the mainland, fromwhich it is distributed throughout the province of Fukien and thenorth of Kuangtung. Everywhere it is sold by Japanese underextra-territorial protection." The article is rather long, and proves beyond doubt theexistence of a well-organized and tremendous smuggling business,by means of which China is being deluged with morphia. In thebody of the article we find this paragraph: "While the morphia traffic is large, there is everyreason to believe that the opium traffic upon which Japan isembarking with enthusiasm, is likely to prove even morelucrative. In the Calcutta opium sales, Japan has become oneof the considerable purchasers of Indian opium. . . . Soldby the Government of India, this opium is exported under permitsapplied for by the Japanese Government, is shipped to Kobe,and from Kobe is transshipped to Tsingtao. Large profits are madein this trade, in which are interested some of the leading firmsof Japan." This article appears to be largely anti-Japanese. In fact,more anti-Japanese than anti-opium. Anti Japanese sentiment inAmerica is played upon by showing up the Japanese as smugglers ofopium. The part the British Government plays in this traffic isnot emphasized. "In the Calcutta opium sales, Japan hasbecome one of the considerable purchasers of Indian opium . . .sold by the Government of India." We are asked to condemnthe Japanese, who purchase their stocks of opium as individuals,and who distribute it in the capacity of smugglers. We are notasked to censure the British Government which produces,manufactures and sells this opium as a State monopoly. We areasked to denounce the Japanese and their nefarious smuggling andshameful traffic, but the source of supply, which depends uponthese smugglers as customers at the monthly auctions, is abovereproach. A delicate ethical distinction. However, there is no doubt that the Japanese are ardentsmugglers. In an article in the March, 1919, number of"Asia" by Putnam Weale, we find the following bit: *"At all ports where Japanese commissioners of MaritimeCustoms (in China) hold office, it is undeniable that centres ofcontraband trade have been established, opium and its derivativesbeing so openly smuggled that the annual net import of Japanesemorphia (although this trade is forbidden by InternationalConvention) is now said to be something like 20 tons ayear-sufficient to poison a whole nation." * " A Fair Chance for Asia," byPutnam Weale, page 227. Mr. Weale is an Englishman, therefore more anti-Japanese thananti-opium. We do not recall any of his writings in which heprotests against the opium trade as conducted by his Government,nor the part his Government plays in fostering and encouragingit. However, there are other Englishmen who see the situation in amore impartial light, and who are equally critical of both GreatBritain and Japan. In his book, Trade Politics and Christianityin Africa and the East," by A. J. Macdonald, M. A., formerlyof Trinity College, Cambridge, we find the facts presented withmore balance. Thus, on page 229: ". . . In the north ofChina another evil is springing up. The eradication of the opiumhabit is being followed by the development of the morphiatraffic. . . . The morphia habit in northern China, especiallyManchuria, is already widespread. The Chinese Government is alertto the evil, but their efforts to repress it are hampered by theaction of traders, mainly Japanese, who elude the restrictionsimposed by the Chinese and Japanese Governments. . . . China isbeing drenched with morphia. It is incredible that anythingapproaching the amount could possibly be devoted to legitimatepurposes. It is said that in certain areas coolies are to be seencovered all over with needle punctures.' An injection of the drugcan be obtained for three or four cents. In Newchang 2,000 Victimsof the morphia habit died in the winter of 1914-15. Morphiacarries off its victims far more rapidly than opium. . . .Morphia is not yet manufactured in any appreciable quantities inthe East, and certainly even Japan cannot yet manufacture thehypodermic injectors by means of which the drug is received. Thebulk of the manufacture takes place in England, Germany andAustria. . . . In this traffic, two firms in Edinburgh and one inLondon are engaged. The trade is carried on through Japaneseagents. The Board of Trade returns show that the export ofmorphia from Great Britain to the East has risen enormouslyduring the last few years. 1911 - 5.5 tons 1912 - 7.5 tons 1913 - 11.25 1914 -- 14 The freedom which allows three British firms to supply Chinawith morphia for illicit purposes is a condemnation of EnglishChristianity. This book of Mr. Macdonald's was published in 1916. Mr.Weale's article was published in 1919, in which he speaksof an importation of about twenty tons of morphia. Apparently thethree British firms which manufacture morphia, two in Edinburghand one in London are still going strong. Japan, however, appearsto be growing impatient with all this opprobrium cast upon her asthe distributor of drugs, especially since much of the outcryagainst this comes from America. Our own country seems to beassisting in this traffic in a most extensive manner. The JapanSociety Bulletin No. 60 calls attention to this: NEW TURN IN MORPHIA TRAFFIC The morphia traffic in China has taken a new turn, accordingto the Japan Advertiser. It quotes Putnam Weale to theeffect that whilst in recent years the main distributors havebeen Japanese, the main manufacturers have been British. Themorphia has been exported in large quantities from Edinburgh toJapan, but as the result of licensing the exports of this drugfrom Great Britain, the shipments to Japan dropped from 6oo,229 ounces in 1917 to one-fourth that amountin 1918. The Japan Chronicle, speaking from"absolutely authentic information," states that 113,000ounces of morphia arrived in Kobe from the United States in thefirst five months of 1919. These figures are not given asthe total shipments received in Kobe, but merely as the quantityof which The Chronicle has actual knowledge. It statesfurther that this morphia is being transhipped in Kobe harbor tovessels bound for China. Dr. Paul S. Reinsch, who has resignedhis post as Minister to China, has stated that he will use everyresource in his power to stop the shipment from America ofmorphia intended for distribution in China, in defiance of theinternational convention which prohibits the sale of the drug inthat country. If sufficient publicity is cast upon the distributors,Japanese, English and American, public sentiment may in time takecognizance of the source of all this mischief, namely, theproducer. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B23-35IA030-000641-B026-187http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141009 text/html 8241HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:09:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:02 GMTContent-length: 8024 The Opium Monopoly - Singapore Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE IV -- SINGAPORE In January, 1917, we found ourselves at Singapore, a Britishdependency, situated at the end of the Malay Peninsula, and oneof the greatest seaports of the Orient. We were stopping at theHotel de l' Europe, a large and first class hotel. The firstmorning at breakfast, the waiter stood beside us, waiting for ourorder. He was a handsome young Malay, dressed in white linenclothes, and wearing a green jade bracelet on one wrist. We gavehim our order and he did not move off. He continued to standquietly beside our chairs, as in a trance. We repeated theorder-one tea, one coffee, two papayas. He continued to standstill beside us, stupidly. Finally he went away. We waited for along time and nothing happened. At last, after a long wait, hereturned and set before us a teapot filled with hot water.Nothing else. We repeated again-tea, coffee, papayas. We said ittwo or three times. Then he went away and came back with sometea. We repeated again, coffee and fruit. Eventually he broughtus some coffee. Finally, after many endeavors, we got the fruit.It all took a long time. We then began to realize that somethingwas the matter with him. He could understand English well enoughto know what orders we were giving him, but he seemed to forgetas soon as he left our sight. We then realized that he wasprobably drugged. It was the same thing every day. In the morninghe was stupid and dull, and could not remember what we told him.By evening his brain was clearer, and at dinner he could rememberwell enough. The effects of whatever he had been taking hadapparently worn off during the day. We learned that the opium trade was freely indulged in, atSingapore, fostered by the Government. Singapore is a large cityof about 300,000 inhabitants, a great number of which areChinese. It has wide, beautiful streets, fine governmentbuildings, magnificent quays and docks-a splendid European cityat the outposts of the Orient. We found that a large part of itsrevenue is derived from the opium traffic-from the sale of opium,and from license fees derived from shops where opium may bepurchased, or from divans where it may be smoked. The customersare mainly Chinese. I wanted to visit these Government-licensed opium shops andopium dens. A friend lent me two servants, as guides. We threegot into rickshaws and went down to the Chinese quarter, wherethere are several hundred of these places, all doing aflourishing business. It was early in the afternoon, but eventhen, trade was brisk. The divans were rooms with wide woodenbenches running round the sides, on which benches, in pairs,sharing a lamp between them, lay the smokers. They purchasedtheir opium on entering, and then lay down to smoke it. Thepackages are little, triangular packets, each containing enoughfor about six smokes. Each packet bears a label, red letters on awhite ground, "Monopoly opium." In one den there was an old man-but you can't tell whether adrug addict is old or not, he looked as they all do, gray andemaciated-but as he caught my eye, he laid down the needle onwhich he was about to cook his pill, and glanced away. I stoodbefore him, waiting for him to continue the process, but he didnot move. "Why doesn't he go on?" I asked my guide. "Heis ashamed to have you see him," came the reply. "But why should he be ashamed?" I asked, "TheBritish Government is not ashamed to sell to him, to encouragehim to drug himself, to ruin himself. Why should he beashamed?" "Nevertheless, he is," replied the guide. "Yousee what he looks like-what he has become. He is not quite so fargone as the others-he is a more recent victim. He still feelsthat he has become degraded. Most of them do not feel that wayafter a while." So we went on and on, down the long street. There was adreadful monotony about it all. House after house of feeble, emaciated, ill wrecks, allsmoking Monopoly Opium, all contributing, by their shame anddegradation, to the revenues of the mighty British Empire. That evening after dinner, I sat on the wide verandah of thehotel, looking over a copy of the "Straits Times." Oneparagraph, a dispatch from London, caught my eye. " Chinesein Liverpool. Reuter's Telegram. London, January 17, 1917Thirty-one Chinese were arrested during police raids last nighton opium dens in Liverpool. Much opium was seized. The police inone place were attacked by a big retriever and by a number ofChinese, who threw boots and other articles from thehouse-top." Coming fresh from a tour of the opium-dens of Singapore, Imust say that item caused some mental confusion. It must also beconfusing to the Chinese. It must be very perplexing to a Chinesesailor, who arrives in Liverpool on a ship from Singapore, tofind such a variation in customs. To come from a part of theBritish Empire where opium smoking is freely encouraged, to GreatBritain itself where such practices are not tolerated. He mustask himself, why it is that the white race is so sedulouslyprotected from such vices, while the subject races are so eagerlyencouraged. It may occur to him that the white race is valuableand must be preserved, and that subject races are not worthprotecting. This double standard of international justice he mustfind disturbing. It would seem, at first glance, as if subjectraces were fair game-if there is money in it. Subject races,dependents, who have no vote, no share in the government and whoare powerless to protect themselves-fair game for exploitation. Is this double-dealing what we mean when we speak of "ourresponsibility to backward nations, 1) or of "the sacredtrust of civilization" or still again when we refer to"the White Man's burden " ? Pondering over these things as I sat on the hotel verandah, Ifinally reached the conclusion that to print such a dispatch asthat in the " Straits Times" was, to say the least,most tactless. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-36IA030-000641-B026-206http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141021 text/html 5031HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:10:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:58 GMTContent-length: 4814 The Straits Settlement Opium Commission Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE V -- THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS OPIUM COMMISSION FROM time to time, certain people in England apparently havequalms as to Great Britain's opium traffic, and from time to timequestions are raised as to whether or not such traffic is morallydefensible. In February, 1909, apparently in answer to suchscruples and questionings on the part of a few, a veryinteresting report was published, "Proceedings of theCommission appointed to Enquire into Matters Relating to the Useof Opium in the Straits Settlements and the Federated MalayStates. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of HisMajesty." This document may be found in the New York PublicLibrary and is well worth careful perusal. This Commission consisted of about a dozen men, some English,some natives of the Straits Settlements. They apparently made anintensive and exhaustive study of the subject, carefullyexamining it from every angle. Countless witnesses appearedbefore them, giving testimony as to the effects of opium upon theindividual. This testimony is interesting, in that it is of acontradictory nature, some witnesses saying that moderate opiumindulgence is nothing worse than indulgence in alcoholicbeverages, and like alcohol, only pernicious if taken to excess.Other witnesses seemed to think that it was most harmful. TheCommission made careful reports as to the manner of licensinghouses for smoking, the system of licensing opium farms, etc.,and other technical details connected with this extensiveGovernment traffic. Finally, the question of revenue wasconsidered, and while the harmfulness of opium smoking was amatter of divided opinion, when it came to revenue there was nodivision of opinion at all. As a means of raising revenue, thetraffic was certainly justifiable. It was proven that about fiftyper cent of the revenues of the Straits Settlements and theFederated Malay States came from the opium trade, and, as wasnaively pointed out, to hazard the prosperity of the Colony bylopping off half its revenues, was an unthinkable proceeding. The figures given are as follows. 1898. Revenue derived from 0pium....45.9 percent 1899 44.8 1900 43.3 1901 53.2 1902 48.3 1903 47.1 1904 59.1 1905 46. 1906 53.3 There was one dissenting voice as to the conclusions reachedby this Opium Commission, that of a Bishop who presented aminority report. But what are moral scruples against cold factsthat there's money in the opium trade? This Commission made its report in 1909. But the opiumbusiness is apparently still flourishing in the StraitsSettlements. Thus we read in the official Blue Book for 1917,"Colony of the Straits Settlements " that of the totalrevenue for the year, $18,672,104, that $9,182,000 came fromopium. What per cent is that? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B23-37IA030-000641-B026-222http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141031 text/html 6267HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:10:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:54 GMTContent-length: 6050 Opium in Siam Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VI --OPIUM IN SIAM BANGKOK, Siam, January, 1917- Siam, an independent kingdom. Asa matter of fact, "protected" very sternly andthoroughly by Great Britain and France, so that its"independence" would about cover an oyster cracker.However, it is doubtless protected "benevolently" forwhat protectorate is anything but benevolent? The more rigorousthe protectorate, the more benevolent its character. The PeaceConference seems to have given us a new word in"mandatory." We do not know as yet what adjective willbe found to qualify mandatory, but it will doubtless be fittingand indicative of idealism-of sorts. Therefore, all will be well.Our suspicions will be lulled. It is high time that a substitutewas found for "benevolent protectorate." The particular form of benevolence noted in Siam was the totalinability of the Siamese to exclude British opium. They areallowed, by the benevolent powers, to impose an import duty onall commodities imported except opium. That is free. The treatybetween Siam and Great Britain in 1856 says so. We rather fancythat Great Britain had more to say about this in 1856 than Siambut maybe not. Anyway poor old Siam, an independent kingdom, isbound to receive as much opium as may be imported, and is quitepowerless, by the terms of this treaty, to enact laws to excludeit. In the last year or two, the Government of Siam has beenobliged to put the opium traffic under government control, inorder to minimize the worst evils in connection with it, althoughto restrict and regulate an evil is a poor substitute for theability to abolish it. All this, you will see, is rather tough on the Siamese, butgood business for the British Empire. However, opium is not bad for one. There are plenty of peopleto testify to that. We Americans have a curious notion to thecontrary, but then, we Americans are so hysterical and gullible.An Englishman whom we met in Bangkok told me that opium was notonly harmless, but actually beneficial. He said once that he wastraveling through the jungle, into the interior somewhere. He hadquite a train of coolies with him, carrying himself and hisbaggage through the dense forests. By nightfall, he found hiscoolies terribly exhausted with the long march. But he was in ahurry to press on, so, as he expressed it, he gave each of them a"shot" of morphia, whereupon all traces of fatiguevanished. They forgot the pain of their weary arms and legs andwere thus enabled to walk all night. He said that morphiacertainly knocked a lot of work out of men-you might say, doubledtheir capacity for endurance. The night we left Bangkok, we got aboard the boat at aboutnine in the evening. The hatch was open, and we looked into thehold upon a crowd of coolies who had been loading sacks of riceaboard the ship. There they lay upon the rice sacks, two or threedozen of them, all smoking opium. Two coolies to a lamp. I ratherwondered that a lamp did not upset and set the boat on fire, butthey are made of heavy glass, with wide bottoms, so that thechances of overturning them are slight. So we leaned over theopen hatch, looking down at these little fellows, resting andrecuperating themselves after their work, refreshing themselvesfor the labor of the morrow. Opium is wonderful, come to think of it. But why, since it isso beneficial and so profitable, confine it to the downtroddenraces of the world? Why limit it to the despised races, who havenot sense enough to govern themselves anyway? The following figures are taken from the Statistical YearBooks for the Kingdom of Siam: Foreign trade and navigation of the port of Bangkok, importsof opium: 1911-12 1,270 chests of opium 1912-13 1,775 1913-14 1,186 1 914-15 2,000 Imported from India and Singapore. 1915-16 2,000 1916-17 1,100 1917-18 1,850 Also, from the same source, we find the number of retail opiumshops: 1912-13 2,985 1913-14 3,075 1914-15 3,132 1915-16 3,104 1916-17 3,111 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-38IA030-000641-B026-245http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141047 text/html 7351HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:10:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:50 GMTContent-length: 7134 The Opium Monopoly - Hong Kong Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VII -- HONGKONG The Crown Colony of Hongkong was ceded by China to GreatBritain in January, 1841; the cession was confirmed by the treatyof Nanking in August, 1842; and the charter bears date April 5,1843. Hongkong is the great center for British commerce withChina and Japan, and a military and naval station of first-classimportance." Thus the Statesman's Year Book. This authority, however, omitsto mention just exactly how this important piece of Chineseterritory came to be ceded to Great Britain. It was the rewardthat Great Britain took unto herself as an "indemnity"following the successful prosecution of what is sometimes spokenof as the first opium war-a war of protest on the part of Chinaagainst Great Britain's insistence on her right to deluge Chinawith opium. China's resistance was in vain-her efforts to stemthe tide of opium were fruitless-the might, majesty, dominion andpower of the British Empire triumphed, and China was beaten. Theisland on which Hongkong is situated was at that time a blankpiece of land; but strategically well placed-ninety miles southof the great Chinese city of Canton, the market for Britishopium. The opposite peninsula of Kowloon, on the mainland, was cededto Great Britain by treaty in 1861, and now forms part ofHongkong. By a convention signed at Peking in June, 1898, therewas also leased to Great Britain for 99 years a portion ofChinese territory mainly agricultural, together with the watersof Mirs Bay and Deep Bay, and the island of Lan-tao. Its area is356 square miles, with about 81,000 inhabitants, exclusivelyChinese. Area of Old Kowloon is 3 square miles. Total area ofcolony, 391 square miles. The population of Hongkong, excluding the Military and Navalestablishments, and that portion of the new territory outside NewKowloon, was according to the 1911 census, 366,145 inhabitants.Of this number the Chinese numbered 354,187. This colony is, of course, governed by Great Britain, and isnot subject to Chinese control. Here is situated a Governmentopium factory, and the imports of Indian opium into Hongkong forthe past several years are as follows: 1903-4 3,576,431 pounds sterling 1904-5 4,036,436 1905-6 3,775,82.6 1906-7 3,771,409 1907-8 3,145,403 1908-9 2,230,755 1909-10 3,377,222 1910-11 3,963,264 pounds sterling 1911-12 3,018,858 1912-13 2,406,084 1913-14 1,084,093 1914--15 110,712 These figures are taken from "Statistical AbstractRelating to British India, 1905-6 to 1915," and "Statistical Abstract Relating to British India, 1903-4 to1912-13." The falling off in imports of opium noticed in1914-15 may be due to the war, lack of shipping, etc., or to thefact that the China market was due to close on April 1, 1917. Theclosing of the China market 400,000,000 of people destined nolonger to have opium supplied to them (except illegally, bysmuggling, etc.) is naturally a big blow to the British opiuminterests. That is where the menace to the rest of the worldcomes in. Opium has been proved such a profitable commodity, thatif one market is shut off, others must be found as substitutes.The idea of closing the trade altogether naturally does notappeal to those who profit by it. Therefore, what we should hailat first sight as a welcome indication of a changed moralsentiment, is in reality but the pause which proceeds the castingabout for new markets, for finding new peoples to drug. The Colonial Report No. 972, Hongkong Report for 1917, givesthe imports and exports of opium: Page 7- "The imports and exports of certified opium during theyear as follows: Imports......... 7 chests Export.......... 224 chests Of these, however, the imports all come from Shanghai, and ofthe total export Of 224 chests, 186 went to Shanghai." Opium received from other sources than Shanghai makes a bettershowing. " Seven hundred and forty chests of Persian opiumimported during the year, and seven hundred and forty-fiveexported to Formosa. Nine hundred and ten chests of uncertifiedIndian opium were imported: Four hundred and ten chests by theGovernment Monopoly, and the remaining five hundred for the Macaoopium farmer." Macao is a small island off the coast of China, near Canton-aPortuguese settlement, owned by Portugal for several centuries,where the opium trade is in full blast. But somehow, one does notexpect so much of Portugal. The most significant feature of theabove paragraph, however, lies in the reference to theimportation of Persian opium. " Seven hundred and fortychests of Persian opium imported." Query, who owns Persia? Nevertheless, in spite of this poor showing, in spite of thedecrease in opium importation as compared with the balmy days,all is not lost. The Crown Colony of Hongkong still continues todo an active trade. In the Colonial Office List for 1917, on page218, we read: "Hongkong. Revenue: About one-third of therevenue is derived from the Opium Monopoly." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-39IA030-000641-B026-268http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141059 text/html 4617HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:10:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:47 GMTContent-length: 4400 The Opium Monopoly - Sarawak Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VIII -- SARAWAK NEAR British North Borneo. Area, 42,000 square miles, manyrivers navigable. The government of part of the present territorywas obtained in 1842 by Sir James Brooke from the Sultan ofBrunei. Various accessions were made between 1861, 1885, and188o. The Rajah, H. H. Sir Charles Johnson Brooke, G. C.M.G.,nephew to the late Rajah, born June 3, 1829, succeeded in 1868.Population estimated at 500,000, Malays, Dyaks, Kayans, Kenyahs,and Muruts, with Chinese and other settlers. Thus the Statesman's Year Book, to which we would add aparagraph from an article in the National Geographic Magazine forFebruary, 1919. Under the title: "Sarawak: The Land of theWhite Rajahs" we read: "With the recent death of SirCharles Brooke, G. C. M. G., the second of the white rajahs ofSarawak, there came to an end one of the most useful and unusualcareers among the many that have done credit to British rule inthe Far East. For nearly 49 years he governed, as absolutesovereign, a mixed population of Chinese, Malays, and numerouspagan tribes scattered through the villages and dense jungles ofan extensive territory on the northwest coast of Borneo. " Constant solicitude for the welfare of his people wonthe sympathy and devotion which enabled this white man, supportedby an insignificant army and police, to establish the peacefuloccupations of civilization in place of barbarous tyranny andoppression." How thoroughly this "civilizing" process wasaccomplished may be judged somewhat by turning to the ColonialOffice List for 19I7, where on page 436 we read: "Sarawak:The principal sources of revenue are the opium, gambling, pawnshops, and arrack, producing: 1908 $483,019 1909 460,416 1910 385,070 1911 420,151 1912 426,867 1913 492,455 In the Statesman's Year Book for 1916 we find the totalrevenue for this well-governed little colony as follows, givenhowever in pounds sterling, instead of dollars, as in the abovetable. Thus: Revenue-1910 221,284 pounds sterling 1911I 159,456 1912 175,967 1913 210,342 1914 208,823 It would seem as if forty-nine years of constant solicitudefor the welfare of a people, establishing the peacefuloccupations of civilization, might have resulted in somethingbetter than a revenue derived from opium, gambling, pawn shopsand arrack. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-40IA030-000641-B026-287http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141105 text/html 10494HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:10:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:43 GMTContent-length: 10276 The Opium Monopoly - Shanghai Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE IX -- SHANGHAI IN the New York Library there is an interesting little book,about a quarter of an inch thick, and easy reading. It isentitled: "Municipal Ethics: Some Facts and Figures from theMunicipal Gazette, 1907-1914. An Examination of the Opium Licensepolicy of the Shanghai Municipality. In an Open Letter to theChairman of the Council, by Arnold Foster, Wuchang. For 42 yearsMissionary to the Chinese." Shanghai, being a Treaty Port, is of two parts. The native orShanghai city, under the control and administration of theChinese. And the foreign concessions, that part of the city underthe control and administration of foreigners. This is generallyknown as the International Settlement (also called the modelsettlement), and the Shanghai Municipal Council is theadministrative body. Over this part the Chinese have no control.In 1907, when China began her latest fight against the opiumevil, she enacted and enforced drastic laws prohibiting opiumsmoking and opium selling on Chinese soil, but was powerless toenforce these laws on "foreign" soil. In the foreignconcessions, the Chinese were able to buy as much opium as theypleased, merely by stepping over an imaginary line, into aportion of the town where the rigid anti-opium laws of China didnot apply. Says Mr. Arnold, in his Open Letter: "It will be seenthat the title of the pamphlet, Municipal Ethics, describes asituation which is a complex one. It concerns first the actualattitude of the Shanghai Municipal Council towards the Chinesenational movement for the suppression of the use of opium. This,we are assured by successive Chairmen of the Council, has beenone of "sincere sympathy...... the greatest sympathy,"and more to the same effect. Certainly no one would have guessedthis from the facts and figures reproduced in this pamphlet fromthe columns of the " Municipal Gazette." "The second element in the ethical situation is theactual attitude of the Council not only towards the Chinesenational movement, but also towards its own official assurances,protestations and promises. "It is on this second branch of the subject before usthat I specially desire to focus attention, and for the factshere stated that I would bespeak the most searching examination.The protestations of the Council as to its own virtuous attitudein regard to opium reform in China are made the more emphatic,and also the more open to criticism, by being coupled with somevery severe insinuations made at the time, as to the insincerityand unreliability of the Chinese authorities in what they wereprofessing, and in what they were planning to do in the samematter of opium reform. It so happens, as the event proves, thatthese sneers and insinuations were not only quite uncalled for,but were absolutely and utterly unjust. When a comparison isinstituted between (a) 'official pronouncements' made two yearsago by the Chinese authorities as to what they then intended todo for the suppression of the opium habit, and (b) the 'actualadministrative results' that in the meanwhile have beenaccomplished, the Chinese have no cause to be ashamed of theverdict of impartial judges. What they have done may not alwayshave been wise, it may sometimes have been very stern, but theoutcome has been to awaken the astonishment and admiration of thewhole civilized world! When, on the other hand, a comparison isinstituted between (a) the fine professions and assurances of theShanghai Municipal Council made six or seven years ago as to itsown attitude towards the 'eradication of the opium evil' and (b)the 'actual administrative results' of the Council's ownproceedings, the feelings awakened are of very different order.Here, not to mention any other consideration, two hard factsstare one in the face: First, in October, 1907, there wereeighty-seven licensed opium shops in the InternationalSettlement. In May, 1914, there were six hundred and sixty-three.In 1907 the average monthly revenue from opium licenses, dens andshops combined, was Taels 5,450- In May, 1914, the revenue fromlicenses and opium shops alone was Taels 10,995. The Council willnot dispute these figures." At the beginning of the anti-opium campaign in 1907, therewere 700 dens (for smoking) in the Native City, and 1600 in theInternational Settlement. The Chinese closed their dens and shopsat once. In the Settlement, the dens were not all closed untiltwo years later, and the number of shops in the Settlementincreased by leaps and bounds. Table I shows an outline of theMunicipal opium-shop profits concurrent with the closing of theopium houses-and subsequently: Year Month Dens Shops Monthly revenue, shops only 1908 Jan. 1436 87 Taels, 338 Oct. 1005 131 623 1909 Jan. 599 166 1,887 Oct. 297 231 2,276 1910 Oct. Closed 306 5,071 1911 Oct. 348 5,415 1912 Nov. 402 5,881 1913 Dec. 560 8,953 1914 March 628 10,111 April 654 10,772 Mr. Arnold quotes part of a speech made by the Chairman of theMunicipal Council, in March, 1908. The Chairman says in part:"The advice which we have received from the BritishGovernment is, in brief, that we should do more than keep pacewith the native authorities, we should be in advance of them, andwhere possible, encourage them to follow us." It must havebeen most disheartening to the native authorities, suppressingthe opium traffic with the utmost rigor, to see their effortsdefied and nullified by the increased opportunities for obtainingopium in that part of Shanghai over which the Chinese have nocontrol. A letter from a Chinese to a London paper, gives theChinese point of view: "China . . . is obliged to submit tothe ruthless and heartless manner in which British merchants,under the protection of the Shanghai 'Model Settlement' areexploiting her to the fullest extent of their ability." There is lots of money in opium, however. The following tablescompiled by Mr. Arnold show the comparison between the amountderived from opium licenses as compared with the amount derivedfrom other sorts of licenses. 1913. Wheelbarrows Taels, 38,670 Carts 22,944 Motor cars 12,376 Cargo boats.... . . .. 5,471 Chinese boats 4,798 Steam launches.... . 2,221 Total, 86,480 Opium shops 86,386 Opium, 86,3 86 Another table shows the licensed institutions in Shanghairepresenting normal social life (chiefly of the Chinese) ascompared with revenue from opium shops: 1913. Tavern Taels, 16,573 Foreign liquor seller.. 19,483 Chinese wine shop.... 28,583 "" tea shop.... 9,484 "" theater. . . . . 8,74 "" club 3,146 Total.. 85,983 Opium shops 86,386 Treaty Ports are those cities in China, in which the foreignpowers have extra-territorial holdings, not subject to Chinesejurisdiction. Shanghai is one of them, the largest and mostimportant. The Statistical Abstract Relating to British India forI903-4 to I912-I3 shows the exports of British opium into theseTreaty Ports. 1903-4 1,610,296 pounds sterling 1904-5 1,504,604 1905-6 1,130,372 1906-7 1,031,065 1907-8 1,215,142 1908-9 2,703,871 1909-10 1,234,432 1910-11 2,203,670 1911-12 3,64,887 1912-13 3,242,902 It was in 1907 that China began her great fight against theopium evil, and enacted stringent laws for its prohibition onChinese soil. On page 15 of his little book, Mr. Arnold quotesfrom Commissioner Carl, of Canton: "The 1912 figure (for theimportation of foreign opium) is the largest on record since1895. The great influx of Chinese into the foreign concessions,where the antiopium smoking regulations cannot be enforced by theChinese authorities, and where smoking can be indulged in withoutfear of punishment, no doubt accounts for the unusual increaseunder foreign opium." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B23-41IA030-000641-B027-9http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141122 text/html 11978HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:11:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:41 GMTContent-length: 11760 The Opium Monopoly - India Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE X -- INDIA INDIA is the source and fount of the British opium trade, andit is from Indian opium that the drug is chiefly supplied to theworld. As we have said before, it is a government monopoly.Cultivators, who wish to plant poppies, may borrow money from theGovernment free of interest, the sole condition being that thecrop be sold back to the Government again. It is manufacturedinto opium at the Government factory at Ghazipur, and once amonth, the Government holds auctions at Calcutta, by means ofwhich the drug finds its way into the trade channels of theworld-illicit and otherwise.* *This description of the Opium Department is to be found inStatistics of British India, Financial Statistics, Vol. 11, 8thIssue, page 159: OPIUM. The region in which the poppy was cultivated in 1916-17for the manufacture of "Bengal opium" comprises 32districts of the United Provinces of Agra and Ouhd. The wholeDepartment has, with effect from the 29th September, 1910, beenunder the control of one Opium Agent, with headquarters atGhazipur. At Ghazipur there is a Government factory where thecrude opium is manufactured into the form in which it passes intoconsumption. The cultivation of the poppy and the manufacture ofopium are regulated by Act XIII of 1857, as amended by Act I of1911, and are under the general control of the LieutenantGovernor and the Board of Revenue of the United Provinces, andthe immediate supervision of the Opium Agent at Ghazipur. Thepossession, transport, import and export of opium are regulatedby rules framed under the Indian Opium Act. Cultivation ispermitted only under licenses granted under the authority of theOpium Agent. The area to be cultivated is fixed by the license,and the cultivator is bound to sell the whole of his productionto the Opium Department at the rate fixed by Government..........Advances, on which no interest is charged, are given to licensedcultivators at the time of executing the agreement and from timeto time (though ordinarily no more than two advances are given)until final delivery. In March, April and May the opium is madeover to the officers of the Department, and weighed and tested,and as soon as possible afterwards each cultivator's accounts areadjusted, and the balance due is paid him. After weighment theopium is forwarded to the Government factory at Ghazipur, whereit is manufactured in 3 forms-(a) opium intended for export toforeign countries, departmentally known as "provisionopium"(b) opium intended for consumption in India and Burma,departmentally known as "excise opium" and (c) medicalopium for export to London. Provision opium is made up in theform of balls or cakes, each weighing 3.5 lbs., and is packed inchests, each chest containing forty cakes, weighing 140 1/7 lbs.It is generally of 71' efficiency. Excise opium is made up incubical packets, each weighing one seer, 60 of which are packedin a case. It is of higher consistency than the "provisionopium." Medical opium is made up into cakes weighing 2 lbs.Provision opium is sold by public auction in Calcutta. Anotification is published annually, generally about the month ofJune, stating the number of chests which will be put up for salein each month of the next calendar year, and the quantities sonotified are not altered without three months notice. Sales areconducted month by month by the Bengal Government; 7,000 chestswere notified for sale in 1917 for shipment to non-China markets.The number of chests actually sold was 4,615. In addition tothis, 4,500 chests were sold to the Government of the StraitsSettlements, 2,200 to the Government of Netherland Indies, and 00to the Government of Hongkong. The duty levied by Government oneach chest may be taken to be the difference between the averageprice realized and the average cost. The following facts are taken from " Statistics ofBritish India. Financial Statistics, Volume II,EighthIssue," to be found at the New York Public Library: AREA UNDER POPPY CULTIVATION Acreage: 1910-11 362,868 1911-12 200,672 1912-13 178,263 1913-14 144,561 1914-15 164,911 1915-16 167,155 1916-17 204,186 In the hey-day of the China trade, 613,996 acres were undercultivation in the years 1905-6, consequently this is a drop inthe extent of acreage. But, as we have said before, the closingof the China market simply means that other outlets must befound, and apparently they are being found, since from I914onwards, the acreage devoted to poppy planting is slowlyincreasing again. The opium manufactured in the Government factory is of threekinds-provision opium for export; excise opium, for consumptionin India, and medical opium, for export to London. It is thislatter form of opium which, according to Mr. MacDonald, in his"Trade Politics and Christianity in Africa and theEast" is being manufactured into morphia by three Britishfirms, two in Edinburgh and one in London, which morphia theJapanese are buying and smuggling into North China. The "Statistics of British India" shows thecountries into which Indian opium has been exported: we will takethe figures for the last five years, which show the number ofchests sent out. In some countries we see a falling off, as in China.Cochin-China, the French colony, shows a considerableincrease--the little Annarnites, Tonquinese, Cambodgians andother inhabitants of this colony of the French Republic beingshown what's what. Mauretius, a British Colony five hundred milesoff the coast of Madagascar, in the Indian ocean, seems to becoming on. The falling off in shipments to the United Kingdom maypossibly have been due to the war and the scarcity of ships."Other countries" seem to be holding their own. Withthe end of the war, the increase in ships, and general traderevival, we may yet see compensation for the loss of China. Withthe increase of drug addicts in the United States, it may be thatin time America will no longer be classed under "othercountries" but will have a column all to itself. In another table we find a comparison as to the number ofchests of provision or export opium and of excise opium, or thatintended for consumption in India. Thus: Each chest contains roughly about one hundred and fortypounds. REVENUE The revenue of India is derived from various sources, and isclassified under eight heads. Thus: for 1916-17- Out of these eight classifications, opium comes fourth on thelist. But in addition to the direct opium revenue, we must addanother item, Excise, which is found under the third heading,taxation. In the "India Office List for i9i8" we find"Excise" explained as follows: Page 383: "Exciseand Customs: Excise duties in India are levied with the two foldobject of raising revenue and restricting the use of intoxicantsand narcotics." In the same book, on page 385, we also read:"Excise and Customs Revenues: The total of the excise andcustoms revenues on liquors and drugs in i 9 i 5-i 6 was in roundfigures ten million pounds. This total gives an average of rathermore than ninepence a head on the whole population of BritishIndia as the revenue charge on drink and drugs during theyear." These excise duties are collected on spirits, beer, opium andintoxicating drugs, such as ganja, charas, and bhang, all formsor preparations of Indian hemp (Cannabis Indica), known in somecountries as hashish. In 1917-18 there were 17,369 drug shopsthroughout India. The excise duties collected from these sourceswas pretty evenly distributed. Excise revenue for a period ofyears is as follows: The "Statistics of British India for 1918" has thisto say on the subject of Excise (page 218): "Revenue: Duringthe ten years ending with 1916-17 the net receipts from Exciseduties increased . . . at the rate of 47 per cent. The receiptsfrom opium (consumed in India, not exported) being at the rate of44 per cent. The net receipts from liquors and from drugs otherthan opium . . . the increase at the rate Of 48 per cent. Thislarge increase is due not merely to the expansion of consumption,but also to the imposition of progressively higher rates of dutyand the increasingly extensive control of the exciseadministration. The revenue from drugs, (excluding opium) hasrisen in ten years . . . the increase being at the rate of 67 percent." A national psychology that can review these figures withcomplacency, satisfaction and pride is not akin to Americanpsychology. A nation that can subjugate 300,000,000 helplesspeople, and then turn them into drug addicts-for the sake ofrevenue is a nation which commits a cold blooded atrocityunparalleled by any atrocities committed in the rage and heat ofwar. The Blue Book shows no horror at these figures. Complacentapproval greets the increase of 44 per cent of opium consumption,and the increase of 67 per cent in the use of other habit-formingdrugs. Approval, and a shrewd appreciation of the possibilitiesfor more revenue from "progressively higher rates ofduty," knowing well that drug addicts will sell soul andbody in order to procure their daily supply. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B23-42IA030-000641-B027-21http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141131 text/html 3944HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:11:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:37 GMTContent-length: 3727 The Opium Monopoly -- Turkey and Persia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XI -- TURKEY AND PERSIA NEXT to India, the greatest two opium-producing countries inthe world are Turkey and Persia. The Statesman's Year Book for1918 has this to say about it. On page 1334: "The principalexports from Turkey into the United Kingdom..... in two yearswere: These are the only articles mentioned in this list of chiefexports. There are others, doubtless, but the Statesman's YearBook is a condensed and compact little volume, dealing only withthe principal things exported. In i9i5 we therefore notice thatthe opium export was second on the list, being exceeded by butone other, dried fruit. In i9i6, the third year of the war, theopium export is decidedly less, as are all the other articlesexported, except dried fruit and wool-which were articlesprobably more vital to the United Kingdom at that time even thanopium. PERSIA THE same authority, the Statesman's Year Book for 1918, givesa table on page 1162, showing the value of the chief exports fromPersia. The values are given in thousands of kran, sixty kranequaling one pound sterling. Since the war, both Turkey and Persia are more or less undercontrol of the British Empire, which gives Great Britain virtualcontrol of the world's output of opium. With this monopoly of theopium-producing countries, and with a million or so square milesadded to her immense colonial Empire, one wonders what use GreatBritain will make of the mandatory powers she has assumed overthe lives and welfare of all these subject peoples! Will she findthese helpless millions ready for her opium trade? Will sheestablish opium shops, and opium divans, and reap half the costsof upkeep of these newly acquired states by means of thisshameful traffic? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-43IA030-000641-B027-44http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141138 text/html 3761HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:11:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:33 GMTContent-length: 3544 The Opium Monopoly - Mauretius Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XII - MAURETIUS ANOTHER British colony is Mauretius, acquired by conquest in1810, and formally ceded to Great Britain by the Treaty of Parisin 1814. This island is in the Indian Ocean, 500 miles east ofMadagascar, with an area of about 720 square miles. Thepopulation is about 377,000, of which number 258,000 are Indian,and 3,000 Chinese. Opium appears to be sold in the colony, sincethe Blue Book mentions that licenses are required for opiumsellers. As far as we can discover, by perusal of theseGovernment Reports, the sale of opium is not conducted by theGovernment itself, as in India, the Straits Settlements,Hongkong, etc., but is carried on by private dealers who obtainlicenses before they can open opium shops. A part of the revenue,however, is derived from opium; thus, according to the Blue Bookfor the Colony of Mauretius for 1915, page V 73, we read that theimports of opium for the year amounted to 1,353 kilos, with aduty collected of 54,126 rupees. The Blue Book for 1916 shows agratifying increase. Thus, the import of crude opium from Indiaamounted to 5,690 kilos, with a duty collected of 227,628 rupees.(See page V 64-) Statistics for British India, Eighth Issue, gives thesefigures: OPIUM EXPORTED TO MAURETIUS 1912-13 -- 10 chests 1913-14 -- 19 1914-15 -- 23 1915-16 -- 65 1916-17. -- 120 This is a poor little colony, but has its possibilities. Theconsumption of opium appears to be increasing steadily in a mostsatisfactory manner. Congratulations all round. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-44IA030-000641-B027-67http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om13.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141147 text/html 6493HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:11:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:30 GMTContent-length: 6276 The Opium Monopoly - British North Borneo Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XIII - BRITISH NORTH BORNEO BRITISH North Borneo occupies the northern part of the islandof Borneo. Area, about 31,000 square miles, with a coast line ofover 800 miles. Population (1911 census), 208,000, consistingmainly of Mohammedan settlers on the coast and aboriginal tribesinland. The Europeans numbered 355; Chinese 26,000; Malays,1,612; East Indians about 5,000 and Filipinos 5,700. The numberof natives cannot be more than approximately estimated, but isplaced at about 170,000. The territory is under the jurisdictionof the British North Borneo Company, being held under grants fromthe Sultans of Brunei and Sulu (Royal Charter in 1881). Like many other British colonies, opium is depended upon forpart of the revenue. The Statesman's Year Book for 1916 observeson page 107: "Sources of revenue: Opium, birds' nests, courtfees, stamp duty, licenses, import and export duties, royalties,land sales, etc. No public debt." In this frank manner, our attention is called to opium, whichappears first on the list of sources o revenue. Going over the files of the Government reports, we will beginwith the "Supplement to the Official Gazette for BritishNorth Borneo. Administration Report for the Year 1910."Published June 1, 1911. On page 3 we read: Customs and Trade: Theimport and export trade of the state shows a healthy expansion. .. . It is interesting to note that imports show an increase atevery station. Out of the 47 headings of Tariff, there are only 7which show decreases. . . . The largest increases appear undercloth, $147,106; opium, $132,692, and iron ware, $218,620. . . .The general all round increases . . . are of course due to thedemand for supplies of all kinds in connection with the openingof rubber estates." The Supplement to the Official Gazette, Report for 1912(published in December, 1913) is also a report of generalprosperity. Page 4: "Trade: The volume of trade for the year1912 was $11,139,122, giving an increase over 1911 of 18 percent. . . . Imports: As in 1911, all stations show an increase ofimports. Out Of 47 headings, 33 show increases, 12 showdecreases, and 2 remain stationary. Increases: There was anincrease under rice, flour and grain . . . the increase underother headings include sundries, opium, machinery, etc." The next Government Report is not so happy. Opium imports showno "healthy expansion." Thus, the Supplement to theOfficial Gazette, Report for 1913 (published 1 February, 1915)says on page 4: "Other decreases in imports were opium,$108,18o. The decrease in opium was due to the abolition of theOpium Farm, which also held the Labuan Farm, and opium wastherefore no longer imported from Labuan for use in the WestCoast and the Interior." Still more bad news as to opium, in the report for 1914,(published 1 February, 1916). All imports drop. Page 4 records"Decrease in imports. . . . Railway and telegraph material,rice, flour, grain and opium." In this year the opiumimports only amount to $58,464. This general falling off in allimports may have been due to the war. But the opium situation wasapparently growing serious. On page 17 of this same report weread that "Thirty-two ordinances were passed by the Counciland became laws during the year. Among them the Opium andChandu." The brevity and meagerness of these official reports oftenleave one puzzled as to their meaning. The Supplement to theOfficial Gazette for 1915 (published October, 1916), shows stillmore discouraging news as to opium. Imports that year amounted toonly $31,299. But, in spite of this discouragement, hope stillremains. The same report shows optimism under the head of Excise."Excise: $627,225, against $467,078, an increase in the netrevenue of $160,147, due to Government taking over the solecontrol of the sale of chandu (smoking opium) and the collectionof other Excise duties, formerly farmed." This explains the Ordinance passed by the Council thepreceding year, regarding Opium and Chandu. Since the Governmenthas taken over 44 sole control of the sale of chandu " andwill collect the excise duties systematically and thoroughly, wemay still hope for some future report which will show once more a"healthy expansion" in the opium revenue. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-45IA030-000641-B027-85http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141155 text/html 4798HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:11:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:26 GMTContent-length: 4581 The Opium Monopoly - British Guiana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XIV - BRITISH GUIANA SITUATED in South America. Area, 89,480 square miles.Population at census of 1911, excluding aborigines in theunfrequented parts of the colony, 296,000. The Statesman's YearBook, which gives us these brief facts, has very little to sayabout this British colony in our Western Hemisphere, and gives nodates or information as to how and when it was acquired. TheGovernment reports are also meager and unsatisfactory, and thereis no wealth of detail as to exports and imports. The country,however, is rich in gold, mining having commenced in i886.Diamonds have also been discovered. The chief sources of revenue, however, are customs, excise andlicenses. With the word "excise" we have come to haveunpleasant associations. From "The Statistical Abstract forBritish Self-Governing Dominions, Colonies, Possessions andProtectorates" we find a table showing the imports of opiuminto the various countries under British rule. The opium importsinto British Guiana are as follows: 1910 1,251 pounds sterling 1911 1,270 1912 2,474 1913 4,452 1914 5,455 1915 4,481 These figures would seem to indicate that even on the WesternHemisphere the taste for opium may be cultivated. It need notnecessarily be confined to the Oriental peoples. The populationof much of South America is a mixed lot, the result of mixedbreeding between Spanish settlers, Indians, native tribes of allsorts. All this jumble, including the aborigines referred to,might, with a little teaching become profitable customers of theOpium Monopoly. Time and a little effort, given this fertilefield, ought to produce a "healthy expansion" in theopium trade. And that this insidious habit is indeed taking hold, in atleast one more country in South America, one may infer from thefollowing paragraph which appeared in the New York Times, 4October, 1919: DRUG EVIL IN ARGENTINA Buenos Aires Opens Fight on Use of Narcotics The city government of Buenos Aires, Argentina, has begun adetermined fight to wipe out the drug evil by the enactment ofstringent laws governing the sale of narcotics. This step wastaken after an investigation by the authorities had disclosedthat not only was the narcotic habit strong among the poor, butthat it was spreading throughout virtually every class in thecity. Until the passage of the laws druggists were permitted to sellcocaine, morphine and opium to any purchaser. The new laws forbidthe sale of these drugs except in filling prescriptions preparedby registered physicians. The city also has establisheddispensaries for the treatment of drug addicts. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-46IA030-000641-B027-112http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om15.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141220 text/html 13157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:12:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:22 GMTContent-length: 12939 History of the Opium Trade in China Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XV -- HISTORY OF THE OPIUM TRADE IN CHINA IN a vague way, we are familiar with the "opiumevil" in China, and some of us have hazy ideas as to how itcame about. The China Year Book for 1916 has this to say on thesubject: "The poppy has been known in China for 12centuries, and its medicinal use for 9 centuries. . . . It wasnot until the middle of the 17th century that the practice ofmixing opium with tobacco for smoking purposes was introducedinto China. This habit was indulged in by the Dutch in Java, andby them taken to Formosa, whence it spread to Amoy and themainland generally. There is no record to show when opium wasfirst smoked by itself, but it is thought to have originatedabout the end of the 18th century. Foreign opium was firstintroduced by the Portuguese from Goa at the beginning of the18th century. In 1729, when the foreign import was 200 chests,the Emperor Yung Ching issued the first anti-opium edict,enacting severe penalties on the sale of opium and the opening ofopium-smoking divans. The importation, however, continued toincrease, and by 1790 it amounted to over 4,000 chests annually.In 1796 opium smoking was again prohibited, and in 1800 theimportation of foreign opium was again declared illegal. Opiumwas now contraband, but the fact had no effect on the quantityintroduced into the country, which rose to 5,000 chests in 1820;16,000 chests in 1830; 20,000 chests in 1838, and 70,000 chestsin 1858." The China Year Book makes no mention of the traders whocarried these chests of opium into China. The opium came fromIndia, however, and the increase in importation corresponds withthe British occupation of India, and the golden days of the EastIndia Company. "Opium was now contraband, but that fact hadno effect on the quantity introduced into the country,"smuggled in wholesale by the enterprising British traders. China was powerless to protect herself from this menace,either by protests or prohibition. And as more and more of thedrug was smuggled in, and more and more of the people becamevictims of the habit, the Chinese finally had a tea-party, verymuch like our Boston Tea Party, but less successful in outcome.In 1839, in spite of the fact that opium smoking is an easy habitto acquire and had been extensively encouraged, the Britishtraders found themselves with 20,000 chests of unsold opium ontheir store-ships, just below Canton. The Chinese had repeatedlyappealed to the British Government to stop these imports, but theBritish Government had turned a persistently deaf ear. Thereforethe Emperor determined to deal with the matter on his ownaccount. He sent a powerful official named Lin to attend to it,and Lin had a sort of Boston Tea Party, as we have said, anddestroyed some twenty thousand chests of opium in a very drasticway. Mr. H. Wells Williams describes it thus: "The opium wasdestroyed in the most thorough manner, by mixing it in parcels Of200 chests, in trenches, with lime and salt water, and thendrawing off the contents into an adjacent creek at lowtide." After this atrocity, followed the first Opium War, whenBritish ships sailed up the river, seized port after port, andbombarded and took Canton. Her ships sailed up the Yangtsze, andcaptured the tribute junks going up the Grand Canal with revenueto Peking, thus stopping a great part of China's income. Peacewas concluded in 1843, and Great Britain came out well. Sherecompensed herself by taking the island of Hongkong; anindemnity Of 21 million dollars, and Canton, Amoy, Foochow,Ningpo and Shanghai were opened up as "treatyports"-for the importation of opium and the"open-door" in general. Mr. Wells, in his "Middle Kingdom" describes theorigin of this first war with England: "This war wasextraordinary in its origin as growing chiefly out of acommercial misunderstanding; remarkable in its course as beingwaged between strength and weakness, conscious superiority andignorant pride; melancholy in its end as forcing the weaker topay for opium within its borders against all its laws, thusparalyzing the little moral power its feeble government couldexert to protect its subjects. . . . It was a turning point inthe national life of the Chinese race, but the compulsory paymentof six million dollars for the opium destroyed has left a stigmaupon the English name." He also says, "The conflict was now fairly begun; itsissue between the parties so unequally matched --one havingalmost nothing but the right on its side, the other assisted byevery material and physical advantage-could easily beforeseen" and again, after speaking of it as being unjustand immoral, he concludes "Great Britain, the firstChristian power, really waged this war against the pagan monarchwho had only endeavored to put down a vice harmful to his people.The war was looked upon in this light by the Chinese; it willalways be so looked upon by the candid historian, and known asthe Opium War." Within fifteen years after this first war, there was anotherone, and again Great Britain came off victorious. China had topay another indemnity, three million dollars, and five moretreaty ports were opened up. By the terms of the Treaty ofTientsin, the sale of opium in China was legalized in 1858. From a small pamphlet, "Opium: England's Coercive Policyand Its Disastrous Results in China and India" by the Rev.John Liggins, we find the following: "As a specimen of howboth wars were carried on, we quote the following from an Englishwriter on the bombardment of Canton: 'Field pieces loaded withgrape were planted at the end of long, narrow streets crowdedwith innocent men, women and children, to mow them down likegrass till the gutters flowed with their blood.' In one scene ofcarnage, the Times correspondent recorded that half an army of10,ooo men were in ten minutes destroyed by the sword, or forcedinto the broad river. " The Morning Herald " assertedthat "a more horrible or revolting crime than thisbombardment of Canton has never been committed in the worst agesof barbaric darkness." Naturally, therefore, after the termination of these two wars,China gave up the struggle. She had fought valiantly to protecther people from opium, but the resources of a Christian nationwere too much for her. Seeing therefore that the opium trade wasto be forced upon her, and that her people were doomed todegradation, she decided to plant poppies herself. There shouldbe competition at least, and the money should not all be drainedout of the country. Thus it came about that after 1858 extensivetracts of land were given over to poppy production. Wholeprovinces or parts of provinces, ceased to grow grain and othernecessities, and diverted their rich river bottoms to the raisingof opium. Chinese opium, however, never supplanted Indian opium,being inferior to that raised in the rich valley of the Ganges.The country merely had double quantities of the drug, usedstraight or blended, to suit the purse or taste of the consumer. Then, in 1906, the incredible happened. After over a hundredyears of steady demoralization, with half her population opiumaddicts, or worse still, making enormous profits out of thetrade, China determined to give up opium. In all history, nonation has ever set itself such a gigantic task, with such agigantic handicap. China, a country of immense distances, withscant means of communication; with no common language, a landwhere only the scholars can read and write, suddenly decided tofree herself from this vice. The Emperor issued an edict sayingthat in ten years' time all opium traffic must cease, and anarrangement was made with Great Britain whereby this might beaccomplished. To the honor of America be it said that we assistedChina in this resolution. We agreed to see her through. A bargain was then made between China and Great Britain, in1907, China agreeing to diminish poppy cultivation year by yearfor a period of ten years, and Great Britain agreeing to aproportional decrease in the imports of Indian opium. A threeyears' test was first agreed to, a trial of China's sincerity andability, for Great Britain feared that this was but a ruse to cutoff Indian opium, while leaving China's opium alone in the field.At the end of three years, however, China had proved her abilityto cope with the situation. Thus, for a period of ten years, bothcountries have lived up to their bargain, the amount of nativeand foreign opium declining steadily in a decreasing scale. April1, 1917, saw the end of the accomplishment. China's part was most difficult. In the remote, interiorprovinces, poppies were grown surreptitiously, connived at bycorrupt officials who made money from the crops. However, drasticlaws were enacted and severe penalties imposed upon those whobroke them. If poppy cultivation could not be stopped, Englandwould not hold to her end of the bargain. Not only was there anation of addicts to deal with, but these could obtain copioussupplies of opium from the foreign concessions, over which theChinese had no control. We shall show, in another article, towhat extent this was carried on. Yet somehow, in some manner, theimpossible happened. Year by year, little by little, one provinceafter another was freed from poppy cultivation, until in 1917,China was practically free from the native-grown drug, andforeign importation had practically ended. In this manner, first by large smuggling, then by two opiumwars, was China drugged with opium. And in this manner, and tothis extent, has she succeeded in freeing herself from the curse.But in one way, she is not free. She has no control over theextra-territorial holdings of European powers, for in each treatyport are the foreign concessions already mentioned-German,Austrian, British, French, Russian. And in these concessions,opium may be procured. Simply by crossing an imaginary line, insuch cities as Shanghai and Hongkong, can the Chinese buy as muchopium as they choose. China will never be rid of this menace tillshe is rid of these extraterritorial holdings. Opium shops,licensed by foreign governments, are always ready to supply herpeople with the forbidden drug. We say that the China market is closed. So it is, in one way.But the British Opium Monopoly is not ended. The year 1917 saw atremendous blow dealt to the British opium dealers, but othermarkets will be found. There are other countries than China whoseinhabitants can be taught this vice. The object of thisdiscussion is to consider these other countries, and to see towhat extent the world is menaced by this possibility. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B23-47IA030-000641-B027-126http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om16.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141232 text/html 18020HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:12:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:17 GMTContent-length: 17802 The Opium Monopoly - Conclusion Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XVI -- CONCLUSION THERE are many people who advocate the use of opium, and whodefend the policy of the Opium Monopoly. They argue that it isnot harmful-if taken in moderation. They even assert that it isno more objectionable than alcohol or tobacco. Leaving out ofaccount, therefore, the consensus of opinion of the medicalprofession as to the evils of habit-forming drugs, and acceptingthe theory that opium is harmless, we should then like to ask whythe use of opium is so carefully restricted to the peoples ofsubject states, who have no voice in their own affairs? Whyshould the benefits of opium be confined to Oriental races, andwhy should not the white race be given the same opportunities forindulgence? Is there any reason for this discrimination? As asource of revenue, it certainly has advantages. Yet curiouslyenough, those European countries which derive much profit throughthe sale of opium to their subject races, seem to have anaversion to introducing it to their people at home. And there isa further coincidence in the fact that none of the self-governingcolonies of European countries-Australia, New Zealand andCanada-permit this traffic. It appears to be only the subjectpeoples, whose well-being has become the White Man's Burden, whoreceive the blessings of this peculiar form of altruism. Is itbecause the white race is worth preserving, worth protecting, andbecause subject nations are fair game for exploitation of anykind? Another argument advanced by advocates of Government opium isthat the Oriental peoples are "different"-that opiumdoes them no harm. Every writer on the subject of opium in China,produces evidence to show the shocking results upon that country,during the hey-dey of the deluge. The complete moral degradation,and economic ruin of thousands of helpless individuals. Nor do wethink the medical profession would agree with this assumptionthat opium is harmless to Orientals, because they are"different." Their only real difference lies in theirhelplessness to protect themselves from foreign aggression. Another argument advanced by the upholders of the Monopoly isthat the Orientals have always been users of opium, that theylike it, it suits them, it would be unfair to deprive them of it.We have seen to what extent the Chinese liked it, and how it wasforced upon them by two wars. Not until they were completelycrushed, and had to accept the terms of the conquerer, did theysubmit. It can hardly, therefore, be called a vice indigenous tothe Chinese. Japan is another Oriental nation that disproves thisargument. As we have said before, there are no opium shops inJapan, and the sale of opium is not conducted by the JapaneseGovernment. On the contrary, the Japanese have the same fear ofthis drug that a European nation has, and exercises the sameprecautions to protect its people. But, as we have said before,Japan is the only Oriental nation that has not been subjugated bya European nation, and therefore has never had opium thrust uponher. She is the only country in the Far East that has managed topreserve her sovereignty, and has never been subject to certainblighting influences of European culture. Another exception to this assumption that the Orientals cannotdo without opium lies in the Philippines. When America acquiredthose islands some twenty years ago, our first act was toeliminate the opium traffic, which had been established there byour predecessors. It had been in existence for decades, but weimmediately set about to abolish it. Root and branch we did awaywith it, and shed no crocodile tears as to the " hardship" this would be to the people who had come under ourprotection. We wished no revenue coming from such a source asthis. Yet we might have cut in half the cost of our Philippinebudget had we followed the example set by other nations. We haveseen that certain British colonies, Hongkong and the StraitsSettlements, for example, derive from one-third to one-half oftheir upkeep expenses from this traffic. But we refrained fromtreating our Filipinos in this manner. We are calledsentimentalists out in the East-at such times as we are notcalled money-getters. To-day, the Philippines are very nearlyready for self government. Would they have been so nearly readyhad we continued to drug them as they had been drugged before wetook possession? Drugged peoples are usually docile andsubmissive-perhaps that is the secret of much of the successfulcolonizing, about which we hear so much. But let us leave aside the question of the Orientals, andwhether or no opium is good for them. We recognize quite clearlythat it is not good for ourselves, for Americans. We recognizethat fact quite as clearly as England realizes that it is notgood for the inhabitants of the British Isles. Quite as clearlyas France, while setting up opium shops in her colony ofIndo-China, refuses to establish them in Paris or Marseilles.America is unique in the fact that although we have colonialpossessions, we do not have a double standard of morality. Weattempt to throw around our colonies the same safeguards that wethrow around ourselves at home. But the question arises, howsuccessful are we in protecting ourselves at home? Notparticularly so, according to the daily press. How great the danger to ourselves was recognized somethirty-seven years ago by an Episcopal missionary to China, theRev. John Liggins. In 1882 he published a small book, alreadyreferred to, entitled: "England's Coercive Opium Policy andIts Disastrous Results in China and India." The preface tothis unheeded warning runs thus. "Our aim in this sketch isto present, as briefly as possible, the most important facts andtestimonies concerning a traffic which is as disgraceful toEngland as it is ruinous to China and hurtful to India. . . . Itis also of the highest importance that the people throughout ourwide domain should be aroused concerning the new, fascinating anddeadly foe which has entered our country through the Golden Gate,and which already numbers its victims by the thousands, and willsoon do so by the tens of thousands." The Rev. Mr. Liggins saw it coming-that danger which is almostready to overwhelm us to-day. He recognized clearly that theOpium Monopoly of that great nation which rules nearly one-thirdof the world-the British Empire would in time reach further andfurther afield for new victims. It is too lucrative a trade to beconfined to only a few countries. Markets must not only becreated and legalized in subject states, but new ones added inoutside countries, through smuggling. All too fatally easy ofaccomplishment, and so profitable, financially, as to be worthany risk and effort. The prediction as to our own danger, made ini882, seems to be abundantly realized. The number of drug addicts in America to-day are fairlystartling. The number is variously estimated in New York Cityalone as from ten thousand to one hundred thousand. It is saidthat there may be a million in the country. Yet these figures arethe merest guesswork, by no means substantiated. Certain it isthat the campaign of the New York Health Department has uncoveredthousands of them, and any other city that chose to do so, couldproduce facts equally startling. The laws on our statute books concerning the prescription ofnarcotic drugs are powerless to deal with the situation. It isshooting into the air to try to "regulate" thiscondition. It is as thoroughly well "regulated" as itcan ever be by the Harrison Anti-Narcotic Act, a Federal Lawwhose enforcement is in the hands of the Internal RevenueDepartment. By the provisions of this Act, every pound of opiumor its derivatives that comes into this country, legitimately, isaccounted for, and its distribution, both wholesale and retail,made a matter of record. Thus, the Board of Trade returns showthe amount imported by the big wholesale drug houses. These mustaccount for their sales to the retail drug stores, and theamounts must tally. The drug stores can only sell narcotic drugson a physician's prescription, and the prescriptions are kept onfile, and the quantity sold must correspond to the quantitycalled for by these prescriptions, as well as to the amountobtained from the wholesale drug house. In prescribing narcotics,the physician is obliged to write his prescription intriplicate--one copy for his own protection, one copy for thelocal druggist, and one copy to be filed with the healthdepartment. Nor is he allowed to prescribe narcotics for anaddict without decreasing the dosage. His prescription cannotcall for thirty grains of morphia day after day, it must show, ina chronic case of this kind, a daily diminution of the amountprescribed, thus indicating a desire to get the patient off thedrug, eventually. All these records are kept on file, open toinspection whenever an accounting is demanded, consequently anyleak can be instantly accounted for. This Harrison Act is ascomprehensive and as nearly perfect as possible, yet it does notcover the situation. By this means, violations can be detected,whether on the part of an unscrupulous physician or druggist, oreven the wholesale house, but these violations are onlyoccasional. The root of the evil remains untouched. At one time, it was believed that carelessness on the part ofthe physician was chiefly responsible for creating drug addicts,but the recent campaign against violators of the Harrison Actseems to have completely exonerated him of this charge. For onepatient who becomes a drug addict while under a doctor's care,through the accidental misuse of morphia, there are a hundred whoform the habit through other ways. It is not the occasional,accidental victim, given morphia for the relief of pain, which iscreating our thousands of drug users. It is not the occasionalunscrupulous physician who is responsible. If this was all, wecould easily cope with these unwitting abuses, or even deliberateinstances of misuse. But the question goes deeper than this. The Opium Monopoly was not established for any humane oraltruistic purpose. It was not established to provide the medicalprofession with a drug for the relief of pain, to ease the agonyof the injured and wounded, or to calm the last days of thosedying with an incurable disease. This, which may be called thelegitimate use of opium, is not the object of the Opium Monopoly.Used only in this manner, there would be no money in it. It isonly when opium is produced in quantities far in excess of thelegitimate needs of the world that it becomes worth while-to theOpium Monopoly. That Monopoly was established not to relieve painand suffering, but with the deliberate intention of creating painand suffering, by creating drug victims by the thousand. It isthese hundreds of thousands of customers that are profitable. Themenace to America lies in the large amounts of opium which aresmuggled into the country for this purpose. Boys and girls osixteen and seventeen first acquire this habit through curiosity,through association with what they call "bad company,"peddlers who first offer it free, as a gift, well knowing thatafter a few doses the fatal habit will be formed. Where do thesevendors obtain their supplies? The daily papers often contain suggestive paragraphs. Thus the" New York Times," under date of February 28, 1919:" Seize Opium in Schenectady. Opium, valued by Federalofficials at $10,000 was seized in Schenectady, and four Chinamenwere arrested in a raid on Chinese places of business on Centrestreet today. The Federal officials expressed the belief thatopium had been smuggled, and that Schenectady is the distributingpoint for this part of the State." An item in the "Seattle Union Record," of June 24,1919, gives us cause for further consideration. BRITISH DRUG SHIP HELD BY UNITED STATES FINE OF $49,265 ASSESSED FOR BRINGING "DOPE" TOAMERICA LINER ALLOWED TO MOVE UNDER BOND NO ARRESTS MADE, THOUGH BOOZE IS FOUND ABOARD No arrests were made up to Tuesday noon in connection with theenormous seizure of opium, cocaine and liquor on the Blue Funnelliner Cyclops, although the investigation is being continued byfederal officials. The ship has been seized and a fine of $49,265 has beenassessed against her for having drugs not listed in the ship'smanifest. United States District Attorney Robert C. Saunders filed alibel Monday night against the Cyclops, the boat being seizedlater by the customs service. Bond was fixed at $100,00, or twicethe fine. The Fidelity Surety Company filed the bond Monday. Theship was released Tuesday morning. A civil libel suit may be filed against Capt. W. Duncan,holding him responsible for the liquor found on the ship. CaptainDuncan, questioned Monday by customs officials, claimed to knownothing about the contraband. The result of Monday's checking of the opium and cocaineshowed that the seizure amounted to 778 tins of opium, 670 ouncesof cocaine and 16 ounces of morphine. A small paragraph in a New York paper, dated June 12, 1919,reads thus: "Two New Yorkers jailed for smuggling opium.Pleas of guilty to charges of opium smuggling were entered in theFederal Court today by Albertus Schneitzer and Maxwell Auerbach,of New York. They were fined $500 each, and sent to Atlantapenitentiary, the former for two years, and the latter for oneyear. The men were arrested in connection with the seizure ofopium on the Canadian border." We cannot grapple with our problem unless we face the facts;if we ignore the source of supply and distribution, and thereasons for this immense overproduction of opium on the part ofthe British Opium Monopoly. The anti-narcotic laws on our statutebooks are powerless to protect us. With Canada, a Britishprovince, to the north, and all Mexico on the south, what chancehave we against such exposure? Of what use to send two smugglersto the penitentiary, when at the Calcutta opium sales, once amonth opium is auctioned off under the auspices of the BritishGovernment, to be disposed of as the buyers may see fit? Much ofit, as we have seen, goes to those helpless states and colonieswhich have no control over their own affairs, where the opiumtraffic is conducted under the administration of the aliengovernment. Much of the rest of it goes out for smugglingpurposes, to be distributed in devious, roundabout, underhandchannels throughout the world. We are coming in for our share inthis distribution. We feel that our country is in grave peril. Our politiciansand our diplomats have been too careful all these years, to speakof this business, through fear of offending a powerful nation.But we feel that the time has now come to speak. England has beenrelying upon our silence to "get away with it." Uponour ignorance, and upon that silence which gives consent. But inthis new, changed world, reborn out of the blood and agony of thegreat war, is it not time to practice some of the decencies whichwe have proclaimed so loudly? As we have said before, no stronger opponents of this policyare to be found than among a section of the people of Englanditself. We look to them to join us, in this great issue, and wefeel that we shall not look in vain. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B23-48IA087-000627-B012-218http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/sum1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050254 text/html 21213HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:02:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:56:50 GMTContent-length: 20995 Savings in California Marijuana Law Enforcement CostsAttributab Savings in California Marijuana Law Enforcement Costs Attributable to the Moscone Act of 1976-A Summary MICHAEL R. ALDRICH, PH.D.* & TOD MIKURIYA, M.D.** *Curator, Fitz Hugh Ludlow Memorial Library, P.O. Box 640346,San Francisco, California 94164 "Psychiatrist and Substance Abuse Therapist, Berkeley,California The fiscal costs of California marijuana law enforcementbegan to escalate dramatically in the mid- 1960's as mainlyyoung, White, middle-class marijuana offenders flooded thecriminal justice system, replacing older, nonWhite heroin addictsas the typical drug offenders in the state (Aldrich, Mikuriya& Brownell 1986: 2-9). California marijuana arrests leapedtenfold from 1962 (3,743) to 1967 (37,514), with correspondingincreases in the number and cost of court dispositions,incarcerations in county jails and state prisons, and probationand parole caseloads. As shown in Table I, by 1972 there wereapproximately 76,561 marijuana-related arrests, of which 73,061were felony arrests, mostly for possession offenses. By 1974there were nearly 100,000 felony marijuana-related arrests, andthese comprised one quarter of all the felony arrests in thestate (Aldrich, Mikuriya & Brownell 1986). The steep increase in the number of arrests, the change indrug-offender characteristics, and the felony status of marijuanapossession offenses led legislators to adopt several differentstrategies to cope with the burden on the criminal justicesystem. These included the so-called wobbler bills of 1968 and1969, which allowed first offense felony marijuana possessioncases to be disposed of as misdemeanors, and since 1972, adiversion program that has allowed charges to be dropped againstfirst offenders if they complete a drug abuse treatment program(Brownell 1988). Nevertheless, the cost of marijuana lawenforcement continued to explode, from approximately eightmillion dollars in 1960 to over $100 million a year in 1972(California Senate Select Committee 1974: 97-118). The crux of the problem faced by legislators was thatpossession of marijuana was a felony offense. In terms of lawenforcement time, personnel. and budgets, a felony offensereceives top priority. It frequently involves the following:investigation by more than one officer; transporting, booking,and incarcerating the offender; hours of paperwork; and timespent in court by the arresting officers. In addition, a felonydrug offense often involves the use of paid informants, gatheringevidence and reliable witnesses, a budget for drug purchases,undercover work, and interagency cooperation. Even under thewobbler provisions of Penal Code Section 17, a felony chargerequired adjudication in a lower court or Superior Court,investigation of the defendant's prior criminal record, and someexpenditure of public funds at every level of the criminaljustice system. This may include the cost of grand juries, publicdefenders, prosecutors, judges, bailiffs, juries, hearings,trials, appeals, county jails, state prisons, and/or probationand parole systems, depending on how each case proceeds (Aldrich,Mikuriya & Brownell 1986; Calof 1968). On the other hand, a misdemeanor offense generally requiresless expenditure of time and money by law enforcement agencies,can often be adjudicated in the lower courts, and punishes theconvicted offender with a fine, probation or a year or less incounty jail rather than a year or more in state prison. Acitation offense, which involves giving the offender a ticketwith a fixed bail that can be forfeited as a fine, is the leastexpensive offense category because it can be disposed of with aminimum of police TABLE I CALIFORNIA MARIJUANA ARRESTS 1972-1986* Year Felony Misdemeanor Total1972 73,061 3,500 76,5611973 88,110 3,500 91,6101974 99,597 3,500 103,0971975 85,757 3,500 89,257Average1974-75 92,677 3,500 96,1771976 19,284 34,110 53,3941977 17,262 34,110 51,3711978 17,397 35,424 52,8211979 19,263 32,796 52,0591980 20,509 38,270 58,7791981 20,771 43,791 64,5621982 20,737 42,904 63,6411983 19,920 43,803 63,7231984 21,350 42,219 63,5691985 24,182 43,181 67,363Average1976-85 20,068 39,133 59,2011986 19,938 30,105 50,043 *Data provided by Bureau of Criminal Statistics and SpecialServices, California Department of Justice. Misdemeanor marijuanaarrest figures were not recorded by the Bureau between 1972through 1977, and am estimated based an the averages of the threepreceding years and the two following years. al. 19 87). It was this reality-based observation of the criminal justicesystem that Senator George Moscone, then Majority Leader of theState Senate, recognized when designing California's uniquemisdemeanor citation system for possession of marijuana in smallamounts (Brownell 1988; Aldrich et al. 1987; Atkeson 1987; Budman1977; Uelman 1976; Moscone 1974); and it is this reality that isrecognized in the present article in-estimating the savingsattributable to that law. At present (under the Moscone Act),almost all misdemeanor marijuana offenses are citable, and arevalued in this article at one third the cost of felony marijuanaarrests. METHODS The methods utilized are presented in detail, with annualtables and formulas used for calculations, by Aldrich andcolleagues (1987) and Aldrich, Mikuriya and Brownell (1986).California marijuana arrest data from 1960 through 1985, andcourt dispositions and law enforcement expenditures from 1972through 1985 were obtained from the Bureau of Criminal Statisticsand Special Services of the California Department of Justice. Marijuana arrest expenditures were calculated according to amethod designed by Post, a former legislative analyst (CaliforniaSenate Select Committee 1974: 99) who determined thatapproximately one quarter of police time is devoted to thedetection and apprehension of criminals, and therefore thatarrest expenditures are approximately one quarter of all lawenforcement expenditures. Weighting felony arrests at dime timesas expensive as misdemeanor arrests, the average cost per felonywas determined by dividing total arrest expenditures by thenumber of felony arrests plus one third of the number ofmisdemeanor arrests. Felony marijuana arrest expenditures from1972 through 1985 were then calculated by multiplying the numberof felony marijuana arrests by the cost per felony arrest foreach year. The average cost per misdemeanor arrest was obtainedby dividing the cost per felony arrest by three, and misdemeanormarijuana arrest expenditures were calculated by multiplying thenumber of marijuana arrests by the cost per misdemeanor arrestfor each year. Total marijuana arrest expenditures for each yearwere obtained by adding felony and misdemeanor marijuana arrestexpenditures (Aldrich et al. 1987). The method used to calculate the cost of marijuanacourt-disposition relies on a time-weighting technique used bythe Judicial Council of California (1985: 112ff) to determine thenumber of judgeships needed in the state. This techniquerecognizes the wide variance in judicial time needed to disposeof different types of cases, and gives a much more accuratepicture of court costs than would be obtained using raw numbersof dispositions. In 1984, for instance, criminal casedispositions were 10 percent of the total dispositions filed inSuperior Court, but took up 33 percent of Superior Court time.For comparison, juvenile delinquency cases were also 10 percentof Superior Court dispositions, but took up only seven percent ofits time (Judicial Council of California 1985: 114). Usingtimeweights and budgets published annually by the JudicialCouncil, the costs, of adult felony marijuana cases werecalculated by ascertaining the costs of criminal cases in thelower courts and Superior Courts, along with court-related costsin each, for each year from 1972 through 1985, and thenmultiplying the result by the percentage of those cases thatinvolved marijuana. Annual prison and parole population counts and expenditureswere obtained from the California Department of Corrections,dividing the latter by the former to determine per capita costs.These costs were then multiplied by the number of prisoners andparolees whose most serious convicted offense was a marijuanacharge (also provided by the Department of Corrections) todetermine the cost of marijuana-related prison and parole foreach year from 1974 through 1985. The State and Local Government Implicit Price Deflation afederal index available from the Commission on State Finance thatis frequently employed by state agencies for budget analysis, wasused to adjust marijuana law enforcement expenditures forinflation. Savings attributable to the Moscone Act (expressed in1986 dollars) were calculated by subtracting theinflation-adjusted arrest, disposition, prison and paroleexpenditures for each year after the law took effect (January 1,1976) from a baseline average of these expenditures in the twoyears (1974 and 1975) immediately before the law took effect. RESULTS As shown in Table I and Figure 1, the major ongoing effect.of the Moscone Act has been to reduce felony marijuana arrestsfrom 92,677 a year (the average for 1974 and 1975) to 20,068 ayear (the average for 1976 through 1985). Thus the new law savedCalifornia the expenses of 72,609 felony arrests every year for adecade, a 78 percent decrease in felony marijuana arrestexpenditures. At the same time, making possession a citable misdemeanorcaused a tenfold increase in misdemeanor marijuana arrests: froman average of 3,500 per year for 1974 and 1975 to an, average of39,113 per year from 1976 through 1985-an average increase of35,613. However, these misdemeanor citations were not nearly asexpensive to issue or to adjudicate. The cumulative effect was tocut total marijuana-related arrests by 39 percent over thedecade: from an average of 96,177 for 1974 and 1975 to an averageof 59,128 from 1976 through 1985-an average decrease of 37,049marijuana arrests per year. The massive reduction in felony arrests, in tandem with amore modest increase in misdemeanor arrests, produced anextraordinary drop in statewide law enforcement expendituressince 1976, as shown in Table IL Total expenditures (in 1986dollars) on marijuana arrests, court dispositions, prisoners andparolees dropped from an average of $157.6 million for 1974 and1975 to an average of $61.8 million per year during the followingdecade. As shown in Table 111, the State of California has savednearly half a billion dollars ($464,552,353 or $46 million below100 in 1980. This resulted in considerable savings in prison andparole expenditures (see Table II), which totaled more than $52million since 1976 (see Table HD. SUMMARY, DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS The State of California has saved a minimum of one billiondollars since 1976 as a result of making possession of an ounceor less of marijuana a citable misdemeanor instead of a felony.The present study considered savings from 1976 through 1985 infour major areas: arrest costs, court costs, prison costs andparole costs. Together they amounted to a total savings of $958million, or nearly $ 100 million per year (see Table III). Whenthese savings are compared with the $100 million a year beingspent on marijuana law enforcement in 1971 and 1972 (CaliforniaSenate Select Committee 1974: 118) and the average of $157.6million spent in 1974 and 1975 (see Table 11), it is evident thatthe Moscone Act has been quite successful in achieving two of itsmain objectives: (1) reducing law enforcement expendituresrelated to possession of small amounts of marijuana to a minimum;and (2) relieving an overwhelming burden on the state judicialsystem. One billion dollars should be considered a minimum estimateof savings because the present study did not include savings inthe cost of county jails, prosecutors, public defenders,probation departments, misdemeanor court dispositions, juvenilefacilities, or peripheral parts of the criminal justice systeminvolved with marijuana law enforcement, such as the cost ofcollecting statistics. Nor were any savings in expenditures byindividual arrestees or defendants considered. Savings are alsounderestimated because the total amount of fines paid formarijuana misdemeanor citations is not recorded. If all of the40,671 people cited for possession of an ounce or less ofmarijuana in 1985 (Aldrich et al. 1987: 1) paid a $100 fine, thatrevenue amounts to more than four million dollars per year. When the Moscone Act was being debated in the CaliforniaLegislature in 1974, some opponents of the bill were concernedthat reducing penalties for possession for an ounce or less ofmarijuana to a maximum $100 fine would be a "greenlight" for drug users across the state (Budman 1977).Senator Moscone pointed out that a 1974 study of marijuana use inOregon, which had passed a similar statute in 1973, had found noincrease in statewide use of the drug, while 40 percent of themarijuana smokers surveyed reported a decrease in their use(California Senate Select Committee: 6-7). A follow-up survey inOregon in 1976 (Drug Abuse Council 1977) showed only a veryslight (three percent) increase in the number currently usingmarijuana, and also reported that fear of prosecution so ENFORCEMENT COSTS mum $100 fine) of these offenses with alternative fine/jail/prison penalties would obliterate the citation system and all thesavings brought about by using this system. Either of theselegislative changes would at least triple, and more likelyquadruple, statewide marijuana law enforcement and criminaljustice system expenditures in every future year (Aldrich et al.1987). It is rare that taxpayers can congratulate lawmakers forsaving a considerable amount of money in any area of lawenforcement The present system is accomplishing the purposes forwhich it was designed by Senator Moscone, by keeping possessionof small amounts of marijuana a criminal offense whilesignificantly reducing the criminal justice expenditures relatedto that offense. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors gratefully acknowledge the editorial assistanceof Gordon Brownell, Michael Rossman and Jerry Mandel at variousstages of this ongoing study, and wish to thank the following forproviding the data on which it is based: Charlotte Rhea andQuinton Hegner, Department of Criminal Statistics; Joe Doyle,Administrative Office of the Courts; Linda Greule, PhyllisMarquez and Doug Jenks, Department of Corrections; and GregGeeting, Commission on State Finance. REFERENCES Aldrich, M.R.; Mikuriya, T.H. & Brownell, G.S. 1986.Preliminary Report: Fiscal Costs of California Marijuana LawEnforcement 1960-1984. Part 1: Arrest Costs. Berkeley,California: Medi-Comp Press. Aldrich, M.R.; Mikuriya, T.H.; Brownell, G.S. & Mandel,J.S. 1987. Fiscal savings in California marijuana lawenforcement, 1976-1985, attributable to the Moscone Act of 1976,with comments on the effects of refelonization and Senate Bill218. Testimony to the California Senate Judiciary Committee,April 7. Atkcson, L 1987. The California battle for marijuana.Unpublished manuscript Brownell. G.S. 1988. Marijuana and the law in California: Ahistorical and political overview. Journal of Psychoactive DrugsVol. 20(l). Budman, K. 1977. A First Report of the Impact of California'sNew Marijuana Law (SB 95) (Requested by the CaliforniaLegislature). Office of Narcotics and Drug Abuse, CaliforniaHealth and Welfare Agency, January. California Senate Select Committee on Control of Marijuana.1974. Final Report, Marijuana: Beyond Misunderstanding. Sacramento: California Legislature. Calof, L. 1968. The cost of enforcing the marijuana laws inCalifornia. In: Aldrich, M.R.; Mikuriya, T.H. & Brownell G.S.1986. PreliminaryReport:Fiscal Costs of California Marijuana LawEnforcement 1960-1984. Part 1: Arrest Costs. Berkeley, California:Medi-Comp Press. Drug Abuse Council. 1,977. Marijuana survey-state of Oregon.News release, Washington, D.C., January 28. Judicial Council of California. 1985. Annual Report to theGovernor and the Legislature. San Francisco: Administrative Office of the Courts. Mandel,J. 1987.Are lower penalties a green light for drugusers? JournaI of Psychoactive Drugs Vol. 19(4): 383-385. Moscone, G. 1974. SB 95 (Moscone) as amended February 4,Health and Safety Code. Marijuana Infractions. History, Digest,Purpose, Comment Sacramento: California Legislature. Uelman, G.F. 1976. California's new marijuana law: A sailingguide for uncharted waters. California State Bar Journal Vol.51(l): 27-86. ALDRICH & MIKURIYA ENFORCEMENT COSTS TABLE III SAVINGS IN 1986 DOLLARS ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE MOSCONE ACT OF1976* Arrest Court Prison/Parole Total Savings Savings Savings SavingsYear1976 51,148,242 30,136,901 4,454,199 85,739,3421977 52,579,256 46,659,085 5,465,589 104,703,9301978 50,929,077 48,672,621 6,222,817 105,824,5151979 52,289,278 50,617,968 7,006,126 109,913,3721980 47,723,509 47,254,261 7,198,048 102,175,8181981 45,462,251 45,032773 6,896,320 97,391,3441982 43,563,228 43,059,6055 6,439,267 93,062,1001983 42,958,451 41,234,833 6,082,368 90,275,6521994 41,229,931 42,270,836 3,909,809 87,410,5761985 36,669,130 46,443,643 <1,303.923> 81,808,850Total1976-85 464,552,353 441,382,526 52,370,620 958,305,499Average savings per year (10-year period): $95.8 million per year.*From Aldrich et al. 1987. Court disposition savings pertain only to adult felony dispositions because data on adult misdemeanor dispositions are unavailable and juvenile divsiion data are limited. Adult felony dispositions(1973-1974) were not reported to the Bureau of Criminal Statistics and Special Services, and estimates were made based on annual increments between 1972 -and 1975.TABLE IVMARIJUANA FELONS IN PRISON AND ON PAROLE 1972-1985*In Prison On Parole TotalYear (n) (n) (n)1972 636 1,061 1,6971973 668 873 1,5411974 605 661 1,2661975 317 462 7791976 198 349 5471977 146 216 3621978 121 104 2251979 101 85 1861980 98 80 1781981 119 69 1881982 157 76 2331983 191 167 3581984 327 234 5611985 618 396 1,014*Aldrich et al. 1987. Data provided by the California Department of Corrections.ALDRICH & MIKURIYAENFORCEMENT COSTSTABLE IIMARIJUANA LAW ENFORCEMENT EXPENDITURES 1974-1985(INFLATION-ADJUSTED IN 1986 DOLLARS)*Arrest Court Prison Parole TotalYear ($) ($) ($) ($) ($)1974 84,365,805 65,465,904 8,452,864 2,651,780 160,927,3531975 75,904,642 71,169,219 5,874,307 1,430,688 154,378,856Average1974-75 80,135,224 68,313,062 7,163,586 2,041,234 157,653,1061976 28,986,982 38,176,161 3,489,715 1,260,906 71,913,7641977 27,555,968 21,653,977 2,929,779 809,452 52,949,1761978 29,206,147 19,640,441 2,398,912 583,091 51,828,5911979 27,845,946 17,695,094 1,813,040 385,754 47,739,8341980 32,411,715 21,058,801 1,702,828 303,944 55,477,2881981 34,672,973 23,280,289 2,013,524 294,976 60,261,7621982 36,571,996 25,253,457 2,462,066 304,487 64,592,0061983 37,176,773 27,078,229 2,609,865 512,587 67,377,4541984 38,905,293 26,042,226 4,628,388 666,623 70,242,5301985 43,466,094 21,869,419 9,259,076 1,249,667 75,844,256Total1976-85 336,799,887 241,748,094 33,307,193 6,371,487 618,226,661Average1976-85 33,679,988 24,174,809 3,330,719 637,149 61,822,666 *From Aldrich et &I. 1987. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-49IA087-000627-B012-251http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/summary.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050314 text/html 16722HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:03:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:56:56 GMTContent-length: 16504 Fiscal Costs of California Marijuana Law Enforcement 1960- 1984 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) Summary -- FISCAL COSTS OF CALIFORNIA MARIJUANA LAWENFORCEMENT 1960 - 1984 by Michael R. Aldrich, Ph.D. Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. Gordon S. Brownell, J.D. Copyright 1986, MEDI-COMP PRESS, 1168 Sterling Avenue,Berkeley, California 94708 PRELIMINARY ONLY NOT FOR PUBLICATION JUNE 15, 1986 DEDICATED To the Memory of GEORGE R. MOSCONE Who Designed theLegislation SUMMARY OF PRELIMINARY REPORT 1. This is not a study of marijuana users or their behavior, but a study of the activity of police, courts, and prisons. 2. In 1974 we did a study for the California Senate which showed that it was costing about $100 million a year (1972) to enforce the marijuana laws. This compares with 1960, when only about $8 million was spent for this. 3. THREE MAIN REASONS for escalation of costs in 1960s: 1) A MAJOR CHANGE IN DRUG OFFENDER CHARACTERISTICS. In 1960 the typical person arrested for drugs in California was a 26-year-old Hispanic heroin addict from Los Angeles, with a long criminal record. By 1967 the typical drug offender was a 19-year-old white marijuana smoker with no criminal record, often a middle-class youth -from the suburbs. 2) ARREST VOLUME. In 1962 there were 3,743 marijuana arrests in the state. In 1967 there were ten times as many (37,514). By 1972 there were 76,561, of which 73,000 were felony arrests. By 1974 there were nearly 100,000 felony marijuana arrests statewide. 3) FELONY STATUS of POSSESSION OFFENSES. The most frequent marijuana offense was possession of a small amount, and it was a felony. By 1974, one-fourth of all the felony arrests in California were for marijuana. This meant that: POLICE RESOURCES, formerly concentrated on Los Angeles heroin addicts, now had to be spread statewide to a much more diverse and less visible populations and many departments had to add narcotics officers to their staff. The sheer volume of arrests greatly increased law enforcement costs statewide. Also: COURT COSTS, especially in Superior Court where felonies are adjudicated, rose dramatically as thousands of felony marijuana possession cases created a logjam in the courts. Prosecutors and judges found it difficult to send 19-yearold first offenders to prison for possession, and conviction rates fell. In sum, thousands of young people were arrested on -felony charges each year. All had to be processed through the criminal justice system, and criminal justice agency costs skyrocketed. One-fourth of the felony arrests in California were for marijuana and it was costing the state $100 million a year to process marijuana offenders. This was the situation the Moscone Law of 1975 was designed to alleviate. 4. There were several legislative attempts to deal with this problem by allowing felony marijuana possession cases to be processed in the lower courts. These were TEMPORARILY successful in reducing congestion in Superior Courts, but could not solve the essential problem, that thousands of young people were being fed into the criminal justice system because possession was still classified as a felony. 5. Two important influences on legislative policy during this period were the 1972 RECOMMENDATION OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION on Marihuana and Drug Abuse that marijuana possession be decriminalized, and the 1972 CALIFORNIA MARIJUANA INITIATIVE, which would have decriminalized possession avid cultivation for personal use. CMI was defeated statewide, but garnered 34% of the vote, providing new impetus to repeal felony penalties for possession. 6. THE MOSCONE ACT. After two years of hearings and a thorough investigation by a Senate Select Committee chaired by Senate Majority Leader George Moscone, a compromise was reached among legislators who would not accept complete legalization of marijuana. The essence of the Moscone Act (passed in 1975, took effect Pages January 1, 1976) was to reduce possession of small amounts 25-27 of marijuana FROM A FELONY TO A NEW TYPE OF MISDEMEANOR, in which a citation is issued to the offender rather than arrest and booking; and for which the MAXIMUM PENALTY is a $100 fine instead of jail or prison. 7. The EFFECT OF THE MOSCONE ACT ON LAW ENFORCEMENT COSTS in California is what we are examining in our new study. We have not completed the DISPOSITIONS part of our study yet, but this is a preliminary report on its effect in regard to the COSTS OF MAKING ARRESTS. S. GRAPH MJFM6084 - CALIFORNIA MARIJUANA ARRESTS 1960-84. This graph shows the effect of the Moscone Act on marijuana 29-31 arrests. FELONY arrests fell dramatically from about 100,000 in 1974 to about 20,000 in 1976-- a drop of about 8O,000. MISDEMEANOR marijuana arrests leaped from about 3500 in 1972 to about 35,000 in 1978. (Unfortunately misdemeanor marijuana arrests were not recorded between 1972 and 1977 so we can't be more precise about the number of misdemeanor or total marijuana arrests for those years.) So the CUMULATIVE effect of the Moscone Act was to reduce total marijuana arrests from more than 100,000 a year to below 64,000 in the 1980s-- a reduction of at least 36,OOO arrests a year. EFFECTS OF THE MOSCONE ACT ON MARIJUANA ARREST COSTS 9. The method we have used to calculate marijuana arrest costs was invented in 1972 by A. ALAN POST, then the Legislative Analyst for the State of California. After consultation with law enforcement agencies Post determined that about one-fourth of a police officer's time is devoted to investigating and making arrests. Therefore one-fourth of law enforcement budgets were expended on making arrests. Thus, the percentage of total arrests which were for marijuana could be applied to one-fourth of state law enforcement expenditures., for a reasonable approximation of the cost of making marijuana arrests. The law enforcement costs included in this calculation are the expenditures of county and state police, sheriffs' departments and the California Highway Patrol. These law enforcement ARREST costs should not be confused with the total amount of money spent in processing offenders through the criminal justice system. It does not include the costs of prosecution public defenders, the courts, or penal institutions. In 19729 for instance the arrest costs were only $13.2 million of the total $100 million expended. 10. GRAPH ARRCOSTS- ACTUAL MARIJUANA ARREST EXPENDITURES 73-84. In 1972, there were 76,561 marijuana arrests. The cost of making these arrests was $13.2 MILLION, or about $173 per arrest. By 1974, with nearly 100,000 felony marijuana arrests, the cost had risen to $18.4 MILLION, or $185 per arrest. 11. Then we discovered that the Moscone Act, which was passed in July 1975 but did not take effect until January, 1976, had a surprising effect even before it officially took effect. Its passage sent a message to police around the state that possession was no longer going to be considered a felony, and marijuana arrests dropped sharply -for the last six months of 1975. This caused a slight $129000 drop in 1975 marijuana arrest costs, but because law enforcement expenditures in general were rising while the number of marijuana arrests was falling, the cost per marijuana arrest rose to $214. 12. Then in 1976, directly as a result of the new law, marijuana arrest expenditures fell to $4.5 MILLION, or $235 per arrest. That same year, 1976, statewide felony arrests dropped by about 75,000. Most of this decrease was marijuana arrests. 13. The nosedive in arrest costs continued in 1977, down to $4.3 MILLION. The costs of misdemeanor marijuana arrests are not included because the arrest statistics are not available. Still, a savings of $14 million a year ($28 million in two years) in felony arrest costs is a considerable achievement for a single legal change. 14. In 1978, when misdemeanor marijuana arrests again began to be counted, arrest costs rose to $14.9 MILLION, or $282 per arrest. This was still lower than the $18 million a year being spent before the Moscone Act. It took another two years until 1980, for arrest costs to pass their pre-Moscone level. 15. IN THE 1980s, California marijuana arrests have levelled off at about 64,000 a year, of which about 20-22,000 are felonies (mostly sale) and about 42-44,000 are misdemeanors. Even though arrests have levelled off, law enforcement costs in general have continued to rise because of inflation and many other reasons, including the continued expansion of police forces and all other criminal justice agencies. 16. Thus by 1984, marijuana arrest costs have risen to about $30.5 MILLION a year, or nearly $500 ($480.24) per arrest. This is a 131 PERCENT RISE in actual expenditures since 1972 when marijuana arrest costs were $13.2 million. 17. INFLATION-ADJUSTED MARIJUANA ARREST EXPENDITURES. In order to understand the real savings attributable to the Moscone Act, it is necessary to account for inflation. We have done this by using the "State and Local Government Implicit Price Deflator" which is routinely used by government agencies in budget analysis. 18. GRAPH INFARRCO (inflation-adjusted arrest costs). As the graph shows in 1974 dollars, marijuana arrest costs have still not risen above their pre-Moscone level. 1984 inflation-adjusted expenditures on marijuana arrests were about $14 million, 24 percent below the $18 million spent in 1974 and just slightly more than was spent in 1975. In fact, the 1984 inflation-adjusted expenditures are only slightly more than the $13.2 million actually expended in 1972. 19. Graph PRISPOP - MARIJUANA FELONS IN PRISON. Although we have not completed the Dispositions part of our study the California Department of Corrections has made available to us the total number of marijuana felons in prison each year between 1972 and 1984. This graph shows one of the most dramatic effects of the the Moscone Act-- a massive drop in the number of people in state prison for felony marijuana offenses. In 1973 there were 668 such prisoners, the highest number in California history. In 1980, largely because the Moscone Act and other measures had reduced the number of felony marijuana offenders being fed into prison through Superior Court, the number of marijuana prisoners dropped to only 98-- the lowest number in recent state history. Recently (1984), with about 21,000 felony marijuana arrests being made for sale, possession for sale and cultivation each year, the number of marijuana felons in prison has risen to 327 -- exactly ten more than there were in 1975. Thus the Moscone Act did the same for marijuana prisoner populations that it did for arrest costs-- it contained them at just above their 1975 level (when the law was passed). CONCLUSIONS 20. The net effect of the Moscone Act was to reduce inflation-adjusted marijuana arrest expenditures by 24 percent from 1974 to 1984, and to contain marijuana arrest costs at about their 1975 level (when the bill was passed). There is no other crime in the state for which this can be said. 21. The most important single effect of the Moscone Act was to reduce the number of felony marijuana arrests by about 80,000 a year. This reduction was permanent and represents a considerable savings to the taxpayer. Cumulatively, it means that about 720,000 felony marijuana arrests and dispositions did not have to be paid for during the nine-year period 1976 - 1984, nor an additional 80,000 per year since then. In 1984 dollars, with every marijuana arrest costing about $500, that means the Moscone Act saved the taxpayers around $360 MILLION between 1976 and 1984 in felony arrest costs. (This does not include any prosecutor public defender, court disposition.., or penal institution costs.) 22. It is rare that a single legal change has such an immediate and drastic effect on arrests and enforcement costs in a state. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B23-50IA087-000627-B012-274http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/chap1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050325 text/html 27195HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:03:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:36 GMTContent-length: 26977 California Drug and Marijuana Arrests, 1960-67 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) A Fiscal Analysis of Marijuana Decriminalization CHAPTER 1. REASONS FOR ESCALATING ENFORCEMENT COSTS: CALIFORNIA DRUG AND MARIJUANA ARRESTS, 1960-67 LEGISLATIVE HISTORY Marijuana has been illegal in California since 1915, when theState Legislature made it unlawful to possess or sell theflowertops, leaves, extracts, tinctures or any narcoticpreparations of hemp, Indian hemp or "loco weed" exceptwhen prescribed by a physician. Originally these were misdemeanoroffenses punishable by a $100- $400 fine or 50-1830 days in jail,but subsequent legislation gradually increased penalties to thefelony level (Source 1). A felony is defined in California law as an offense for whichconfinement in state prison is either an alternative or the solepenalty. By 1939, possession or sale of any amount (or any part)of the plant Cannabis sativa L. drew up to a year in county jailor up to six years in prison. In 1953-54 minimum mandatory sentences were established forcannabis crimes, with "escalator clauses" punishingrepeat offenders more severely. Most marijuana offenses werefelonies with minimums of one to ten years in prison forpossession,) or five to life for sale. Practically the onlymarijuana misdemeanors were "use of marijuana" (a crimesince 1949), and "maintaining premises where narcotics areused." These were punished by a mandatory 90 days to oneyear in jail. A U.S. Supreme Court decision in the Robinson case in 1962,however, held that addiction or use of drugs per se was not acrime, leaving "use of marijuana" exclusively ajuvenile offense thereafter. California's delinquent tendencylaws allow juveniles to be punished for offenses such as usingmarijuana, or being a runaways which would not be crimes if theywere committed by adults (Source 2). The marijuana laws covering most of the first eight-year(1960-67) period of this study were established in 1961. Simplepossession of any amount of marijuana drew a minimum 1-10 yearsin prison, with no parole until a year had been served. Anoffender with any prior felony conviction got 2-20 years, andwith two priors five years to life in prison. Possession of marijuana for sales a new offense in 1961, drewtwo to ten years in prison (5-15 with any prior; 10-life with twopriors). Sale of marijuana was punished by a mandatory five orten years to life, with no possibility of parole until threeyears had been served (Source I). By putting virtually all marijuana offenses in the same felonyclass as heroin% murder, rapes and arson, legislators placedmarijuana offenders in the most expensive law enforcementjudicial, and correctional categories. Malting any crime a felonysends a message to the police and Courts that this offense hastop priority in terms of time and money spent pursuing andprosecuting the offender. This was feasible as long as there wereonly a few thousand marijuana arrests per year.., but whenarrests started doubling and tripling it soon became evident thattreating marijuana like heroin was going to be a very expensiveproposition indeed. THE BCS INDIVIDUAL REPORTING SYSTEM, 1959-67 California has one of the best statistical databases on drugoffenders in the world today because the 1959 State Legislatureappropriated funds to establish a unit within the JusticeDepartment's Bureau of Criminal Statistics to keep track of everyknown drug law violator from the point of arrest through thefinal disposition. Information such as the age, sex, race, drug usage, priorcriminal record, and probation or parole status of each newoffender was recorded on a 5x8 card at the time of his or herdrug arrest. Subsequent events (disposition and sentence) inprocessing the offender through the criminal justice system wererecorded on this same card., along with any later criminalinvolvements (Source 3). This was the first attempt in any state to gather informationabout individual drug offenders from all available sources.Federal agencies as well as city, county and state agenciescontributed data from police arrest reports, rap sheets, courtrecords, jail and prison files, juvenile hall and CaliforniaYouth Authority records, and probation and parole reports. Atotal of 120,248 persons were included in these files between1960 and 1967 (Source 3i, p.7). These persons accumulated a totalof 214,809 drug arrests during this time, of which 91,529 weremarijuana arrests (Table 1). The wealth of detail on drug offenders preserved by theIndividual Reporting System allows us to determine whyenforcement costs skyrocketed. The eight-year period 1960-67 hasbeen chosen because thereafter the method of recording arrests nolonger included detailed offender characteristics. CHANGES IN DRUG OFFENDER CHARACTERISTICS 1960-67 Changes in drug arrest patterns and drug offendercharacteristics in the early 1960s were the primary reasons forthe sudden escalation of drug law enforcement costs in Californiaduring the ensuring years. A brief survey of these changesbetween 1960 and 1967 will help us understand why enforcementcosts rose so drastically. Fuller detail can be found in Sources3 and 4i, and in the RACE67 appendix to this report. 1960 was the first full calendar year of the IndividualReporting System, and in many ways reflects the narcotics sceneof the late 1950s. Drug arrests were split about evenly betweenheroin offenders and a quite different group of marijuana ordangerous drug offenders (see Table 1). The replacement of thefirst group by the second is essentially what caused the costs oflaw enforcement to rise. The chief concern of law enforcement was heroin arrests, whichwere nearly half (48 percent) of all drug arrests. There weretwice as many heroin arrests as marijuana arrests among adults,with dangerous drug arrests taking third place (Table 1). Policepriority was given to heroin and marijuana offenses because mostwere felonies while dangerous drug offenses were practically allamphetamine and barbiturate misdemeanors. Nearly three-fourths (74.1 percent) of heroin arrests were forsimple use of the drug-- a felony. Forty percent of heroinoffenders were Hispanic; about a third were white, and a fourthwere black (Race67). TABLE 1. CALIFORNIA DRUG ARRESTS 1960-67 By Offense Category and Percentage of All Drug Arrests YEAR ALLDRUG    MJ   MJ%      HEROIN H%      D.DRS. DD%     OTHER 0%1960	19265	5155	27	9295	48	4048	21	767	41961	15185	3794	21	8307	46	5239	29	848	51962	17613	3743	21	6022	34	6771	38	1077	61963	19226	5518	30	6064	33	5443	30	1201	71964	21729	7560	35	7701	35	5216	24	1252	61965	24374	10002	41	6164	25	6881	28	1327	51966	33622	18243	54	6482	19	7071	21	1826	51967	61792	37514	61	8469	14	12367	20	3442	6 TOTAL    214809    91529 43% 58504 27%           53036   25% 11740      5.5% Note: Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. Source: Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California 1969, p.l. The typical adult heroin offender in 1960 was a male heroinaddict of Mexican descent from Los Angeles. He was 25 years ofage or older, and had a lengthy criminal record for drugs andcrimes against property. Seven out of ten heroin offenders hadalready served prison or jail sentences at the time of their 1960arrest (Source 4). Juveniles in the early 1960s, however, had many more marijuanaand dangerous drug arrests than heroin arrests. In 1961 juveniledrug offenders were 39 percent Mexican descent, 37 percent white,22 percent black, and 1.6 percent "other" races (RACE67Appendix). The main reason for these ethnic distributions in the earlySixties was that Los Angeles County, with its large Hispanic andblack populations was responsible for about 70 percent of alldrug arrests in the state. There was considerable variationbetween Los Angeles and the rest of the state in ethnicity ofarrests. "A much higher percentage of whites was arrestedoutside Los Angeles County. The percentage of Negroes arrested inLos Angeles County was substantially higher than in the rest ofthe state" (Source 3c, p.20). The establishment of the California Rehabilitation Center(CRC) for narcotics addicts in 1961, and the U. S. Supreme Courtdecision in the Robinson case in 1962, had the cumulative effectof greatly reducing the number of arrests for heroin addiction oruse in the next few years. Since these were about three-fourthsof all heroin arrests, the percentage of drug arrests which werefor heroin steadily declined (Sources 3b-3i). Meanwhile, arrests for marijuana and dangerous drugs startedto climb. A surge of dangerous drug arrests in 1961-62 was thefirst sign that drug arrest patterns were about to changeradically. Dangerous drug arrests exceeded heroin arrests for thefirst time in 1962 (Table 1). In 1960, felony marijuana arrests were only 3.72 percent ofall the felony arrests in California (MJSPRD line 43), andmarijuana arrests were about one-fourth (27 percent) of all drugarrests in the state (Table 1). Seventy percent of marijuanaarrests were made in Los Angeles. Whites accounted for nearlyhalf (48.5 percent) of adult marijuana arrests, blacks for 28percent, and Hispanics for 22 percent (RACE67). The typical adult marijuana or dangerous offender in 1960 wasa white male under 25 years of age from Los Angeles. He had neverbeen arrested before on a drug charge, but was likely to havebeen arrested for some crime against property. One out of sevenadult marijuana offenders in 1960 progressed to heroininvolvement within five years (Source 4). In 1963 the number of marijuana arrests began to rise rapidly.In 1964 marijuana and heroin arrests were each about 35 percentof all drug arrests, and in 1965 marijuana arrests surpassedheroin arrests both in number and as a percentage of drug arrests(Table 1). For the first time in California history, whites were involvedin more than half of all drug and all marijuana arrests in 1965.The Los Angeles component of statewide drug arrests steadilydeclined, from 70 per-cent in 1960 to 64 percent in 1965 and only50 percent in 1967 (RACE67). The Bureau of Criminal Statistics noted in 1966 that "anew segment of California's population is entering the drugpicture. Here there is an indication that an important componentof the new segment is made up of persons of Caucasian descent ...The proportion of white (adult) arrestees has risen to 56 percentfrom 44 percent in 1960... This development appears to stem inpart from the influx of large numbers of novice users into thedrug arrest population" (Source 3h, p.14). This trend was even more pronounced in 1967, when whitesbecame 64.5 percent of adult drug arrests, 70.9 percent ofjuvenile drug arrests, and 66 percent of all drug arrests. Thesurge in white arrests occurred in all categories. Manyamphetamine-barbiturate offenses were raised to felony level in1965, and LSD and similar hallucinogens were made illegal in1966, which caused dangerous drug arrests to double between 1965and 1967 (Table 19 and Sources 3h, pp.1-49 and 3i, pp.1-39 12). The most significant increase however, was in marijuanaarrests, where the proportion of white offenders in 1967 rose to68 percent for adults, 72.9 percent for juveniles) and 64 percentof all marijuana arrests, with concomitant decreases of about 5percent each in black and Hispanic marijuana arrests (Source 3i,p.12). Marijuana arrests doubled between 1966-1967 and became 61percent of all drug arrests in the state, compared with 27percent in 1960. Despite the explosion of dangerous drug arrestsin 1967, they constituted only about 20 percent of all drugarrests-- down slightly from 21 percent in 1960. And heroinarrests, which had been 48 percent of drug arrests in 1960, werenow only 14 percent of all drug arrests in California (Table 1). Accompanying the increase in white offenders was a continuingrise in the proportion of offenders who had never been arrestedon drug or criminal charges before. In 1965, 53 percent of adultdrug arrestees were first offenders; in 1967 they were 61percent. The highest proportion of these were new marijuanaoffenders-- 67 percent of adult marijuana arrests in 1965 wereinitial arrests, rising to 71 percent in 1967 (Sources 3g, P.8;3h, p.9; 3i, p.7). The median (average) age of marijuana offenders fell from 24years old in 1961 to 22 in 1965 and 19 in 1967. This drove downthe median age of all drug offenders from 26 in 1961 to 20 in1967. About 85 percent of drug offenders were male (Sources 3g,p.11; 3h, p.14; 3i, pp.12-13). Thus by 1967 the typical person arrested for drugs inCalifornia was no longer an aging Hispanic heroin addict with alengthy criminal record, but a young white pot smoker who hadusually not been involved with drugs or crime before. This changewas permanent, at least through 1985, and had great impact on thecosts of drug law enforcement in California. Generally an ethnic-minority heroin addict does not have thefinancial resources available to a first-time white marijuanaoffender, with which to fight a felony case through the criminaljustice system. It was not the change in skin color, but thechanges in drug of choice, place of arrest, and financialcircumstances of the average drug offender that caused the costsof law enforcement to skyrocket. The single most importantinfluence on these costs was the rising number of white felonymarijuana arrests, which by 1967 were 42 percent of all drugarrests in California (RACE67). MARIJUANA ARREST ANALYSIS, 1960-67 The following analysis of marijuana arrest patterns will behelpful in understanding the predominant role of these arrests inincreasing the costs of law enforcement in California. Thefrequency counts (Tables 1, 2, and 3) and the MJSPRD table onwhich this analysis is based may be found in the reference tablesection at the back of this report. Marijuana arrests increased tenfold between 1962 (3743) and1967 (37514). As can be seen in graph DRMJ6067 above, it was.this rise in marijuana arrests which fueled the statewide surgein drug arrests, so the drug arrest curve generally matches themarijuana arrest curve. Graph %AMJAD67 shows that marijuana arrests rose from 27percent of all drug arrests in 1960 to 61 percent in 1967. Thisimportant change in the typical offender's drug of choiceoccurred in 1965, when marijuana arrests surpassed heroinarrests, and was solidified when marijuana arrests surpassednon-marijuana arrests in 1966 (graph DAD672 below). 95 to 99 percent of California marijuana arrests were feloniesat this time. Most misdemeanor marijuana arrests were ofjuveniles, for use of marijuana. A few adults each year werearrested for maintaining premises. Adults were arrested for marijuana far more frequently thanjuveniles, contrary to the public impression that most marijuanaarrests are of juveniles (Table 3, graph MJ6067) However, therate of increase for juvenile arrests was much greater than foradult arrests.., and the average marijuana offender was only 19years old by 1967 (Source 3i, p.13). Adult marijuana arrests increased vastly in number, butdeclined as a percentage of all marijuana arrests, from 92percent in 1962 to 71 percent in 1967 (graph %AJMJ67). Juvenilearrests rose from 8 to 29 percent. Possession of any amount of marijuana was a felony, and wasthe most frequent marijuana offense, ranging from 77 percent in1962 to 84 percent in 1967. When possession for sale is includedpossession arrests were nearly 90 percent of all marijuanaarrests by 1967 (Table 3, graphs above). Non-possession offenses were 19.5 percent (1962) to 11 percent(1967) of marijuana arrests. The most common non-possessionfelony was sale of marijuana; the least common -felonies werecultivation of marijuana and sale of some other substance in lieuof marijuana. SUMMARY: REASONS FOR RISING ENFORCEMENT COSTS The following are the most important reasons for -theescalation of marijuana law enforcement costs in California.Unless otherwise stated, the data given are for 1967. 1. ARREST VOLUME: There were ten times as many marijuanaarrests in 1967 (37,514) as there were in 1962 (3,743), and stillrising. 2. FELONY STATUS: Virtually all marijuana offenses (99percent) were classified as felonies, which put them into thecostliest "top priority" law enforcement judicial andcorrectional classes. 3. MOSTLY POSSESSION: Eighty-four percent of felony marijuanaarrests were for simple possession (Table 3). The minimummandatory penalty for simple possession was 1-10 years in stateprison. 4. PERCENTAGE OF STATEWIDE FELONY ARRESTS: Felony marijuanaarrests were 18.23 percent of all felony arrests, compared withonly 3.72 percent in 1960 (MJSPRD line 43). It was the easiestfelony bust in the state for police to make, and this toocontributed to the sharp rise in arrests. 5. %AMJAD: Marijuana arrests were 61 percent of all drugarrests, compared with 27 percent in 1960 (Table 1, and MJSPRDline 53). 6. PLACE OF ARREST: Drug arrests, particularly marijuanaarrests., spread statewide instead of being concentrated in LosAngeles. Los Angeles County made 70 percent of drug arrests and66 percent of marijuana arrests in 1960, declining to 50 and 48percent in 1967. "Areas which previously had little illegaldrug activity... now found it necessary to add highly specializednarcotic officers to their law enforcement staffs" (Source3h, p.12). 7. DRUG OF CHOICE: The typical drug offender in California wasno longer a heroin addict, scrambling to support an expensivehabits but a marijuana smoker with better financial resourcesavailable. B. RACE AND FINANCIAL CONDITION: White people, who receivedfewer than half of all drug arrests in 1960, now accounted fortwothirds (66 percent) of all drug arrests and for 70 percent ofall marijuana arrests. Whites in general have better financialresources than ethnic minorities with which to fight a felonycase. 9. CRIMINAL RECORD: the typical drug offender no longer had acriminal record. This meant that he or she was harder to convict,and often that he or she would fight a first offense with allavailable resources. With more defendants fighting their cases,,costs rose across the board, especially in Superior Court. 10. AGE: The typical drug offender was now 19 years old, andprosecutors and judges found it increasingly difficult to send19-year-old first offenders to state prison for simplepossession. In 1960, 93 percent of all drug offenders wereconvicted as charged; by 1967 this had fallen to 70 percentoverall, with only 48 percent of marijuana offenders convicted ascharged (Source 3i, p.29). In sums the underlying reason for the rise in enforcementcosts was a radical change in offender characteristics. Thetypical Californian arrested for drugs was no longer anethnic-minority heroin addicts but a young white marijuana user.The arrest statistics themselves thus reveal a majorsociocultural change in California, directly connected to therise of white marijuana and dangerous drug (psychedelic) arrests.This was the rise of the youthful counterculture. Social commentary on the predominantly white counterculture isbeyond the scope of this papers but it should be pointed out thatblack and Hispanic marijuana and dangerous drug arrests showincreases parallel to the white increases but more modest (RACE67annual tables). Whether this was due to countercultural influenceand assimilations to increased availability of these drugs, or toother factors, cannot be ascertained from the statistics. Likewise, it is difficult to be more specific about the costsof arresting and prosecuting heroin addicts (usually repeatof-fenders) versus marijuana smokers (usually first offenders).The key question here would be whether the cost of repeatedincarceration of those financially unable to defend themselves ismore or less than the cost of fruitless prosecution of those whocan. The former calculation would have to include the capitalcosts of correctional facilities for addicts (including prisons,jails, and the CRC)-- and capital expenditures are not includedin the enforcement cost statistics collected by BCS. Othervariables such as how many white and nonwhite offenders were ableto hire lawyers, are also not available. Nevertheless, it is generally true that a white marijuanaoffender has better financial resources with which to fight afelony charge than an ethnic-minority heroin addict does, andthis is reflected in the declining conviction rates for drugoffenders (see item 10 on page 8). This fact, coupled with the extraordinary increase in arrestvolume (marijuana arrests leaping beyond 37,000 a year and stillrising), led to increased costs at every stage of the criminaljustice system, including expanded police forces, the need formore public defenders, huge caseloads in probation and paroledepartments and a major logjam in the courts. Because the law continued to treat marijuana like heroin (as afelony)$ enforcement costs started exploding the moment thischange occurred in 1965. The resulting rise in enforcement costswill be examined in the next chapter. SOURCES 1. Letter to Senator Arlen Gregorio (titled "Marijuana -#17361"), from Peter Melnicoe, Deputy Legislative Counsel,Office of the Legislative Counsel of California (George H.Murphy)* Sacramento, January 18, 1974. Printed as an appendix tothe Moscone Report ("Marijuana: BeyondMisunderstanding%" Final Report of the CaliforniaLegislature Senate Select Committee on Control of Marijuana),Sacramento, May 1974. 2. "While all (juvenile) narcotic arrests have beengrouped Linder the heading, major offenses (felonies), it is verydifficult to identify in detail the exact nature of theseoffenses. The Bureau of Criminal Statistics publishes a separateseries of reports on narcotic arrests each year which indicatesthat about one-half of the juvenile arrests fall into a felonycategory and the other half either in a misdemeanor category orin an area of delinquency not defined by the Penal Code. The factthat an adult has admitted the use of marijuana or dangerousdrugs is not a criminal offense defined by the Penal Code;however% a ,juvenile who has admitted to the use of suchsubstances can be filed on in the juvenile court as adelinquent." -- Crime and Delinquency in California 1965(Sacramento: BCS, 1966), p.143. 3. A detailed history of the Individual Reporting System drugoffender study and its methodology may be found in its firstreport (#3a below), and as appendices to the BCS reports for 1960through 1963 (#3b-#3e). Retroactive revisions of data arediscussed in the reports for 1965 (#3g) through 1967 (#3i). Seealso Michael R. Aldrich, "Legislative and Reporting-SystemChanges Relevant to Statistics on Cost of Enforcing CaliforniaMarijuana Laws," in the Moscone Report, Sacramento, 1974. 3a. Narcotic Arrests in California July 1, 1959- June 30,1960. Sacramento: Bureau of Criminal Statistics, 1960. 3b. Narcotic Arrests and Their Dispositions in California,1960. 3c. Narcotic Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1961. 3d. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1962. 3e. Drug AT-rests and Dispositions in California, 1963. 3f. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1964. 3g. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1965. 3h. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1966. 3i. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1967. 4. "Follow-Up Study of 1960 Adult Drug Offenders,"Sacramento: Bureau of Criminal Statistics, 1968. See also RACE67file appended to this Study and, for an interesting comparison,the "Five Year Follow-Up of 1966 Juvenile DrugArrestees," Sacramento: BCS, 1973. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B23-51IA087-000627-B012-305http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/chap2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050335 text/html 23829HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:03:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:28 GMTContent-length: 23611 Fiscal Costs of California Marijuana Law Enforcement,1960-1972 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) A Fiscal Analysis of Marijuana Decriminalization CHAPTER II. FISCAL COSTS OF CALIFORNIA MARIJUANA LAW ENFORCEMENT,1960-1972 The fact that nearly one-fifth of all California felonyarrests pertain to marijuana charges indicates that marijuanaenforcement costs constitute a significant portion of allCalifornia law enforcement and correctional expenditures. Legislative Analyst A. Alan Post, 1972 (Source la). THE BCS SUMMARY REPORTING SYSTEM, 1968-77 One of the first casualties of the explosion of drug arrestswas the BCS Individual Reporting System drug offender study. By1967, almost one-fourth of the entire BCS staff was involved incollecting drug statistics (Source 1d, p.1). As the number ofarrests continued to rise, -the Bureau was forced to resort to aless accurate system of summary estimates rather than keepingtrack of thousands of individual offenders. The Summary Reporting System began in 1968, ay-id involvedmaking estimates of the total number- of drug offenders -from a30 percent sample of police drug arrest summaries and rap sheets.When drug arrests again increased in 1969, the sample was reducedto 20 percent (Sources 2a, pp. :13-19; 2b, p.5). This immediately downgraded the value and precision of thestatistical database. A sample is an averaging device and doesn'tgive very reliable information on individuals, particularly in arapidly changing population of drug offenders. Although a randomsample can eflect the number of people arrested in each generaldrug category with some precision, characteristics such as theage, sex, race, or criminal record of offenders wereprogressively lost because there is no way to check, whether thesample accurately reflects these individual traits in the drugoffender population as a whole. Police summary forms had spaces -for the general offensecharged-how many were arrested for marijuana--- but did notcontain specific offenses, i.e. how many were arrested forpossession. Thus frequency counts (like Table 2), which are veryvaluable to legislators -trying to determine the efficacy ofspecific laws, could no longer be obtained from the database(Source 1d, p.2). This meant, for example, that it was impossibleto determine how many dangerous drug arrests were for LSD, or howmany marijuana arrests were for cultivation. Rap sheets -from the Criminal Identification and Investigationbureau, part of the sample used by BCS, are based on-fingerprints. Juveniles are often not fingerprinted:consequently juvenile drug offenders are under-represented in thesample. Another-- problem is that "booking offenses shown onrap sheets are poor indicators of actual offenses" describedin arrest reports (Source 2c,., p.6). In addition, use of the summary system led BCS to revise theirdata retroactively each year--- meaning, for instance, that thenumber of drug arrests in 1968 was reported differently almostevery year after that (Sources 2a, pp.43-44, 46, 61-63; 2b and2c, p.1; 2d, p.3; 2e, p.4). To solve this problem we havearbitrarily chosen the final estimates for these years given inCrime and Delinquency in California, 1972 (Source 3e). Finally, USE- Of the summary system meant that someinformation previously reported had to be dropped. First to gowere statistics on Federal offenses in California, which have notbeen collected since 1968. Then in 1972 BCS stopped reportingmisdemeanor marijuana arrests; this continued until 1978, andinjured the database permanently because the total number ofmarijuana arrests each year between 1972 and 1977 cannot beascertained precisely. DRUG ARRESTS A MAJOR FACTOR IN RISING ENFORCEMENT COSTS California criminal justice agency expenditures rose by 67percent -from fiscal 1967-68 to fiscal 1971-72 (Source 3e, p.62).Much of this extraordinary increase in enforcement costs must beattributed to the explosion in drug arrests, especially marijuanaarrests (graph DRMJ6072). Drug arrests were the prime contributor to sudden rises instatewide felony arrests. "Adults arrested for felony crimesincreased by about 30,000 in 1969 over 1968, of which drugarrests accounted for 20,000, or about 67 percent of theincrease. In 1972, total -felony arrests increased 11,000 over1971, with drug arrests making Lip nearly all the rise..."(Source 3e, p.29). Felony marijuana arrests were only 3.72 percent of all felonyarrests in 1960. By 1972 over one-fifth (21.19 percent) of thefelony arrests in California were for marijuana (Table 4: line 43MJSPRD). Misdemeanor marijuana arrests were negligible, less thanone percent of misdemeanors. During this same five years (1968-72), -the number- of drugoffenders increased by 96 percent compared to a 23 percentincrease in non-drug offenders. Also, more drug arrestees wereprosecuted; complaints filed by the police against drug offendersrose by 123 percent, compared to 34 percent for non-drugoffenders (Source 3e, p.39). The result was that massive numbers of drug offenders werefunneled through police stations, county jails, lower andsuperior courts, and probation and parole departments each year.All the trends shown in the previous chapter continued, insofaras can be determined from the database: these offenders weremostly white, Mostly Young (19 to 20), and mostly arrested onfelony charges of possession of marijuana (Source 2a, p.28). TABLE 4. DRUG AND MARIJUANA ARRESTS 1960, 1967-72 ARRESTS          1960      1967      1968       1969      1970       1971       1972 FELONY	(42)    132379    203233    258740     299574    315232     332693     344762Fel. Drug(40)   15768     48120     79221      106344   118314     119184      127699% Drug/Fel      11.91     23.68     30.62       35.50    37.53      35.82       37.04Marijuana (39)   4921     37049     47949       51414    64880      61199       73061% MJ/Fel (43)	  3.72	    18.23     18.53       17.16    20.58      18.40       21.19MISDEMEANOR(48)611458    717015    697514       770583  808518     806428      860158Misd. Drug(46)   3497     13672     15517        16827   17850      18377       17889% Drug/Misd.     0.57      1.91      2.22        2.18     2.21       2.28        2.O8Marijuana (45)    234       465      2388        3762     4141       3398        3500% MJ/Misd(49)    0.04      0.06      0.34        0.49     0.51       0.42         0.41FEL & MISD.(54)743837    920248    956254     1070157  1123750    1139121      1154325Total Drug (52) 19265     61792     94738      123171   136164     137561       145588% Drug/FM        2.59      6.71      9.91       11.51    12.12      12.08         12.61Total Marij (51) 5155     37514     50327       55176    69021      64597         76561% MJ/F&M(55)     0.69      4.08      5.26       5.16      6.14       5.67       6.63 Source: MJSPRD and its Sources. Numbers in parentheses referto MJSPRD lines. COSTS OF MARIJUANA LAW ENFORCEMENT 1960-72 The following is a brief summary of all previous studies ofthe costs of California marijuana law enforcement. In general,the- method of these studies was to apply cost-per-unit estimatesto the number of offenders in each stage of the criminal justiceprocess from arrest to final dispositions For greater detail,Consult Source In 1968 Stanford law student, Lawrence Calof wrote thedefinitive first study of these costs. Taking the 1966 marijuanaarrest and disposition data and applying fiscal 1967-68 budget-figures, Calof arrived at a "hybrid" estimate of$29,783,418.56 for -the 18,243 adult and juvenile marijuanaarrests and the dispositions of 14,209 adult -felony offenders.This averages out to approximately $1,630 per arrest, or $2,100per adult disposition (Source la, p.114; see Calof appendix). To estimate the costs at each stage of the dispositionprocess, Calof relied not only on published budgets, but also onnumerous interviews with officials at each stage, and a sample ofLos Angeles superior court dispositions. The interviews werenecessary to form a realistic assessment of the amounts of timespent in the prosecution of marijuana offenders. Then hecalculated the costs of taking a single offender through thesystem in Los Angeles, where more than 60 percent of marijuanaarrests were made (Calof appendix). Calof's study is especially valuable in reflecting the costsof adult felony prosecution before "The Wobbler" tookeffect. However-, Calof excluded the costs of juvenile courtproceedings, and misdemeanor proceedings in lower- court-----because at the time these were insignificant Thus Calof'sestimate must be regarded as conservative, a minimum figure. His professor at Stanford Law School, John Kaplan, used theCalof method to calculate the 1968 enforcement costs in his book"Marijuana The New Prohibition" (1970). He arrived at afigure of about $72 million for the 50,327 marijuana arrests thatyear, with emphasis in adult felony dispositions for which themost information was available- (Source 4). U.C. L. A. researcher William McGlothlin, using a variation ofthe Calof method, estimated approximately $43.1 million for thecost of 1969 marijuana dispositions. Dr. MCGlothlin excludedcertain costs which Calof had included (appeals, state narcoticsbureau, motions to suppress evidence), and used significantlylower cost/unit estimates for court dispositions and commitments(Source la, p.114). However, McGlothlin, not a lawyer, made noattempt to interview criminal justice agency or court officialsabout the actual costs involved at each stage, and his estimatesare not as realistic as Calof's. As at result his cost estimatefor 1969 is, in our opinion, much too low. Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D., a consultant to the National Commissionon Marihuana and Drug Abuse, estimated 1970 marijuana enforcementcost, at $106 million. This figure was obtained by multiplyingCalof's estimate by the percentage increase in marijuana arrestsin 1970 over 1966 (Source la, p.115). THE A. ALAN POST METHOD OF DETERMINING ARREST COSTS Perhaps not coincidentally, a different method of assessingthe costs Of Marijuana arrests for 1971 gave approximately thesame $106 million figure obtained for 1970, even though thenumber of marijuana arrests in 1971 declined by 3,681 from theprevious year (Source la, p.115; Table 5). This new method was invented by Legislative Analyst A. AlanPost, and was based on the fact that the overwhelming majority ofmarijuana arrests are made by local police and sheriff'sdepartments. "It was determined that approximately 25percent of a police Officer's time is devoted to the detectionand apprehension of criminals. Therefore, it was concluded that25 percent of the county's law enforcement budget is expended oncriminal activity. The percentage of total marijuana arrests ofthe total arrests was computed for each county. This percentagewas applied to that activity. Thus, a rough approximation wasconstructed of what it Costs California County law enforcementagencies to effect marijuana arrests" (Source la, pp. 98-99and letter from Wayne Knutila of BCS to the Moscone CommitteeFeb. 7, 1974, are appendix in Source 1). This method revealed that in 1971, local police and sheriff'sdepartments spent approximately $8.9 million at the arrest stagealone, an average of $138 per marijuana arrest. Using the samemethod, county law enforcement expenditures on marijuana arrestsin 1972 were calculated at approximately $11 million, or $144 perarrest (Source la. P.99). However these figures did not, include the costs of theCalifornia Highway Patrol, 63 per-cent of whose felony arrests in1972 involved marijuana and other drug arrests. Adding CHPexpenditures on marijuana arrests brought the cost per arrest to$166 in 1971 and $171 in 1972 (Source lap P.100). Thus for 1971, using the Post method for arrest costs andtaking into account a significant reduction in disposition costscaused by increasing use of The Wobbler and P.C. Section 17(discussed below), total costs of marijuana law enforcement werecalculated at approximately $106,859,808. The 1971 estimateproved comparable to the 1970 figure by a different method ofcalculation (Source la, pp.115-117). This is further evidencethat the McGlothlin estimate for 1969 was too low. To determine costs in 1972 for the Moscone Committee, twoseparate evaluation techniques were used. First, the Calof methodwas applied to the 1972 marijuana arrest/disposition statisticsand budgets. This produced an estimate of $95,239,536 for 1972(Source. lb). The second approach was to apply the A. Alan Post arrest costsand Calof unit Costs to updated information, including revisedcorrectional Costs, supplied by every major criminal justiceagency in the state. This produced an estimate of $105,762,049spent on marijuana Offenders by these agencies in 1972 (Source1c). The two different evaluation methods again produced comparableresults-- $95 million and $106 million-- as total marijuanaenforcement costs in 1972. We rounded this off to $100 million asan average. This estimate is conservative, a minimum figure,because it did not include the costs of 20,697 unknown adultdispositions, 84310 commitments from lower court, or any juveniledispositions (Source la., p.113). INFLUENCE OF "THE WOBBLER" AND P.C. SECTION 17 ONCOSTS A close scrutiny of dispositions revealed that the majorinfluence on reducing the fiscal costs of processing marijuanaoffenders through the courts had been Section 17 of the PenalCode. The number of adult felony marijuana offenders in lowercourts increased sharply between 1969 and 1971, and by 1972 more(12,346) felony marijuana cases were disposed of in lower courtsthan in superior court (8,884). (Source la, p. 101.) Nevertheless, superior Court dispositions nearly doubled from1968 to 1971, because of vast increases in the number of arrests(Source 3e, p.40, and Table 5). It took three years for the"Wobbler" and Section 17 PC to relieve the congestionin superior court. 1972 at last saw a drop of over 6,000 superiorcourt dispositions, largely attributable to -filing felonies asmisdemeanors in lower courts (Source 3e, p.40). This reduction in superior court costs is responsible for theslight drop in estimated enforcement costs in 1972 compared to1971 (Table 6). Because off reduced superior court costs, Weincluded McGlothlin's low estimate to indicate that the cost perarrest/disposition declined to $1,342 between 1969 and 1972, aconsiderable savings (Source la,, p.117). However, in 1972 there was an unexpected jump of 11,000 morefelony drug arrests, accompanied by a leveling off in lower-court dispositions. "After three years of sharpincreases," BCS reported "this short boom in lowercourt terminations is over. The number of felony complaintsterminated in lower courts in 1972 increased about 2000, or only4 percent Over 1971 . The leveling-off of lower courtterminations in 1972 may indicate that the use of P.C. Section17b5... has -reached its full potential." (Source 3e.,p.36). Another problem presented itself when 1972 dispositions wereexamined. Of the 41,927 marijuana complaints filed in 1972, 8,884were processed as felonies in Superior Court and 12,346 asmisdemeanors in lower courts leaving a serious lacuna of some20,697 complaints unaccounted for in the BCS record books. Theapparent leveling off of enforcement costs at about $100 milliona year might as easily be the result of not having information onthe dispositions of 49 percent of the complaints filed, as ofhypothetical savings from the use of P.C. Section 17 (Source la,pp. 101, 117). In SUM, the "Wobbler" and P.C. Section 17 werepolitical compromises of limited Success. Their main effect wasto contain enforcement costs which would have been appreciablyhigher without them. By allowing most -felony marijuanapossession cases to be processed in lower Courts without actuallytaking possession out of the felony category, congestion in thesuperior courts was reduced, with concomitant fiscal savings. On the Other hand, as superior courts handled fewer (marijuanacases, lower courts handled many more than they had in the past,and lower-court costs began increasing as the number of marijuanaarrests continued to rise. It became evident that simplyre-shuffling offenders from superior to lower courts couldmitigate, but would not solve, the cost problem. As shown in Table 6 and graph COST6072, the costs Of marijuanalaw enforcement rose from about $8 million in 1960 to $100million in 1972. It cost California taxpayers about $577 millionto punish about 400,000 people between 1960 and 1972, an average$44.4 million a year. These estimates are conservative becausethey do not include costs of many adult dispositions or anyjuvenile dispositions (Source la, p.113). Marijuana arrests increased tenfold between 1962 and 1967,while enforcement costs increased ninefold (Table 6). For theentire thirteen-year period from 1960 to 1972, marijuana arrestsincreased 1385 percent, while-, enforcement costs increased 1090percent (Table 6). And what was the result of these massive Cost increases? TheDepar tment of Corrections informed the Moscone Committee that asof December- 31, 1973, there were 621 felons in state prisonwhose most serious commitment offense was violation of some lawpertaining to marijuana. In Addition, there were 858 marijuanaoffenders on parole as of that date (Source la., p.109). Thus Californians were spending $100 million a year to putabout 1500 people in prison or on parole. This comes to more than$66,000 for each convicted adult felony offender. One clear fact emerged from the weight of evidence presentedto the Moscone Committee: despite all attempts to reduce them,the -fiscal costs of marijuana law enforcement continued toincrease slightly or suddenly, year after year. TABLE 6. CALIFORNIA MARIJUANA LAW ENFORCEMENT COSTS, 1960-72 YEAR      MJ ARRESTS COST OF ENFORCEMENT SOURCE/UNIT COSTS RELEVANT LAWS1960	5,155	$ 3,402,650	Calof- $1630	All arrests,1961	3,794	6,184,220		prosecution,1962	3,743	6,101,090		commitments1963	5,518	8,994,340		handled as1964	7,560	12,322,800		felonies.1965	10,002	16,303,260		Avg. cost per1966	18,243	29,147,418		arrest, $16301967	37,514	61,147,820		disp., $2100.1968	50,327	$ 72,074,860	Kaplan    $1432	"Wobbler" and1969	55,176	43,100,000	McGlothlin .- $ 7 8 1	P.C. Sec. 17:1970	69,021	106,028,968	Mikuriya- $1536	Avg. cost/arr1971	64,597	106,859,808	Extrapol-- $1654	1968-72 $13561972	76,561	100,000,000	Aldrich- $1306	1969-72 $1342 TOTAL 407,211 577,303,234   Avg. $1417.70 or $44,407,941/yr. Source-. Moscone Report (Source la), p. 117. SOURCES (Moscone Report) California Senate Select Committee on Controlof Marijuana (George Moscone, Chairman), Final Report, Marijuana:Beyond Misunderstanding. Sacramento, May 1974. la. Michael R. Aldrich, Ph.D., "Fiscal Costs ofCalifornia Marijuana Law Enforcement," Chapter 8, pp.97-118. The quote from A. Alan Post is on page 97. lb. Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D., Barbara Schneider, Michael R.Aldrich, and Gordon Brownell, "Selected CaliforniaStatistics Concerning the Enforcement of Marijuana Laws ...February 13, 1974." An appendix to the Moscone Report. 1c. Michael R. Aldrich, Barbara Schneider, Tod H. Mikuriya,M.D., and Gordon Brownell, "Costs of California MarijuanaLaw Enforcement: A Preliminary Study." Appendix, 7pp. Id. Michael R. Aldrich, "Previous Marijuana EnforcementCost Estimates," February, 1974. Appendix, 4pp. le. Michael R. Aldrich, "Legislative and Reporting-SystemChanges Relevant to Statistics on Cost of En-forcing CaliforniaMarijuana Laws," Feb. 1974. Appendix, 5pp. 2. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California. Sacramento:Bureau of Criminal Statistics. Usually published a year after, date. 2a. D.A.D. 1968. 2b. D.A.D. 1969. 2c. D.A.D. 1970. 2d. D.A.D. 1971. 2e. D.A.D. 1972. 3. Crime and Delinquency in California. Sacramento: Bureau ofCriminal Statistics. Usually published a year after date. 3a. CD 1968. 3b. CD 1969. 3c. CD 1970. 3d. CD 1971. 3e. CD 1972. 4. John Kaplan, Marijuana-- The New Prohibition. New York andCleveland: World Publishing Cc.., 1970, pp.29-30. For a fulldiscussion of the processing of Marijuana offenders through thestages of the criminal justice system, see "Marijuana Laws:An Empirical Study of Enforcement and Administration in LosAngeles County," UCLA Law Review 15 (1968), pp. 1499-1582. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B23-52IA087-000627-B012-335http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/chap3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050356 text/html 14362HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:03:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:21 GMTContent-length: 14144 Legislative Changes in California Marijuana Laws in the1970S Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) A Fiscal Analysis of MarijuanaDecriminalization CHAPTER III LEGISLATIVE CHANGES IN CALIFORNIAMARIJUANA LAWS IN 1970S I. 1972: Prelude to Decriminalization Following the enactment of The Wobbler and the revisions inSection 17 of the Penal Code, California's marijuana laws were toremain unchanged until 1972, when certain events occurringoutside of the Legislature heralded the beginning of anoncriminal approach to marijuana possession and use in thestate. The first external force to impact upon the Legislature wasthe Final Report of the National Commission on Marijuana andHealth, appointed by President Nixon to study all aspects ofmarijuana in American society and to recommend public policyapproaches and guidelines. The Commission was A conservative bodyof thirteen members, nine of whom were appointed by the Presidentand two each by the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives, andit was widely assumed that the Commission would reinforce andrubber-stamp the harsh "War on Drugs" approach towardmarijuana and drug use which the White House had been advocating.Thus, the Commission's Final Report made headlines across thecountry when it recommended decriminalizing marijuana possessionand use. Decriminalization was a term essentially coined andpopularized by the National Commission. Decriminalizationentailed a public policy of discouragement of marijuana use,. bykeeping cultivation, sale and other non-possessory offensesillegal, while removing criminal penalties for simple use andpossession of the substance. In essence, it aimed at eliminatingthe harsh social consequences brought about by labeling marijuanausers "criminal" while concentrating the resources andsanctions of the criminal law on commercial traffickers. Thereport of the National Commission was to become the Bible of themarijuana law reform movement for the remainder of the '70s. The second major event to force a re-examination by theLegislature of the state's marijuana laws was the 1972 CaliforniaMarijuana Initiative, which appeared on the November ballot thatyear as Proposition 19. Founded by Foster City attorney LeoPaoli, Proposition 19 was a measure which proposed totallyremoving criminal penalties for the adult possession andcultivation of marijuana for personal use. Though defeated, themeasure garnered 34% of the vote and provided new impetus forlegislative efforts to repeal felony penalties for marijuanapossession. Significantly, the California Legislature passed two majorbills in 1972 affecting marijuana penalties, both of which wereclearly influenced by the statewide demonstration for marijuanalaw reform symbolized by Proposition 19. The first, Penal Code 1000, commonly known as the "drugdiversion program," was sponsored by, among others,then-State Senator George Deukmejian, in order to provide amechanism for diverting first-offenders from the criminal justicesystem. Under P.C. 1000, individuals charged with various drugpossession offenses could have all criminal charges against themdismissed, provided they agreed to participate in a drugeducation and/or treatment program. Supported by liberals andconservatives alike, the drug diversion bill was signed into lawby Governor Ronald Reagan. Also passing the Legislature in late 1972, following the voteon Proposition 19, was a bill sponsored by Beverly HillsAssemblyman Alan Sieroty which would have repealed the wobblerand made possession of marijuana for personal use a straightmisdemeanor. The Sieroty bill was vetoed by Governor Reagan.Another Sieroty misdemeanor bill passed both houses of theLegislature in 1974, but was also vetoed by Governor Reagan. The impact of Proposition 19 was also noticed by SenateDemocratic leader George R. Moscone, who represented SanFrancisco, which was the only county to pass Proposition 19.Recognizing that a penalty reduction bill had no chance ofenactment as long as Ronald Reagan was governor, Senator Mosconeinstead proposed the appointment of a state commission, analogousto the National Commission on Marijuana and Health, to studyCalifornia's marijuana laws and recommend appropriate publicpolicy changes. Originally proposed as a state commission,Moscone realized that Governor Reagan would be able to block theformation of such a commission. Thus came into being,alternatively, the California Senate Select Committee on theControl of Marijuana. The Select Committee, commonly referred to as the MosconeCommittee after its chairman, conducted the first major studyinto marijuana law enforcement in the state, with particularemphasis on the social and fiscal costs of the laws. Among itsfindings were the facts that in the early 1970s, statewidemarijuana arrests were approaching almost 100,000 annually, withenforcement costs averaging well over $100,000 million per year. Finding that the overwhelming majority of marijuana offenses(approximately 90%) were for simple possession, the MosconeCommittee recommended in its Final Report a serious re-orderingof law enforcement priorities by the Legislature. The FinalReport of the Select Committee noted that: "The marijuana laws as they pertain to simple possessionfor private adult use should be amended to abolish the felonyoffense. The Legislature should adopt a program ofdecriminalization, making simple possession of marijuana forprivate adult use an infraction, if anything." 1975: Enactment of Senate Bill 95 Following an unsuccessful attempt in 1974 to implement thedecriminalization recommendations of the Select Committee, whichwas essentially a "trial run" with no expectation ofactual success, Senator Moscone introduced Senate Bill 95 whichwas heard and enacted by the Legislature in 1975. This bill wassigned into law on July 9, 1975 by Governor Edmund G. Brown, Jr.,making California the fifth state (out of an eventual total ofeleven) to end the arrest and jailing of persons charged withpossession of small amounts of marijuana for personal use. As originally introduced, S.B. 95 would have made possessionof not more than three ounces of marijuana an infraction,punishable by a maximum fine of $100.00. There was politicalresistance, however, to both the three-ounce standard and also tolabeling the offense an infraction, which opponents of S.B. 95contended sent too "permissive" a message to thepublic. The bill was therefore amended by the author in theSenate Judiciary Committee to make possession of one ounce orless a citable misdemeanor, rather than an infraction, in orderto split law enforcement opposition to the bill and pick up thenecessary votes to pass the measure out of committee. The amendment changing the offense from an infraction to amisdemeanor resulted in a change of label more than anythingelse, in that an infraction was also a crime in California, andS.B. 95 created essentially a new category of low misdemeanorwhich was sui generis and was treated like an infraction in allcritical respects. Possession of an ounce or less became amandatory citable misdemeanor offense, punishable by fine only,not to exceed $100.00, -with no arrest, booking or jail. Under S.B. 95, possession of more than one ounce of marijuanaalso became a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in thecounty jail for not more than six months, by a fine of not morethan $500.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In suchinstances, the arresting officer has the discretion of eitherissuing a citation or taking the defendant into custody. S.B. 95 also revised the penalties for both furnishing withoutconsideration and transporting not more than one ounce ofmarijuana, treating such offenses as simple possession, ratherthan as felonies. Giving away or transporting more than one ounceof marijuana, as well as cultivation, sale and possession of-anyamount with intention to sell remained as felonies under S.B. 95. Prior California law did not distinguish among various formsof marijuana based on form or potency, treating the naturalcannabis plant, synthetic THC and hashish as the same substance.S. B. 95 distinguished between "marijuana" and"concentrated cannabis", the latter referring to theseparated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained frommarijuana. As to concentrated cannabis, essentially hashish orhash oil, the prior wobbler penalties remain in effect. Thislegislative distinction was brought about by law enforcementopposition to eliminating felony penalties for possession ofhashish or hash oil. One of the critical reforms embodied in S.B. 95, whichresulted directly from the legislative "trade-off"which came about when the bill was amended to make possession ofsmall amounts of marijuana a citable misdemeanor rather than aninfraction, was a new record.-purging provision unlike anythingin existing California law. This provision ended the prospect oflife-long criminal records for individuals arrested and/orconvicted of marijuana possession and other marijuana misdemeanoroffenses and contained retroactive provisions for offensesoccurring prior to January 1, 1976, when S.B. 95 took effect. Under these provisions as later amended S.B. 95 required thedestruction of records of any court or public agency pertainingto an arrest or conviction for possessing marijuana, other thanconcentrated cannabis, or for giving away or transporting notmore than one ounce of ordinary marijuana where the arrest and/orconviction occurred after January 1, 1976, in which case suchrecords could not be kept beyond two years from the date ofconviction, or from the date of arrest if there was noconviction. No civil or collateral disabilities or penaltiescould attach to an individual as a result of a prior marijuanamisdemeanor offense, once the records are destroyed or two yearshad passed. The penalty provisions of S.B. 95 are non-recidivist, in thatrepeat offenders are not subject to any greater penalties thanfirst offenders. S.B. 95 provided, however, that individualsconvicted more than three times within a two year period shall besubject to the provisions of P.C. Section 1000.1 and 1000.2 (thedrug diversion program). No jail penalties or increased fines canbe assessed against repeat offenders. In summary, in addition to repealing various minor marijuanaoffenses, S.B. 95 adopted six major forms affecting California'smarijuana laws, which together have had a major impact on thefiscal costs of marijuana law enforcement in the state and inreducing the legal, social and fiscal costs of marijuana lawenforcement: No arrest or booking for individuals apprehended in possession of small amounts of marijuana; No jail or incarceration for persons convicted of possession of small amounts of marijuana; Furnishing of small amount of marijuana for no consideration is treated as simple possession, not sale; Transportation of small amounts of marijuana is treated as simple possession, not felony transportation; Elimination of life-long criminal records for marijuana possession arrests and convictions, and placing a two-year limit on the retention of such records and the use of such records. against individuals arrested and convicted of specified offenses; Abolition of recidivist penalties for simple possession, giving and away and transporting small amounts of marijuana. The actual fiscal savings brought about by S.B. 95, and theimpact which this reform legislation has had on California'scriminal justice system, have been dramatic, as evidenced by theanalysis set forth in this study. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B23-53IA087-000627-B013-25http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/chap4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050442 text/html 11392HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:04:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:16 GMTContent-length: 11174 Marijuana Arrest Costs 1972-1984 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) A Fiscal Analysis of MarijuanaDecriminalization CHAPTER IV. MARIJUANA ARREST COSTS 1972-1984 The following graph (Source: MJSPRD) shows at a-glance theeffect of the Moscone Act on marijuana arrests. Felony marijuanaarrests fell by about 80,000, from nearly 100,000 in 1974 to lessthan 20,000 in 1976. Misdemeanor marijuana arrests were notrecorded between 1972 and 1977, but leaped tenfold from about3,500 in 1972 to 35,424 in 1978. By 1984, total marijuana arrestswere leveling off at below 64,000 a year, so the cumulativeeffect of the Moscone Act was to reduce total marijuana arrestsby at least 36,000 a year. EFFECT OF THE MOSCONE ACT ON MARIJUANA ARRESTS In 1974 felony marijuana arrests peaked at nearly 100,000(99,597), representing about one-fourth (24.75 percent) of thefelony arrests in the state (Table 7) and over two-thirds (69.21percent) of the state's felony drug arrests (line 41 MJSPRD).This was the situation the Moscone Act was designed to alleviate. The Moscone Act had an effect even before it officially wentinto effect on January 1, 1976. Its immediate effect upon passagein July 1975 was to reduce the number of felony marijuana arrestsby 13,840 from their 1974 level, and by another whopping 66,473arrests in 1976. In two years felony marijuana arrests droppedfrom nearly 100,000 to fewer than 20,000 (Table 7). This caused 1976 statewide felony arrests to fallprecipitously by about 75,OOO from their 1974 level (Table 7). That is, felony marijuana arrests fell from 25 percent ofstatewide felony arrests in 1974 to a mere 6 percent in 1976(line 43 MJSPRD), and from 7.22 percent of totalfelony-misdemeanor arrests in 1974 to only 1.41 percent in 1976(Table 7). The reduction of felony marijuana arrests was permanent andremains the most important effect of the Moscone Act. Felonymarijuana arrests crept past 20,000 in 19809 and have leveled offat about 21,000 a year since then (Table 7). This loss of about 80,000 felony marijuana ay-rests each yearfrom 1976 to 1984 represents a considerable savings to thetaxpayer. Cumulatively, it means that about 720,000 felonyarrests and dispositions did not have to be paid for during thenine-year period. TABLE 7. CALIFORNIA MARIJUANA ARRESTS 1972-84 MJSPRD LINE 54 42 39 55 43 45 51 YEAR F-M ARRESTS FEL.ARR. FEL.MJ %MJFMA %FMJFA MISD.MJ TOTAL MJ 1972 1154325 344762 73061 6.63 21.19 Est.3500 765611973 1280177 358024 Betio 6.88 f 24.61 n/a n/a1974 1380204 402421 99597 7.22 f 24.75 n/a n/a1975 1353720 393658 85757 6.33 f 21.78 n/a n/a1976 1366988 327535 19284 1.41 f 5.89 n/a n/a1977 1410587 327215 17262 1.22 f 5.28 n/a n/a1978 1399724 334647 17397 3.77 5.20 35424 528211979 1460608 357632 19263 3.56 5.39 32796 520591980 1561658 372190 20509 3.76 5.51 38270 587791981 1666569 386195 20771 3.87 5.38 43791 645621982 1658240 386995 20737 3.84 5.36 42904 636411983 1668027 373609 19920 3.82 5.33 43803 637231984 1697231 384861 21350 3.75 5.55 42219 63569 Source: MJSPRD and its sources. 135) The other major effect of the Moscone Act was to increasethe number of misdemeanor marijuana arrests, though the exactamount of the increase cannot be ascertained because misdemeanormarijuana arrests were not recorded in the base year period(1972-77). It is also difficult to know precisely whatmisdemeanor marijuana arrests were recorded from 1978 onwards,because the Moscone Act allows the issuance of a citation forpossession offenses and the offender need not appear at thepolice station or in court where the arrest would be recorded(see Chapter III). However, with the available information it can be stated thatthe overall effect of the Moscone Act was to reduce totalmarijuana arrests by at least 36,000 a year. This is based on thefact that in 1974 there were about 100,000 felony marijuanaarrests, plus an unknown number of misdemeanor arrests, while in1984 there were 21,350 felony marijuana arrests, plus 42,219misdemeanor marijuana arrests, for a total of 63,569 marijuanaarrests (Table 7). 100,000 felony arrests minus 63,500 totalarrests indicates a reduction of at least 36,413 arrests eachyear. EFFECT OF THE MOSCONE ACT ON MARIJUANA ARREST COSTS Table 8 below summarizes the ARRCOST file appended to thisreport. The A. Alan Post method (see Chapter II) was used tocalculate actual marijuana arrest expenditures, and the State andLocal Government implicit Price Deflator (see INFLATE appendix)was used to adjust for inflation. TABLE S. MARIJUANA ARREST COSTS 1972-84 FISCAL NUMBER ACTUAL MJ ARR. COST PER INFLATION-ADJ. IA COST/ YEAR MJ ARR. EXPENDITURES MJ ARREST EXPENDITURES MJ ARREST 71/72 76,561 $13,220,270 $172.66 $15,214,567 $ 198.7272/73 88,110 fel $15,540,785 $176.38 $17,374,438 $197.1973/74 99,597 fel $18,380,911 $184.55 $18,380,911 $184.5574/75 85,757 fel $18,368,236 $214.19 $14,335,488 $167.1675/76 19,284 fel $ 4,526,727 $234.74 $ 3,772,119 $195.6176/77 179262 fel $ 4,324,924 $250.55 $ 3,381,480 $195.8977/78 52,821 $14,887,136 $281.84 $10,835,750 $205.1478/79 52,059 $14,787,243 $284.05 $ 9,937,320 $190.8979/80 58,779 $19,352,917 $329.25 $11,858,474 $201.7580/8l 64,562 $23,228,001 $359.78 $12,991,204 $201.2281/82 63,641 $26,318,198 $413.54 $13,651,710 $214.5182/83 63,723 $28,473,506 $446.83 $13,847,971 $217.3283/84 63,569 $30,528,638 $480.24 $13,979,108 $219.90 Source: MJSPRD, ARRCOST and INFLATE appendices. For the years immediately surrounding the Moscone Act(1973-77), including the base year 1974, misdemeanor marijuanaarrest statistics are not available and the cost of making felonymarijuana arrests is shown in Table 8 for those years. Ifmisdemeanor arrests were included, the total arrests and totalexpenditures would be higher for those years, but the cost perarrest would probably be lower. Between 1972 and 1984, actual expenditures for marijuanaarrests rose 131 percent, from $13.2 million in 1972 to $30.5million in 1984 (Table B). Let's look at that in two periods, theshort-term effect through 1979 and the long-term effect through1984. The immediate effect of the Moscone Act was to reduce totalmarijuana arrests (felony and misdemeanor combined) from over100,000 in 1974 to about 52,000 in 1979. As a result, actualmarijuana arrest expenditures were held to approximately $14.8million in fiscal 1978/79, a bit lower than their fiscal 1972/73levels (Table 8). The 1979 cost of $284.05 per marijuana arrest compares with1974's $184.55 figure. However, in 1974 dollars the 1979 cost perarrest was only $190.89. Thus, when adjusted for inflation, amajor result of the Moscone Act was a mere $6.34 increase in thecost per arrest (Table 8). This means that during a time when statewide law enforcementcosts in general were rising sharply due to inflation increasingarrest volume, and other factors, the Moscone Act held the lineon marijuana arrest costs. To be precise, it was the bestcost-containment measure passed by the Legislature in the 1970s:the same containment of actual and inflation adjustedexpenditures cannot be discerned for any other type of crime. The 1984 cost per marijuana arrest was $480.24, compared with$172.68 in 1972 and $184.55 in 1974. This is a 178 percent risein expenditures per marijuana arrest since 19729 caused byreducing the number of marijuana arrests while law enforcementcosts in general continued to rise (Table 8). However, when adjusted for inflation and expressed in 1974dollars, the cost of marijuana arrests in 1984 was $13,979,105(line 13) or $219.90 per arrest. This is only slightly higherthan the $13,220,270 spent on marijuana arrests in 1972, and is24 percent lower than the $18,380,911 spent in the base fiscalyear 1973/74. Thus the net effect of the Moscone Act was to reduce inflationadjusted marijuana arrest expenditures by 24 percent from 1974 to1984, and to contain marijuana arrest costs at just above their1972 level. Again, there is no other crime in the state for whichthis can be said. Nevertheless, actual expenditures for marijuana arrests havebeen rising steadily in the Eighties, from about $20 million in1980 to over $30 million in 1984. Total marijuana arrests seem tohave leveled off at about 639000 a year, but expenditures keeprising due to inflation and generally increased law enforcementcosts. In sum, it costs the taxpayers an average of about $500 everytime someone is arrested for marijuana in California, regardlessof whether that is a felony or misdemeanor arrest. This figureincludes only the cost of making an arrest, not the cost ofprocessing the offender later. This cost per marijuana arrest canbe expected to continue to rise. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B23-54IA087-000627-B013-66http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/chap5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050547 text/html 26110HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:05:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:11 GMTContent-length: 25892 Adult Felony Marijuana Dispositions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) A Fiscal Analysis of MarijuanaDecriminalization CHAPTER V. ADULT FELONY MARIJUANA DISPOSITIONS The following graph clearly shows the buildup of marijuanacases in California's superior and lower Courts until 1977, whenthe Moscone Act, in tandem with Penal Code Section 17, and PC1000, took marijuana possession dispositions out of the courtsystem. This part of our report is far from complete. The Bureau ofCriminal Statistics has provided us with adult felony marijuanadisposition data for the years 1976 to 1984, which is presentedhere. 'There is no data available on adult misdemeanordispositions, and the juvenile disposition data is limited. The adult felony marijuana dispositions are collected by asystem known as OBTS-- the Offender Based Transaction Statisticsprogram, which has been on line in California since 1978. Beforethat, the information is less than complete because some countiesweren't using OBTS yet. Even the OBTS data, however, is thought to be about 30 percentunderreported. This applies to all adult felony dispositionsincluding those for felony marijuana offenders. Despite this, itis possible to calculate the costs of these dispositions by usingthe percentage of all dispositions which were for marijuanainstead of the raw figures themselves. The other figures needed for this calculation are Accurate,across the board Court expenditures including direct trial costsand other court related expenditures. Only the CaliforniaJudicial Council collects this information in combined form, andthat has only been in the last few years. We have used thisinformation to determine an approximate court-cost per adultfelony marijuana disposition for fiscal years 1982/83 and1983/84. The data collected by the Bureau of Criminal Statisticsdivides these expenditures into Court costs (for Superior,Municipal, and Justice courts) and "Court-RelatedCosts" which are not divided by court. This makes it hard toassign court-related costs to superior or lower court, and we'restill reforming on a method by which to do this. Then we will beable to ascertain total Court expenditures on marijuanadispositions for other years. In the DISPTREE charts on the -following three pages, the-figures used determine court costs are those in lines 8 and 39,because those are the dispositions that made it into a court.Line 1, the total adult felony marijuana dispositions, includesthose released by the police (line 2), those that were turnedover to another jurisdiction (line 3), those on whom a complaintwas requested by a prosecutor (line 4), and those whose complaintwas denied by a Court (line 5). Since only those on whom a complaint was filed (line 6) madeit into courts it is accurate to use only the actual courtdispositions (lines 8 and 39) in computing Court Costs. However,this does not include the costs of police dispositions,prosecutors, or public de-fenders. Actual court expenditures on adult felony marijuanadispositions were approximately 16.4 million dollars in fiscal1992/83, and approximately $18.6 million in fiscal 1983/84. Thisworks out to a Superior Court cost of $2112 per marijuana case, aLower Court cost of $1491 per marijuana case, and a combinedaverage cost of $1701 per marijuana case. Inflation-adjusted expenditures have -riot been calculatedyet. 132) DISPTREE OBTS ADULT FELONY MARIJUANA DISPOSITIONS,1976-1984 1976 % 1977 % 1978 % 1. TOTAL AD.FEL.MJ. DISPOSITIONS 8862 100 19317 100 8201 100 2. Released by Police 255 2.9 254 1.3 377 4.6 3. Indictments/ Warrants (SC/LC) 592 6.7 350 1.8 498 6.1 4. COMPLAINT Requested (Pros.) 8015 90.4 18713 96.9 7326 89.3 5. Complaint Denied 1239 14.0 1401 7.3 1243 15.2 6. COMPLAINT GRANTED (To L.C.) 6776 76.5 17312 89.6 6083 74.2 7. 5. LOWER COURT DISPOSITIONS 7293 82.3 17602 91.1 6526 79.6 9. MISDEMEANOR Complaints 4097 46.2 13841 71.6 3337 40.7 10. Not Convicted 1863 21.0 8102 41.9 1328 16.2 11. Dismissed 1850 20.9 8025 41.5 1319 16.1 12. Acquitted 12 0.1 75 0.4 9 0.1 13. Juv. Court 1 0.0 2 0.0 0 0 14. CONVICTED (Misd.) 2234 25.2 5738 29.7 2009 24.5 15. Guilty Plea (Misd.) 2103 23.7 5449 28.2 1858 22.7 16. CYA 0 0 2 0.0 0 0 17. Probation 631 7.1 1835 9.5 535 6.5 18. Prob. w/ Jail 280 3.2 603 3.1 287 3.5 19. Jail 276 3.1 642 3.3 253 3.1 20. Fine 1008 11.4 2480 12.8 920 11.2 21. Other 39 0.4 176 0.9 14 0.2 22. FELONY Complaints 3196 36.1 3762 19.5 3189 38.9 23. Not convicted 1008 11.4 1119 5.8 1109 13.5 24. Dismissed 998 11.3 1110 5.7 1108 13.5 25. Acquitted 9 0.1 a 0.0 1 0.0 26. JUV. Court 2 0.0 1 0.0 0 0 27. CONVICTED (Fel.) 705 8.0 795 4.1 725 8.8 28. Guilty Plea (Fel.) 678 7.7 763 3.9 674 19.2 29. CYA 0 0 0 0 0 0 30. Probation 241 2.7 333 1.7 266 3.2 31. Prob. w/ Jail 244 2.8 222 1.1 252 3.1 32. Jail 86 1.0 68 0.4 SC) 1.0 33. Fine 130 1.5 159 0.8 126 1.5 34. Other 4 0 13 0.1 1 0.0 35. To Superior Court 1483 16.7 1848 9.6 1355 16.5 36. Held to Answer 1352 15.3 1662 8.6 1214 14.8 37. Guilty Plea (S.C.) 131 1.5 186 1.0 141 1.7 38. 39. SUPERIOR COURT DISPOSITIONS 1558 17.6 1907 9.9 1410 17.2 40. Not Convicted 303 3.4 520 2.7 260 3.2 41. Dismissed 284 3.2 484 2.5 236 2.9 42. Acquitted 18 0.2 35 0.2 24 0.3 43. Not guilty-Insane 0 0 0 0 0 0 44. Juv. Court 1 0.0 1 0.0 0 0 45. CONVICTED 1255 14.2 1387 7.2 1150 14.0 46. Guilty Plea (inc. NG-To-G) 1013 11.4 1138 5.9 947 11.6 47. Prison 59 0.7 49 0.3 42 0.5 48. CYA 7 0.1 15 0.1 1 0.0 49. Probation 376 4.2 458 2.4 326 4.0 50. Probation w/ Jail 727 19.2 753 3.9 727 8.9 51. Jail 38 0.4 39 0.2 27 0.3 52. Fine 38 0.4 58 0.3 23 0.3 53. CRC 10 0.1 10 0.1 3 0.0 54. Other 0 0 2 0.0 1 0.0 55. 56. TOTAL CONVICTIONS (14+27+45) 4497 50.7 7920 41.0 3884 47.4 57. Total Guilty Pleas(15+28+46) 3794 42.8 7350 38.1 3479 42.4 58. Total Incarcerated (18,19, 1710 19.3 2376 12.3 1668 20.3 31,32,47,50,51) NO Death sentences, NO not-guilty-insanity. I think line 46includes line 37 198) DISPTREE. OBTS ADULT FELONY MARIJUANA DISPOSITIONS,1979-1981 1979 % 1980 % 1981 % 1. TOTAL AD.FEL.MJ. DISPOSITIONS 9034 100 10889 100 11767 100 2. Released by Police 598 6.6 809 7.4 933 7.9 3. Indictments/ Warrants (SC/LC) 537 5.9 550 5.1 688 5.9 4. COMPLAINT Requested (Pr-cis.) 7899 87.4 9530 87.5 1014686.2 5. Complaint Denied 1489 16.5 1873 17.2 2070 17.6 6. COMPLAINT GRANTED (To L.C.) 6410 71.0 7657 70.3 8076 68.6 7. B. LOWER COURT DISPOSITIONS 6934 76.8 8200 75.3 8758 74.4 9. MISDEMEANOR Complaints 3713 41.1 4277 39.3 3807 32.4 10. Not Convicted 1395 15.4 1609 14.8 1363 11.6 11. Dismissed 1375 15.2 1600 14.7 1353 11.5 12. Acquitted 19 0.2 9 0.1 1.0 0.1 13. Juv. Court 1 0.0 0 0 0 0 14. CONVICTED (Misd.) 2318 25.7 2668 24.5 2444 20.8 15. Guilty Plea (Misd.) 2139 23.7 2433 22.3 2205 18.7 16. CYA 1 0.0 1 0.0 0 0 17. Probation 614 6.8 714 6.6 721 6.1 15. Prob. w/ Jail 398 4.4 464 4.3 388 3.3 19. Jail 266 2.9 374 3.4 346 2.9 20. Fine 998 11.0 1081 9.9 955 8.1 21. Other 41 0.5 34 0.3 34 0.3 22. FELONY Complaints 3221 35.7 3923 36.0 4951 42.1 23. Not convicted 1012 11.2 1126 10.3 1379 11.7 24. Dismissed 1007 11.1 1118 10.3 1377 11.7 25. Acquitted 4 0.0 5 0.0 1 0.0 26. JUV. Court 1 0.0 3 0.0 1 0.0 27. CONVICTED (Fel.) 728 8.1 1025 9.4 1243 10.6 28. Guilty Plea (Fel.) 674 7.5 956 8.8 1157 9.8 29. CYA 0 0 0 0 0 0 30. Probation 288 3.2 356 3.3 357 3.0 31. Prob. w/ Jail 265 2.9 427 3.9 556 4.7 32. Jail 82 0.9 98 0.9 141 1.2 33. Fine Be 1.0 141 1.3 184 1.6 34. Other 5 0.1 3 0.0 5 0.0 35. To Superior Court 1481 16.4 1772 16.3 2329 19.8 36. Held to Answer 1325 14.7 1465 13.5 1868 15.9 37. Guilty Plea (S.C.) 156 1.7 307 2.8 461 3.9 38. 39. SUPERIOR COURT DISPOSITIONS 1494 16.5 1779 16.3 2335 19.8 40. Not Convicted 246 2.7 230 2.1 293 2.5 41. Dismissed 229 2.5 202 1.9 283 2.4 42. Acquitted 17 0.2 28 0.3 10 0.1 43. Not guilty-Insane 0 0 0 0 0 0 44. Juv. Court 0 0 0 0 0 0 45. CONVICTED 1248 13.8 1549 14.2 2042 17.4 46. Guilty Plea (inc. NG-To-G) 1014 11.2 1294 11.9 1739 14.8 47. Prison 59 0.7 59 0.5 101 0.9 48. CYA 3 0.0 12 0.1 15 0.2 49. Probation 374 4.1 382 3.5 462 3.9 50. Probation w/ Jail 751 8.3 1036 9.5 1388 11.8 51. Jail 25 0.3 29 0.3 48 0.4 52. Fine 35 0.4 28 0.3 21 0.2 53. CRC 0 0 3 0.0 4 0.0 54. Other (inc.MDSO) 1 0.0 0 0 0 0 55. 56. TOTAL. CONVICTIONS (14+27+45) 4294 47.5 5242 48.1 572948.7 57. Total Guilty Pleas(15+28+46) 3827 42.4 4683 43.0 5101 43.4 58. Total Incarcerated (18,19, 1846 20.4 2487 22.8 2968 25.2 31,32,47,50,51) No Death sentences, No not-guilty-insanity. I think line 46includes line 37 Adfel MJ Complaints filed (12276) in CJP 79 p.61 differ a lotfrom this data 264) DISPTREE. OBTS ADULT FELONY MARIJUANA DISPOSITIONS,1982-84 1982 % 1983 % 1984 % 1. TOTAL AD.FEL.MJ. DISPOSITIONS 12030 100 12332 100 11356 100 2. Released by Police 644 5.4 568 4.6 580 5.1 3. Indictments/ Wary-ants (SC/LC) 1 0.0 4 0.0 1 0.0 4. COMPLAINT Requested (Pros.) 11385 94.6 11760 95.4 1077594.9 5. Complaint Denied 3552 29.5 4116 33.4 3522 31.0 6. COMPLAINT GRANTED (To L.C.) 7833 65.1 7644 62.0 7253 63.9 7. B. LOWER COURT DISPOSITIONS 7833 65.1 7644 62.0 7253 63.9 9. MISDEMEANOR Complaints 2548 21.2 1813 14.7 1279 11.3 10. Not Convicted 1081 9.0 948 7.7 585 5.2 11. Dismissed 10783 9.0 944 7.7 584 5.1 12. Acquitted 3 0.0 2 0.0 1 0.0 13. Juv. Court 0 0 2 0.0 0 0 14. CONVICTED (Misd.) 1467 12.2 865 7.0 694 6.1 15. Guilty Plea (Misd.) n/a n/a n/a 16. CYA 0 0 0 0 0 0 17. Probation 496 4.1 304 2.5 238 2.1 18. Prob. w/ Jail 410 3.4 298 2.4 258 2.3 19. Jail 246 2.0 151 1.2 121 1.1 20. Fine 305 2.5 103 0.8 74 0.7 21. Other 10 0.1 9 0.1 3 0.0 22. FELONY Complaints 5285 43.9 5831 47.3 5974 52.6 23. Not convicted 1403 11.7 1479 12.0 1427 12.6 24. Dismissed 1399 11.6 1471 11.9 1415 12.5 25. Acquitted 3 0.0 4 0.0 4 0.0 26. Juv. Court 1 0.0 4 0.0 4 0.0 27. CONVICTED (Fel.) 1015 8.4 999 8.1 842 7.4 2B. Guilty Plea (Fel.) n/a n/a n/a 29. CYA 0 0.0 0 0 0 0 30. Probation 341 2.8 364 3.0 293 2.6 31. Prob. w/ Jail 491 4.1 499 4.0 431 3.83 32. Jail 116 1.0 115 0.9 92 0.88 33. Fine 66 0.5 21 0.2 25 0.2 34. Other 1 0.0 0 0 1 0.0 35. To Superior Court 2867 23.8 3353 27.2 3705 32.6 36. Held to Answer 2131 17.7 2241 18.2 2455 21.6 37. Guilty Plea (S.C.) 736 6.1 1112 9.0 1250 11.0 38. 39. SUPERIOR COURT DISPOSITIONS 2868 23.8 3357 27.2 3706 32.6 40. Not Convicted 327 2.7 299 2.4 292 2.6 41. Dismissed 299 2.5 272 2.2 278 2.4 42. Acquitted 27 0.2 26 0.2 11 0.1 43. Not guilty-Insane 0 0 0 0 0 0 44. Juv. Court 1 0.0 1 0.0 3 0.0 45. CONVICTED 2541 21.1 3058 24.8 3414 30.1 46. Guilty Plea (inc. NG-To-G) n/a n/a n/a 47. Prison 106 0.9 134 1.1 221 1.9 48. CYA 8 0.1 3 0.0 6 0.1 49. Probation 577 4.8 698 5.7 607 5.3 50. Probation w/ Jail 1753 14.6 2117 17.2 2503 22.0 51. Jail 87 0.7 97 0.8 65 0.6 52. Fine a 0.1 7 0.1 a 0.1 53. CRC 2 0.0 2 0.0 2 0.0 54. Other (inc.MDSO) 0 0 0 0 2 0.0 55. 56. TOTAL CONVICTIONS (14+27+45) 5023 41.8 4922 39.9 4950 43.6 57. Guilty Pleas(15+28+46) not available from OBTS TREES after1982. 58. Total Incarcerated (18,19, 3209 26.7 3411 27.7 3691 32.5 31,32,47,50,51) Note DROP in convictions, incarcerations. No Death sentences, No not-guilty-insanity. Guilty pleas n/ain OBTS trees. 334) COSTS OF ADULT FELONY MARIJUANA ARREST DISPOSITIONS,1983-84 The method used to calculate the costs of marijuanadispositions relies on the time-weighting technique which theJudicial Council of California uses to determine the number- ofjudgeships needed in the state (Source la). This techniquerecognizes the wide variance in judicial time needed to disposeof different types of cases, and gives a much more accuratepicture of court dispositions than would be obtained from usingthe raw numbers of dispositions. In fiscal 1983/84, for example, there were 781,471 cases filedin superior court. Of these, only about IC) percent (74,412) werecriminal cases. However, these criminal cases tool, up 33per-cent of superior court time. For comparison juveniledelinquency cases were also about IC) percent of filings, buttook up only 7 percent of superior court time because most weresent to juvenile court (Source la!, pp. 105, 114). With this in mind, the costs of felony marijuana dispositionscan be worked out by ascertaining the costs of criminal cases insuperior and lower courts, and then multiplying the result by thepercentage of those cases which were for marijuana. The figures for court expenditures in fiscal 1982/83 and1983/849 and the percentage of time spent on criminal cases, come-from the annual reports of the California Judicial Council(Source 1). However, the Council does not have specificinformation on the number of marijuana dispositions processedthrough the courts, and for this we must rely on Bureau ofCriminal Statistics data (Sources 2 and 3). BCS can provide information on adult felony marijuanadispositions back to 1976, and for comparability we willtherefore use BCS data on total adult felony arrest dispositions.However, due to underreporting of disposition information to BCS,only about 70 percent of adult felony dispositions are recordedeach year (Sources 2 and 3). And this does not include any adultmisdemeanor dispositions or juvenile dispositions. Thus, we are comparing expenditures that are 100 percentreported with dispositions that are only 70 percent reported. Thedifficulty is mitigated somewhat by the fact that the percentagesof total adult felony dispositions which were for marijuana(lines 6, 14 and 20 in the tables) would remain approximately thesame if the disposition information was reported 100 percent.Since the calculation of marijuana expenditures relies on thesepercentages rather than on the raw number of dispositions, theresult should be as accurate as possible with availableinformation. In the lower courts, the categories of criminal cases whichinclude marijuana offenses are felony preliminary hearings,felonies reduced to misdemeanors, and Group A misdemeanors. Theseare the criminal cases used to determine the percentages ofMunicipal court time in line 10. Justice Court percentages areunavailable; by using Municipal Court percentages we have ineffect transferred the relatively few marijuana cases in JusticeCourt into Municipal Court. ADULT FELONY MARIJUANA DISPOSITION EXPENDITURES, l982/83 1982/83 SUPERIOR COURT SOURCE 1. S.C. Expenditures $314,800,000 lb, p. 52 2. S.C. Criminal Case Time Percentage 33% lb, p.124 3. S.C. Criminal Case Expenditures $103,884,000 (#I X #2) 4. S.C. Ad. Fel. Dispositions (83) 52,874 2, p. 13 5. S.C. Ad. Fel. MJ Dispositions 3,357 3, p. 3 6. S.C. % MJ of Ad. Fel. Dispositions 6.35% (#5 / #4) 7. S.C. Ad. Fel. MJ Disp. Expenditures $ 6,596,634 (#6 X #3) 5. S.C. Cost per Ad. Fel. MJ Disposition $1965.04 (#7 / #5) 1982/83 LOWER COURTS SOURCE 9. L.C. Expenditures $263,100,000 lb, p. 52 9a. Municipal Court Expenditures $245,200,000 lb, p. 52 9b. Justice Court Expenditures $ 17,900,000 lb, p. 52 10. M.C. Criminal Case Time Percentages* 45% (#10a + #10b) l0a. M.C. Felony Cases 19% lbp p.157 10b. M.C. Group A Misdemeanor Cases 26% lb, p.157 11. L.C. Criminal Case Expenditures $118,395,000 (#I0 X #9) Ila. L.C. Felony Expenditures $ 49,989,000 (#10a X #9) Ilb. L.C. A-Misd Expenditures $ 68,406,000 (#10b X #9) 12. L.C. Ad. Fel. Dispositions (83) 92,063 2p p. 13 13. L.C. Ad. Fel. MJ Dispositions (83) 7,644 3, P. 3 13a. L.C. Felony MJ Complaints 5,831 3, p. 3 13b. L.C. Misdem MJ Complaints 1,813 3, p. 3 14. % MJ of L.C. Ad. Fel. Dispositions 88.30% (#13 / #12) 15. L.C. MJ Disposition Expenditures $ 9,826,785 (#14 X #11) 16. L.C. Cost per Ad. Fel. MJ Disposition $1285.56 (#15 / #13) Note: Only Municipal Court time-percentages are used herebecause Justice Court data is unavailable; the percentages should beapproximately equal. 1982/83 RECAPITULATION: SUPERIOR AND LOWER COURTS SOURCE 17. SCLC Criminal Case Expenditures $222,279,000 (#3 + #11) 18. SCLC Ad. Fel. Dispositions (yr) 144,937 (#4 + #12) 19. SCLC Ad. Fel. MJ Dispositions 11,001 (#5 + #13) 20. % MJ of SCLC Ad. Fel. Dispositions 7.59% (#19 / #18) 21. SCLC Ad. Fel. MJ Disp. Expenditures $ 16,423,419 (#7 +#15) 22. AVG SCLC Cost per Ad. Fel. MJ Disp. $1492.90 (#21 / #19) ABBREVIATIONS USED S.C. = Superior Court Mi = Marijuana Ad. Fel. = Adult Felony L.C. = Lower Court AVG = Average Disp. = Disposition M.C. = Municipal Court SCLC = Superior and Lower CourtsCombined 464) ADULT FELONY MARIJUANA DISPOSITION EXPENDITURES, 1983/84 1983/84 SUPERIOR COURT SOURCE 1. S.C. Expenditures $360,650,000 la, p. 48 2. S.C. Criminal Case Time Percentage 33% la, p.114 3. S.C. Criminal Case Expenditures $120,216,667 (#I X #2) 4. S.C. Ad. Fel. Dispositions (84) 56,963 2, p. 13 5. S.C. Ad. Fel. MJ Dispositions 3,706 3, P. 3 6. S.C. % MJ of Ad. Fel. Dispositions 6.51% (#5 / #4) 7. S.C. Ad. Fel. MJ Disp. Expenditures $ 7,826,105 (#6 X #3) B. S.C. Cost per Ad. Fel. MJ Disposition $2111.74 (#7 / #5) 1983/84 LOWER COURTS SOURCE 9. L.C. Expenditures $310,060,000 la, p. 48 9a. Municipal Court Expenditures $289,510,000 la, p. 48 9b. Justice Court Expenditures $ 20,550,000 la, p. 48 IC). M.C. Criminal Case Time Percentages* 47% (#10a + #10b) 10a. M.C. Felony Cases 20% la, p.147 10b. M.C. Group A Misdemeanor Cases 27% la, p.147 11. L.C. Criminal Case Expenditures $145,728,200 (#10 X #9) l1a. L.C. Felony Expenditures $ 62,012,000 (#10a X #9) Ilb. L.C. A--Misd Expenditures $ 83,716,200 (#10b X #9) 12. L.C. Ad. Fel. Dispositions (84) 97,757 2, p. 13 13. L.C. Ad. Fel. MJ Dispositions 7,253 3, p. 3 13a. L.C. Felony MJ complaints 5,974 3, p. 3 13b. L.C. Misdem MJ complaints 1,279 3, p. 3 14. % MJ of L.C. Ad. Fel. Dispositions 7.42% (#13 / #12) 15. L.C. MJ Disposition Expenditures $ 10,813,032 (#14 X #11) 16. L.C. Cost per Ad. Fel. MJ Disposition $1490.84 (#15 / #13) *Note: Only Municipal Court time-percentages are used herebecause Justice Court data is unavailable; the percentages should beapproximately equal. 1983/84 RECAPITULATION: SUPERIOR AND LOWER COURTS SOURCE 17. SCLC Criminal Case Expenditures $265,944,867 (#3 + #11) 18. SCLC Ad. Fel. Dispositions (84) 154,720 (#4 + #12) 19. SCLC Ad. Fel. MJ Dispositions 10,959 (#5 + #13) 20. % MJ of SCLC Ad. Fel. Dispositions 7.08% (#19 / #18) 21. SCLC Ad. Fel. MJ Disp. Expenditures $ 18,639,137 (#7 +#15) 22. AVG SCLC Cost per Ad. Fel. MJ Disp. $1700.81 (#21 / #19) ABBREVIATIONS USED S.C. = Superior Court Mi = Marijuana Ad. Fel. = Adult Felony L.C. = Lower Court AVG = Average Disp. = Disposition M.C. = Municipal Court SCLC = Superior ay-id Lower CourtsCombined 533) SOURCES 1. Judicial Council of California, Annual Reports to theGovernor and the Legislature. San Francisco: AdministrativeOffice of the Courts. la. 1985 Final Report. Weighting is described pp. 112 et seq.lb. 1984 Final Report. IC. 1983 Final Report. Id. 1982 Final Report. 2. Criminal Justice Profile 1984, pp. 12-14. Sacramento:Bureau of Criminal Statistics, 1985. 3. DISPTREE file appended to this report. It is derived fromOBTS (Offender-Based Transaction Statistics) Disposition Treesfor Adult Felony Marijuana Dispositions, with data limitationnotes., 1976-1984. Sacramento: Bureau of Criminal Statistics,1985. NOTE: EXPENDITURES NOT INCLUDED IN THIS CALCULATION: 1. Prosecutor (District Attorney) costs 2. Public Defender costs 3. Probation services expenditures 4. Adult Misdemeanor Arrest Dispositions 5. Juvenile Felony Arrest Dispositions 6. Juvenile Misdemeanor- Arrest Dispositions 7. Adult Felony Arrest Dispositions that did riot reach acourt because dismissed by police. e. Adult Felony Arrest Dispositions that did -riot reach acourt except to have the complaint requested by a prosecutor bedenied. 9. None of the expenditures have been inflation-adjusted yet. NOTE- EXPENDITURES WHICH ARE INCLUDED IN THIS CALCULATION: "These costs represent the total operational costs of thetrial Courts. The only category of costs not included are capital Outlay expenditures for Such purposes as site acquisition andconstruction of new court facilities." -- Source la, p. 43. (Thus the expenditures recorded by the Judicial Councilinclude county budgets for superior, municipal and justicecourts, the County clerks office, bailiffs, court-appointed privateattorneys., and indirect county costs attributable to courtactivities Such as personnel or purchasing offices whose costsare attributed to the courts by local prorated budget estimates.In addition, certain state contributions to trial courts such assuperior court judges' salaries, block grants, judges' retirementfunds, and reimbursement for specific legislative mandates.--Ibid.) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B23-55IA087-000627-B013-101http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/chap6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050637 text/html 8735HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:06:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:04 GMTContent-length: 8518 Prison and Parole Costs (Marijuana) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) A Fiscal Analysis of MarijuanaDecriminalization CHAPTER VI. PRISON AND PAROLE COSTS INFLUENCE OF THE MOSCONE ACT ON PRISON POPULATIONS It is difficult to distinguish the roles of PC Section 17 andthe "Wobbler," PC 1000 (drug diversion), the MosconeAct, and the Determinate Sentencing Act of 1976 in reducingprison populations for all had some effect. Nevertheless it ispossible to follow their cumulative impact chronologically. Itshould be remembered that by definition, a -felony is a crime forwhich a possible sentence is a year or more in prison. Most ifnot all felony offenders reach prison via the Superior Courtpipeline. Section 17 PC allowed certain felonies, including manyMarijuana possession cases, to be disposed of in lower courts.This began the process of clearing the congestion in SuperiorCourt, but increased the workload in the lower courts. PC 1000,the 1973 drug diversion program, also took first offenders out ofthe courts, jails and prisons by allowing their charges to bedismissed upon completion of a drug treatment program. As a result the number of felony offenders disposed of inSuperior Court began diminishing, with the direct effect ofreducing the number of felony marijuana offenders in prison from668 in 1973, to 605 in 1974 and 317 in 1975 (Source 1). The Moscone Act, effective January 1, 1976, augmented thisprocess by taking the most common marijuana offense-- possessionof a small amount out of Superior Court entirely. Moreover, thisdid not increase the lower court workload. As explained in aprevious chapter, the new law provided that individualsapprehended for possession of less than an ounce need not beformally arrested or booked on the misdemeanor charge. Thisprovision meant that marijuana possession offenders did not haveto appear even in lower courts. And since the maximum penalty forthis offense was a $100 fine (not incarceration), jail as well asprison populations fell. As a result, felony marijuana offenders in prison again fellto only 198 in 1976. Thus!. before the Determinate SentencingAct, the combined three laws had reduced marijuana felonpopulations by 70 percent between 1973 and 1976, simply byemptying the Superior Court pipeline of felony marijuanapossession cases. The Determinate Sentencing Act occasioned a one-time,across-the-board release of felons from prison (Source 1). Thisis reflected in the drop in marijuana felons from 198 in 1976 to146 in 1977. The law's long-term effect was to decrease thenumber of trials in Superior Court and to increase the number Ofguilty pleas (Source 2). Acting in tandem, these legislative changes continued toreduce the marijuana felon population to 121 in 1978, 101 in1979, and 98 in 1980. Starting with 668 marijuana felons in 1973,this represents an enormous 85 percent drop in the number ofmarijuana prisoners. Then in 1981, as felony arrests for sale and cultivation ofmarijuana climbed and leveled off at about 21,000 a year, thenumber of marijuana felons in prison again began to rise,reaching 327 by 1984. Overall, the result of the Moscone Act andthese other influences was to reduce the marijuana prisonpopulation to about half its 1972 level. FELONY MARIJUANA OFFENDER PRISON AND PAROLE COSTS The California Department of Corrections keeps close track ofthe per capita costs of convicted felons in prison or on parole.Since it costs no more for a marijuana offender than for anyother inmate or parolee, it is easy to determine the costs ofadult felony marijuana offenders by Multiplying the number ofsuch of-fenders in prison or on parole by the per capita costseach year. All statistics for this calculation were provided bythe Department of Corrections (Source 1). FISCAL MJ FELONS PER CAP MJ PRISON MJ FELONS PER CAP MJ PAROLE YEAR IN PRISON COSTS COSTS ON PAROLE COSTS COSTS ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 77/78 (77) 146 $10,400 $1,518,400 (77) 216 $ 792 $171,072 78/79 (78) 121 $10,058 $1,217,018 (78) 104 $ 854 $88,816 79/80 (79) 101 $11,304 $1,141,704 (79) 85 $1,285 $109,225 80/81 (80) , 98 $12,646 $1,239,308 (80) 880 $1,408 $112,640 81/82 (81) 119 $12,706 $1,512,014 (81) 69 $1,103 $76,107 82/83 (82) 157 $12,706 $1,994,842 (82) 76 $ 837 $63,612 83/84 (83) 191 $12,948 $2,473,068 (83) 167 $1,393 $232,631 84/85 (84) 327 $14,344* $4,690,488 (84) 234 $1,847 $432,198 NOTES: *1984/85 Institution and Parole per capita costs areestimated. The Population counts are as of December 31 each year.Felons counted are those with marijuana as their most seriousoffense. In 1973, the 668 marijuana offenders in prison were about 3percent of the total prison population of 22,486. In 1980 the 98Marijuana felons were less than half of one percent (0.4per-cent) of the prison population, and by 1984 the 327 marijuanafelons were 0.76 percent of that population. By reducing the number of marijuana felons significantlycompared to their 1972-74 levels, the Moscone Act and the otherlaws mentioned above saved the taxpayers consider-able sums ofmoney. Nevertheless it should be noticed that the cost of keeping327 marijuana offenders in prison in 1984 was nearly 5 milliondollars. SOURCES 1. Total and Marijuana Felon prison populations for 1972-84,and Per Capita Institution and Parole Costs for fiscal 1977/78 to1985/86 were provided by Phyllis Marquez and Linda Greutle,Estimates Unit, California Department of Corrections(Sacramento)., in January 1986. Ms. Greule alerted us to thepossible influence of the Determinate Sentencing Act in additionto the Moscone Act in reducing prison populations, as well. 2. Judicial Council of California, 1985 Annual Report to theGovernor and the Legislature (San Francisco, 1986), p. 21. TheJudicial Council reports since 1977 have followed the influenceof the Determinate Sentencing Act closely. MRA NOTE: in the later version of this report, look in thePrison.CDC file folder for a study Linda Greule sent on theaver-age time served before parole by marijuana prisoners. Also: do a comparative cost estimate like the one in myPRISON.CDC -file. Also; check sources Suggested by Linda Greule for per capitacosts before 1977-- take it back to at least 1972. PRISON.CDC-file again. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana)WT01-B23-56IA087-000625-B008-195http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/misc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040151 text/html 8053HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:01:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:14:52 GMTContent-length: 7836 Miscellaneous Items on Drugs and Drug Policy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Miscellaneous Items on Drugs and Drug Policy Items not elsewhere classified War on Drugs Articles- A collection of articles about the War on Some Drugs. The "Scientific" Justificationfor Urine Testing - Part 1 The "Scientific"Justification for Urine Testing - Part 2 By John Morgan, Medical professor and acting Chairman of Pharmacology, City University of New York Medical School, KANSAS LAW REVIEW, 1988 Test Negative A look atthe "evidence" justifying illicit-drug tests, by John Morgan, SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN March 1990, p. 18 Federal Panel Says Valueof Workplace Testing Unproven--Forensic Drug Abuse Advisor Vo. 7 (1) January 1995, p.6 The Drug Test Scam by Ian Goddard Urinalysis or Uromancy?The Untold Costs of Drug Testing Abuseby Dale Gieringer, Ph.D., A paper for the Drug Policy Foundation Published in "Strategies for Change: New Directions in Drug Policy (1992) Meta-Analysis ofAdolescent Crime and Substance Use, 1981-1995 by Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. The University of MemphisMemphis, Tennessee 1994 American ManagementSurvey on Workplace Drug Testing Simple Way to BeatUrine Tests - Just Drink Water, Reportfrom American Academy of Forensic Sciences, Forensic Drug AbuseAdvisor, Vol. 6, Issue 3, March 1994 Testimony of Marc Mauer,Assistant Director, The Sentencing Project Before the Subcomittee on Legislation and National Security and the Subcommittee on Government Information, Justice and Agriculture of the House Government Operations Committee, May 2, 1990, Washington, D.C. Criminal Justice SystemReform by Judge Thomas M. Stark America Held Prisoner, by HughDowns - A radio show by Hugh Downs, about the author of these webpages. PCP and Violence - excerpted from :Drug Abuse and Drug Abuse Research, an annual report to congressby the U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, pg. 153. (1991) Marijuana - The Insidious Drug Asummary of some of the major points in Pot Safari and MarijuanaAlert by Peggy Mann, McGraw Hill. A modern version of ReeferMadness. The Dollar Cost ofPunishment This file contains miscellaneous notes andreferences regarding the costs of punishing people for drugoffenses. Lots of interesting tidbits. Originally posted onDRCNet. A Review of the ScientificLiterature Re Amotivational Syndrome This is an excellent synopsis of the information regarding the"amotivational syndrome" and marijuana. Complete withcitations for further reference. Contributed by Brian of DRCNet. DRUGS AND THE INFORMATIONSUPERHIGHWAY by HON. GERALD B.H. SOLOMON OF NEW YORK inthe House of Representatives, Thursday, October 6, 1994 A speech by Gerald Solomon. He is upset because people areusing the internet to promote drug policy reform. Free speechmust be stopped before it ruins America. DRUG DECRIMINALIZATION INHOLLAND HAS INCREASED CRIME AND ADDICTION by HON. GERALD B.H.SOLOMON OF NEW YORK in the House of Representatives Thursday,March 2, 1995 Another diatribe, full of misinformation, by GeraldSolomon. What he doesn't know about the subject has filledlibraries. Drug Laws in South America- A synopsis of the drug laws in various South Americancountries. Pharmacology of Marijuana: JustAnother Sedative by Frederick H. Meyers, M.D., Professor ofPharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, Ca. Thisis an excellent document discussing the effects and pharmacologyof marijuana. The Drug Policy Foundation'sForum on Legislative Policy State Capitol, January 27, 1992by Frederick H. Meyers, M.D., Professor of Pharmacology,University of California, San Francisco, CA This paraphrases thereport of the Research Advisory Panel. Facts About Marijuana Marijuana:Drug of Deception, A publication of the Lions Club Beer Versus Drugs Why beer is goodand the illegal drugs are bad - from Anheuser-Busch. Three articles on the Drug Problem,From the Economist May 15 -21, 1993 ABC News WAR ON DRUGS: SEARCHING FORSOLUTIONS: A Summary by Jim Hoffman Your Child and Stimulants bythe Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs. This file consists of excerpts from a publication directed atparents in the Netherlands. Contributed by Mario Lap. Drug Bibliography -- Alisting of articles and other materials on drugs. The latestarticle listed is 1990. (Note: This file is more than 300K) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B23-57IA087-000632-B018-23http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/studies.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092148 text/html 49952HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:21:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:56:02 GMTContent-length: 49736 Major Studies of Drugs and Drug Policy - Titles andSummaries Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Major Studies of Drugs and Drug Policy This page will contain full-text copies of the majorstudies of drugs and drug policy as they become available and aswe have resources to scan them and put them on the web. Readerswho wish to fund the addition of new research to the web shouldsee How You CanSupport the Schaffer Library. We are currently seeking copies of any reports for which wedo not yet have full text. These reports are marked with We also invite submissions of major reports which are notyet listed here. MajorStudies Table of Contents - Titles only Year Country Title 1894 India Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report This 3,281-page, seven-volume classic report on the marijuana problem in India by British and concluded: "Viewing the subject generally, it may be added that moderate use of these drugs is the rule, and that the excessive use is comparatively exceptional. The moderate use produces practically no ill effects." Nothing of significance in the report's conclusions has been proven wrong in the intervening century 1905 US Report of the Committee Appointed by the Philippine Commission to Investigate The Use of Opium and the Traffic Therein...Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Dept., Philippines Summary not yet available. 1926 England Departmental Committee on Morphine and Heroin Addiction, Report (The Rolleston Report): This landmark study by a distinguished group of British doctors appointed by the government codified existing practices regarding the maintenance of addicts on heroin and morphine by individual doctors and recommended that they continue without police or medical society interference. In coming to this conclusion, these physicians displayed a humane regard for the addicts in their care, perhaps due to their view of the nature of narcotic addiction: "Me condition must be regarded as a manifestation of disease and not as a mere form of vicious indulgence." The British addiction experts took pains to state that they did not agree with the opinions of "some eminent physicians, especially in the United States" that addicts "could always be cured by sudden withdrawal." 1928 US The Opium Problem by Charles E. Terry and Mildred Pellens Summary not yet available. 1929 US Panama Canal Zone Military Investigations (US Military, 1916-29) After an exhaustive study of the smoking of marijuana among American soldiers stationed in the zone, the panel of civilian and military experts recommended that "no steps be taken by the Canal Zone authorities to prevent the sale or use of Marihuana." The committee also concluded that "there is no evidence that Marihuana as grown and used [in the Canal Zone] is a 'habit-forming' drug." 1930 US Wickersham Commission Report on Alcohol Prohibition Summary not yet available. 1944 US The LaGuardia Committee Report Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in the City of New York commissioned by Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia, written by the New York Academy of Medicine, and published by the City of New York in 1944 This study is viewed by many experts as the best study of any drug viewed in its social, medical, and legal context. The committee covered thousands of years of the history of marijuana and also made a detailed examination of conditions In New York City. Among its conclusions: "The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead to addiction in the medical sense of the word." And: "The use of marihuana does not lead to morphine or heroin or cocaine addiction, and no effort is made to create a market for those narcotics by stimulating the practice of marihuana smoking." Finally: "The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects of marihuana smoking in New York City is unfounded." 1961 England Interdepartmental Committee, Drug Addiction, (The First Brain Report) When the Brain Committee first met at the invitation of the minister of health, its mission was to review the advice given by the Rolleston Committee in 1926. That advice had been to continue to allow doctors to treat addicts with maintenance doses of powerful drugs when the doctors deemed it medically helpful for the patient. Brain I reiterated that advice and in this first report recommended no changes of any significance on the prescribing powers of doctors. This report expanded on one important point alluded to in Rolleston-the authenticity of the existence of "stabilized addicts." While many American experts doubt their existence, this report explained, "careful scrutiny of the histories of more than a hundred persons classified as addicts reveals that many of them who have been taking small and regular doses for years show little evidence of tolerance and are often leading reasonably satisfactory lives." Six "case histories of known stabilized addicts" were included in an appendix. They were mature, older patients, functioning normally on what would be huge doses of drugs by American standards. "Mr. F.," for example, a clerical worker, was receiving the equivalent of 200 milligrams of morphine tablets each day. It is likely that these patients and their doctors would be dealt with as criminals in the United States. 1961 US Drug Addiction: Crime or Disease? Joint Committee of the American Bar Association and the American Medical Association on Narcotic Drugs, Interim and Final Reports, 1961: This report was the result of the only major combined study of drug policy made by two of the most important professional societies in the country. Chaired by attorney Rufus King of Washington, D.C.. the committee presented a direct challenge to the tough policies of Federal Bureau of Narcotics Director Harry Anslinger, a philosophical ancestor of the previous "drug czar," William Bennett. The blue-ribbon committee included a senior federal judge and was advised by Indiana University's Alfred Lindesmith, one of the most distinguished addiction scholars in history. The report observed, "Drug addiction is primarily a problem for the physician rather than the policeman, and it should not be necessary for anyone to violate the criminal law solely because he is addicted to drugs." The report concluded that drug addiction was a disease, not a crime, that harsh criminal penalties were destructive, that drug prohibition ought to be reexamined, and that experiments should be conducted with British-style maintenance clinics for narcotic addicts. 1965 England Interdepartmental Committee, Drug Addiction, Second Report, (The Second Brain Report) Brain II has been consistently misinterpreted by leading American scholars and officials. It did not recommend the dismantling of the British prescription system nor the compulsory registration of addicts, as has been claimed. Instead, Brain II urged that doctors who wished to prescribe "restricted drugs" to addicts for the purpose of maintenance be required to obtain a special license from the Home Office; treatment centers be established for treating addicts who were to be regarded as sick and not criminal; and doctors and other medical personnel be mandated to "notify" the Home Office when they encountered an addict in the course of their professional work. Originally, the category of restricted drugs included heroin and cocaine; now, dipipanone has been added. The core of the British system remains, however, and in recent years has been reinvigorated. Approximately 200 doctors with special licenses are free to prescribe all drugs, including the restricted medicines, for maintenance of addicts. Also, any doctor, unlike those in the U.S., may prescribe all of the other drugs for maintenance, including, for example, injectable morphine and methadone. Brain II in the end was aimed at controlling a few overprescribing doctors, not at adopting the American system of treating addicts as the enemy. 1968 England Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence, Cannabis, (The Wootton Report) This study report on marijuana and hashish was prepared by a group that included some of the leading drug abuse experts of the United Kingdom. These impartial experts worked as a subcommittee under the lead of Baroness Wootton of Abinger. The basic tone and substantive conclusions were similar to all of the other great commission reports. The Wootton group specifically endorsed the conclusions of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission and the La Guardia Committee. Typical findings included the following: There is no evidence that in Western society serious physical dangers are directly associated with the smoking of cannabis. It can clearly be argued on the world picture that cannabis use does not lead to heroin addiction. The evidence of a link with violent crime is far stronger with alcohol than with the smoking of cannabis. There is no evidence that this activity ... is producing in otherwise normal people conditions of dependence or psychosis, requiring medical treatment. 1970 Canada Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs, Interim Report, (The Le Dain Report) The distinguished Canadian experts on this governmental commission were led by law school dean, later Supreme Court Justice, Gerald Le Dain. The report was similar to the other great commission reports in terms of its non-martial, calm approach to the facts and in its belief that marijuana use did not constitute a great threat to the public welfare. The official governmental commission was remarkable in the extent to which its report portrayed casual drug users as decent, thoughtful citizens whose views deserved the fullest possible hearing by the government in the process of developing drug control strategies. A mother of four and school teacher was quoted in the report as saying: "When I smoke grass I do it in the same social way that I take a glass of wine at dinner or have a drink at a party. I do not feel that is one of the great and beautiful experiences of my life; I simply feel that it is pleasant, and I think it ought to be legalized." The commission did not ask for that change immediately but instead recommended that serious consideration be given to legalization of personal possession in the near future. The report also urged that police and prosecutors go easy on casual users and keep them out of jail as often as possible. 1970 US The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree of Knowledge: An Inquiry into the Legal History of American Marihuana Prohibition by Professors Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H. Whitebread, II, Virginia Law Review, Volume 56, October 1970 Number 6 This is the most definitive history of the marijuana laws. See The History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs for the author's short version of this history. The authors concluded that the marijuana laws were motivated by three major factors. The first state marijuana prohibition law came in Utah in 1915 and was enacted into law along with a number of other Mormon religious prohibitions. The early state marijuana laws in the Southwest and West were passed because "All Mexicans are crazy and marijuana is what makes them crazy." That is, they were the result of racial prejudice against newly arrived Mexican immigrants. The other early state marijuana laws were passed out of the fear that opiate addicts, who had been deprived of legal access to opiates by the Harrison Tax Act of 1914, would turn to marijuana. In other words, they were afraid that opiate use would lead to marijuana. The first Federal prohibition on marijuana was passed for reasons which can only be described as "nonsense," including the racial reasons listed above, as well as allegations that marijuana caused young lovers to elope. Interested readers may want to review the original source documents under Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. 1972 US The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs, by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors of Consumer Reports Magazine This is a landmark study, a "must-read", used as a basic textbook at major universities. This web page will ultimately include chapter by chapter summaries of the main points of this book. It is certainly one of the first books which should be read by people who want to know about this subject 1972 US The Koerner Commission Report, State of Ohio Summary not yet available. 1972 US Dealing With Drug Abuse: A Report to the Ford Foundation, by the Drug Abuse Survey Project. Summary not yet available. 1972 US Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding, National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse This commission was directed by Raymond P. Shafer, former Republican governor of Pennsylvania, and had four sitting, elected politicians among its eleven members. The commission also had leading addiction scholars among its members and staff and was appointed by President Nixon in the midst of the drug-war hysteria at that time. While the commission supported much existing policy, it produced two reflective reports, this being the final comprehensive document, which recommended research, experimentation, and humane compromise. The first recommendations of the commission were: Possession of marihuana for personal use would no longer be an offense, but marihuana possessed in public would remain contraband subject to summary seizure and forfeiture. Casual distribution of small amounts of marihuana for no remuneration, or Insignificant remuneration not involving profit, would no longer be an offense. The recommendations in this reports were endorsed by (among others) the American Medical Association, the American Bar Association, The American Association for Public Health, the National Education Association, and the National Council of Churches. 1973 US Drug Use in America: Problem in Perspective, National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Summary not yet available. 1977 US The Nation's Toughest Drug Law: Evaluating the New York Experience, by the Joint Committee on New York Drug Law Evaluation, of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York This commission was formed to review the Rockefeller drug laws, the toughest in the nation. The report basically concluded that tougher sentences had provided little, if any, benefit. Instead, they had increased the incentive for drug sellers to commit violence and had clogged the criminal justice system. The report also found that tougher penalties had done nothing material to reduce drug use but had instead exacerbated some of the existing problems with drug abuse. 1980 US The Facts About Drug Abuse, The Drug Abuse Council A 1972 report to the Ford Foundation, "Dealing With Drug Abuse," concluded that current drug policies were unlikely to eliminate or greatly affect drug abuse. This conclusion led to the creation and joint funding by four major foundations of a broadly based, independent national Drug Abuse Council. The council reviewed and assessed laws, programs, and projects-federal, state, and local, private and governmental-related to use and misuse of psychoactive drugs. In its final report, the council's board of directors offered a set of observations considered central to the process of reaching mom consistent, coherent, and responsible approaches to drug use and misuse. Psychoactive substances have been available throughout recorded history and will remain so. To try to eliminate them completely is unrealistic. The use of psychoactive drugs is pervasive, but misuse is much less frequent, and the failure to make the distinction between use and misuse creates the impression that all use is misuse and leads to addiction. There is a clear relationship between drug misuse and pervasive societal ills such as poverty, racial discrimination, and unemployment, and we can expect drug misuse so long as these adverse social conditions exist. The price of an effective strategy to eliminate drug misuse through the criminal law would be perceived by many Americans as too high in terms of invasions of privacy and abrogations of individual liberties. Drug laws and policies attend insufficiently to the problems of people misusing drugs and too much to the properties of drugs themselves, as though the drugs were somehow inherently to blame. Too many Americans have unrealistic expectations about what drug policies and programs can accomplish. We have a regrettable tendency to blame our drug problems on others, failing to recognize that our drug problems are products of our own national experience. The council's directors then offered a set of suggestions, Principal among them are the following, Treatment for drug dependence should be available chiefly because people need help, rather than as a crime control or behavior control method. There should be a major study of the effects of drug laws and their enforcement on personal decisions to use or not use illicit drugs. Legislative efforts to decriminalize at both state and federal levels the possession of small amounts of marijuana for personal use should continue. The report ends with the recommendation: "... that serious consideration be given to the use of state and local option as a means of attempting solutions appropriate in one place but not in others. Local options could encourage greater flexibility and ingenuity rather than reliance on an unrealistic, rigid homogeneity in national drug policy. We need to respond to the diversity of people who use and misuse drugs, base all our policies on a consistent set of principles seeking to discourage misuse, and keep our seemingly innate drug-using behavior within reasonable limits through means. which do not themselves produce more harm than they prevent. 1982 US An Analysis of Marihuana Policy, National Research Council of the National Academy of Science The NAS Committee on Substance Abuse and Habitual Behavior was composed of some of the leading American experts on medicine, addiction treatment, law, business, and public policy. These experts reviewed all of the available evidence on every aspect of the marijuana question. The committee then recommended that the country experiment with a system that would allow states to set up their own methods of controlling marijuana as is now done with alcohol. Under this approach, federal criminal penalties would be removed, and each state could decide to legalize the drug and impose regulations concerning hours of sale, age limits, and taxation. In the same vein as all the previous major objective studies, this report stated that excessive marijuana use could cause serious harm, that such use was rare, and that, on balance, the current policy of total prohibition was socially and personally destructive. The report placed great emphasis on building up public education and informal social controls, which often have a greater impact on drug abuse than the criminal law. Regarding the possibility of disaster for our youth under legalization, the report observed: There is reason to believe that widespread uncontrolled use would not occur under regulation. Indeed, regulation might facilitate patterns of controlled use by diminishing the "forbidden fruit" aspect of the drug and perhaps increasing the likelihood that an adolescent would be introduced to the drug through families and friends, who practice moderate use, rather than from their heaviest-using, most drug-involved peers, 1988 US DEA Docket No. 86-22, DEA Chief Administrative Law Judge ruling on medical marijuana This is the ruling of the DEA's own Chief Administrative Law Judge which arose as the result of a suit against the Federal Government, seeking to reschedule marijuana for medical purposes. Before issuing his ruling, Judge Francis Young heard two years of testimony from both sides of the issue and accumulated fifteen volumes of research. This was undoubtedly the most comprehensive study of medical marijuana done to date. Judge Young concluded that marijuana was one of the safest therapeutically active substances known to man, that it had never caused a single human death, and that the Federal Government's policy toward medical marijuana is "unconscionable." 1989 US AIDS and Drug Misuse, Part 1, Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs, 1988; Part 2, 1989 "The spread of HIV is a greater danger to individual and public health than drug misuse," declared the leading drug abuse and health experts of the United Kingdom who sit on this distinguished quasi-governmental advisory group. This concept operated as the guiding principle in this commission report, one part issued in 1988, another in 1989. In stark contrast to the Bush administration's war plans, the British council provided a comprehensive health plan that seeks to prevent the use of drugs, as is the American goal. However, the plan has realistic goals regarding drug abusers; abstinence in the American mode, where possible, but above all else, health and life. Thus, the Advisory Council accepted the lessons of the "harm reduction" programs of the Liverpool area and recommended that they be spread to the entire United Kingdom. Some of these lessons involve needle exchanges and prescribed drugs for addicts. The report even went beyond the Liverpool experience when these leading British experts quietly observed, "We believe that there is a place for an expansion of residential facilities where drug misusers may gain better health, skills, and self-confidence whilst in receipt of prescribed drugs." Thus, while the United States is planning more prison space for drug addicts, the United Kingdom is contemplating more hostels where addicts could be taught to live more healthy, more self-confident and more productive lives in the community. 1989 US Report of the Research Advisory Panel for the State of California This panel, appointed by the state legislature of California to regulate all research on controlled substances, reviewed drug policy and recommended that "the legislature act to redirect this, state away from the present destructive pathways of drug control." The report noted that we had followed a path of prohibition over the last fifty years and concluded that this policy "has been manifestly unsuccessful in that we are now using more and a greater variety of drugs, legal and illegal." In addition, the failure of prohibition has resulted in "societal overreaction (that] has burdened us with ineffectual, inhumane, and expensive treatment, education and enforcement efforts." They recommended a move toward the formulation of "legislation aiming at regulation and decriminalization" and the winding down of the war on drugs. The Research Advisory Panel made three specific recommendations for initial legislative action. These were permit the possession of syringes and needles; permit the cultivation of marijuana for personal use; and in order to project an attitude of disapproval of all drug use, take a token action in forbidding the sale or consumption of alcohol in state-supported institutions devoted in part or whole to patient care or educational activity. The panel recommended immediate and innovative action, concluding it is "incontrovertible that whatever policies we have been following over the past generations must not be continued unexamined and unmodified since our actions to date have favored the development of massive individual and societal problems." 1991 US "The Twin Epidemics of Substance Use and HIV" The National Commission on AIDS This indictment of current drug policy focuses on the relationship between the spread of HIV and drug use. The commission criticized the federal government's failure to recognize that these are twin epidemics and found that the "strategy of interdiction and increased prison sentences has done nothing to change the stark statistics" showing spread of AIDS by drug users. The commission singled out the Office of National Drug Control Policy for ignoring AIDS and "neglecting the real public health and treatment measures which could and must be taken to halt the spread." The commission put forward five recommendations: Expand drug treatment so that all who apply for treatment can be accepted into treatment programs. Remove legal barriers to the purchase and possession of injection equipment. The federal government must take the lead in developing and maintaining programs to prevent HIV transmission related to licit and illicit drugs. Research and epidemiologic studies on the relationships between licit and illicit drug use and HIV transmission should be greatly expanded and funding should be increased, not reduced or merely held constant. All levels of government and the private sector need to mount a serious and sustained attack on the social problems of poverty, homelessness, and lack of medical care that promote licit and illicit drug use in American society. The National Commission on AIDS could be described as the echo of the British Advisory Council on the misuse of drugs in its report on AIDS and drug misuse, as it made virtually the same policy recommendations. The commission concluded that "the federal government must recognize that HIV and substance use is one of the issues of paramount concern within the 'war on drugs.' Any program which does not deal with the duality of the HIV/drug epidemic is destined to fail." The commission urged the federal government to move away from a law enforcement approach in controlling drugs toward a public health approach, which to date has "been seriously neglected." 1994 US A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition, A Report of the Special Committee on Drugs and the Law of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York The Bar of the City of New York studied the issue of drugs and drug policy for about five years and concluded that the only reasonable way to correct the current problems would be to repeal the Federal laws on these drugs in their entirety and allow the states to develop their own programs, similar to the situation with alcohol. 1994 Australia Legislative Options for Cannabis. Australian Government Summary not yet available. 1994 US Technologies for Understanding and Preventing Substance Abuse and Addiction -- US Government Office of Technology Assessment -- October 18, 1994 Summary not yet available. 1996 Australia Drugs and our Community - Report of the Premier's Drug Advisory Council, Melbourne: Victorian Government, March, 1996 Summary not yet available. 1996 US Report and Recommendations of the Drug Policy Task Force, New York County Lawyers Association The recommendations are: Pursue Alternative Models in Establishing Future Drug Policy Provide Immediate Sentencing Relief and Additional Judicial Discretion in Criminal Prosecution of Drug Cases Reduce the Harms Associated With Substance Abuse and Drug Prohibition Concentrate Law Enforcement Resources on Reducing Violent Crime and Prosecution of Violent Criminal Offenders Reshape the Drug Policy Debate -- Return to Objective Analysis and Realistic Goals Implement Public Education Campaign on Drug Use and Substance Abuse Decriminalize Marijuana Reverse Encroachments on Civil Rights and Restore "Due Process of Law" Provide Alternative Social and Economic Opportunity for Inner City Youth End War on Youth and Inner City Communities -- Restore Confidence and Integrity in Government 1996 Australia Beyond Prohibition - Report of the Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law Reform Project - September 1996 This recent report from Australia explores specific options for alternatives to the current drug prohibition. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B23-58IA031-000655-B038-236http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/misintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112719 text/html 7777HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:27:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:21 GMTContent-length: 7560 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Introduction This is the first of two Reports by the National Commission onand Drug Abuse. Public Law 91-513 requires that we report to thePresident, Congress and the public initially on marihuana andthen on the broader issue of drug abuse in the United The secondReport will include a review of the marihuana issue withparticular attention to studies which have been conducted in theinterim. In large measure, the marihuana issue is a child of thesixties, the visual and somewhat pungent symbol of dramaticchanges which have permanently affected our nation in the lastdecade. Some have that our mandate has placed the cart before thehorse, and that we should have focused first on the wider socialissue and assessed marihuana's impact on society within thatcontext. much thought and investigation, we now believe thatCongress was wise in focusing this Commission's attention firston marihuana. separating it from the rest of the drugcontroversy, we have been better able to analyze the uniqueposition marihuana occupies in our society. Our mandate was a broad one, covering, for example, the natureand scope of use, the effects of the drug, the relationship ofmarihuana use to other behavior and the efficacy of existing law.Realizing that marihuana had never before in the Americanexperience been the subject of a concentrated, authoritativegovernmental study, we launched a comprehensive research andfact-finding effort. We sought.. to evaluate and supplementexisting material, to fill knowledge voids. and to assess theso-called truths commonly posed in the marihuana debate. Soon after funds became available on March 22, 1971, wecommissioned more than 50 projects, ranging from a study of theeffects of marihuana on man to a field survey of enforcement ofthe marihuana laws in six metropolitan jurisdictions. Ofparticular importance in our fact-finding effort were theopinions and attitudes of all groups in our society. Through formal and informal hearings, recorded in thousands ofpages of transcripts, we solicited all points of view, includingthose of public officials, community leaders, professionalexperts and students. We commissioned a nationwide survey ofpublic beliefs, information and experience referred to in thisReport as the National Survey. In addition, we conducted separatesurveys of opinion among', district attorneys, judges, probationofficers, clinicians, university health officials and free clinicpersonnel. This inquiry focused on the American experience. However, wehave been well aware from the outset that the scope of marihuanause in the United States differs considerably from that in othercountries where the drug has been used for centuries.Accordingly, the Commission sought to put the American experiencein perspective by seeing the situation first hand in India,Greece, North Africa, Jamaica, Afghanistan, and other countries. Because of our initial concentration on marihuana, certainissues common to marihuana and other drugs have been deferred formore complete coverage in the second Report. For example, adetailed analysis of educational programs about marihuana and itsuse will be considered when we evaluate drug education programsin general. Further, we do not discuss the rehabilitation of the problemmarihuana user since no such specialized programs exist; we foundthe subject is best approached from a broader perspective ofrehabilitation programs for problem users of all non-narcoticdrugs. An examination of federal and state organizationalresponse to the drug issue, as well as an in-depth study ofgeneral law enforcement strategies, have both been undertaken andwill continue, but will not be reported fully until the secondyear. Officers of the Federal Government have set a high priority onfuller understanding of the marihuana issue and appropriategovernmental action. President Nixon has frequently expressed hispersonal and official commitment to providing a rational andequitable public response to the use and misuse of drugs.Similarly, Congress has shown its concern in passing theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. Inappointing this Commission, both the President and Congress haverecognized the need for an independent, nonpartisan appraisal ofthe nature of marihuana and the consequences of its use, for asimilar appraisal of the abuse of all drugs, and for appropriaterecommendations for public policy as a result of both studies. The Commission decided early in its deliberations to write aReport that was complete but not overly technical so that thereader could understand the points discussed without analyzingdetailed studies. Some. studies and supporting data are includedin an Appendix to the Report, which is published separately. Forthe researcher and others interested in greater detail, theAppendix provides the necessary technical data. This Report focuses on marihuana, the popular name for amixture of stems, leaves and flowering tops of the Indian hempplant, Cannabis Sativa L. This Report presents the mostsignificant information gathered to date about the drug and itsusers, concluding with the Commission's recommendationsconcerning the most appropriate public response to marihuanausage in our society. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B23-59IA031-000655-B038-274http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/mis2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112746 text/html 70753HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:27:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:02 GMTContent-length: 70535 Marihuana and the Problem of Marihuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding I -- marihuana and the problem of marihuana "There are no whole truths; all truths are half -truths.It is trying to treat them as whole truths that plays thedevil." Alfred North Whitehead (1953) We are a nation of problem-solvers. We are restless andimpatient with perceived gaps between the way things are and theway we think ought to be. Understandably, such an impulse towardself-correction never leaves us wanting for social problems tosolve. Although it is a prerequisite to social progress, thisproblem-solving orientation misdirects our attention. In order tomaximize public awareness we are apt to characterize situationsas being far worse than they really are. Because any activity iscommonly regarded as a move toward a solution, rhetoric andstopgap legislation sometimes substitute for rational reflection.We become so impressed with social engineering that we overlookinherent human limitations. Since the mid-sixties, American society has been increasinglyagitated by what has been defined as a marihuana problem. Thetypical sequences of "a national problem" haveresulted: exaggeration, polarization and the inevitable demandfor a. solution. The appointment of this Commission and thepublication of this Report reflect the escalation of marihuanause into the realm of social problem. Since the beginning of ourofficial life, we have grappled with the threshold question: Whyhas the use of marihuana reached problem status in the publicmind? Origins of the Marihuana Problem Marihuana has been used as an intoxicant in various parts ofthe world for centuries and in this country for 75 years. Yet useof the drug has been regarded as a problem of major proportionsfor less than a decade. We will not find the reasons forcontemporary social concern in pharmacology texts or previousgovernmental reports, for we are dealing with two separaterealities: a drug with certain pharmacologic properties anddeterminable, although variable, effects on man; and a pattern ofhuman behavior, individual and group, which has, as a behavior,created fear, anger, confusion, and uncertainty among a largesegment of the contemporary American public. The marihuanabehavior pattern is the source of the marihuana controversy. The most apparent feature of the behavior is that it isagainst the law. But inconsistency between behavior and the legalnorm is not sufficient, in itself, to create a social problem.Marihuana, has been an illegal substance for several decades; andthe widespread violation of laws against gambling and adulteryhave not excited the public to the same extent as hasmarihuana-smoking in recent years. At the same time, we suspect that illegality may play animportant role in problem definition where drugs are concerned.Alcohol is of proven danger to individual and societal health andthe public is well aware of its dangers, yet use of this drug hasnot been accorded the same problem status. Marihuana's illegalitymay have been a necessary condition for the marihuana problem,but the increased violation of the legal proscription does not byitself explain the phenomenon. The Commission believes that three interrelated factors havefostered the definition of marihuana as a major national problem.First, the illegal behavior is highly visible to all segments ofour society. Second, use of the drug is perceived to threaten thehealth and morality not only of the individual but of the societyitself. Third, and most important, the drug has evolved in thelate sixties and early seventies, as a symbol of wider socialconflicts and public issues. VISIBILITY More than anything else, the visibility of marihuana use by asegment of our population previously unfamiliar with the drug iswhat stirred public anxiety and thrust marihuana into the problemarea. Marihuana usage in the United States has been with us for avery long period of time, dating back to the beginning of thecentury. For decades its use was mainly confined to theunderprivileged socioeconomic groups in our cities and to certaininsulated social groups, such as jazz musicians and artists. Aslong as use remained confined to these groups and had anegligible impact on the dominant social order, the vast majorityof Americans remained unconcerned. From the other side, theinsulated marihuana user was in no position to demand carefulpublic or legislative scrutiny. However, all this changed markedly in the mid-1960's. Forvarious reasons, marihuana use became a common form of recreationfor many middle and upper class college youth. The trend spreadacross the country, into the colleges and high schools and intothe affluent suburbs as well. Use by American servicemen inVietnam was frequent. In recent years, use of the drug hasspanned every social class and geographic region. The Commission-sponsored National Survey, "A NationwideStudy of Beliefs, Information and Experiences," indicatedthat some 24 million Americans have tried marihuana at least onceand that at least 8.3 million are current users. Other surveys uniformly indicate that more than 40% of theU.S. college population have tried marihuana, and in someuniversities the figure is much higher. Also, use of the drug hasbecome almost as common among young adults out of college, andamong older teenagers in high school. The National Surveyindicates that 39%, of young adults between 18 and 25 years ofage have tried marihuana. The stereotype of the marihuana user asa marginal citizen has given way to a composite picture of largesegments of American youth, children of the dominant majority andvery much a part of the mainstream of American life. Public confusion, anger, and fear over this development becameincreasingly apparent during the mid and late 1960's. Such massdeviance was a problem and the scope of the problem was augmentedby frequent publicity. The topic of the usage of marihuana by theyoung received considerable attention from newspapermen andtelevision reporters. The drug's youthful users abetted the mediain this regard by flaunting their disregard of the law, Few of ushave not seen or heard of marihuana being used en masse at rockconcerts, political demonstrations and gatherings of campusactivists. In addition, new scientific and medical interest in marihuanaand its use was stimulated by the sudden public interest. For thefirst time in the American experience, the drug became thesubject of intensive scrutiny in the laboratories and clinics.Unfortunately, this research was conducted in the spotlight ofpublic controversy. Isolated findings and incomplete informationhave automatically been presented to the public, with littleattempt made to place such findings in a larger perspective or toanalyze their meanings. Any new marihuana research has had ready access to the newsspotlight and often has been quickly assimilated into therhetoric of the marihuana, debate. Science has become a weapon ina propaganda battle. Because neither the reporters nor the publichave the expertise to evaluate this information, the result hasbeen an array of conflicting anecdotal reports, clinical studieson limited populations, and surveys of restricted utility. Visibility, intense public interest, and fishbowl research areall important components of the marihuana problem. PERCEIVED THREATS Although marihuana is taken by most users for curiosity orpleasure, the non-using public still feels seriously affected byuse of the drug. Several decades ago it was popularly assertedthat the drug brought about a large variety of social andindividual ills, including crime and insanity. As a result it wasprohibited by federal law in 1937. The marihuana explosion of themid-sixties occurred within the context of 30 years of instilledfear. Although based much more on fantasy than on proven fact,the marihuana "evils" took root in the public mind, andnow continue to color the public reaction to the marihuanaphenomenon. Even beyond the violation of law, the widespread useof marihuana, is seen as a threat to society in other ways. Andthe threats grow proportionately as the controversy swells. It has been astutely observed that any statement frequentlyrepeated in public assumes the status of fact. With so manypeople continually arguing about marihuana, the public hasunderstandably become alarmed and confused. On the basis of the National Survey, we have tried to identifythe ways in which the public feels threatened by marihuana use.Essentially these threats fall into three general categories:threats to the public safety, threats to the public health, andthreats to the dominant social order. In terms of public safety, the concern is with therelationship between marihuana and aggressive behavior, crime andjuvenile delinquency. Threats to the public health usually referinitially to the impact of marihuana on the user. Lethality,psychosis, addiction potential and effects of chronic long-termuse, are major concerns. Additionally, the fear exists thatmarihuana leads to the use of more dangerous drugs, especiallyLSD and heroin. The threat which marihuana use is thought to present to thedominant social order is a major undercurrent of the marihuanaproblem. Use of the drug is linked with idleness, lack ofmotivation, hedonism and sexual promiscuity. Many see the drug asfostering a counterculture which conflicts with basic moralprecepts as well as with the operating functions of our society.The "dropping out" or rejection of the establishedvalue system is viewed with alarm. Marihuana becomes more than adrug; it becomes a symbol of the rejection of cherished values. SYMBOLISM The symbolic aspects of marihuana are the, most intangible ofthe items to which the Commission must address itself, and yetthey may be at the heart of the marihuana problem. Use ofmarihuana was, and still is, age-specific. It was youth-relatedat a time in American history when the adult society was alarmedby the implications of the youth " movement": defianceof the established order, the adoption of new life styles, theemergence of "street people," campus unrest, drug use,communal living, protest politics, and even political radicalism.In an age characterized by the so-called generation gap,marihuana symbolizes the cultural divide. For youth, marihuana became a convenient symbol ofdisaffection with traditional society, an allure whichsupplemented its recreational attraction. Smoking marihuana mayhave appealed to large numbers of youth who opposed certainpolicies or trends, but who maintained faith in the Americansystem as a whole. In ;a time when symbolic speech is oftenpreferred to the literal form, marihuana was a convenientinstrument of mini-protest. It was also an agent of groupsolidarity, as the widely-publicized rock concerts so wellillustrate. For the adult society, the decade of the sixties was adistressing time. The net effect of racial unrest, campusdisruption, political assassination, economic woes and anunpopular war was widespread uneasiness. Attending a general fearthat the nation was witnessing its own disintegration was adesire to shore up our institutions and hold the line. That linewas easy to define where drugs, particularly marihuana, wereconcerned. Use of drugs, including marihuana, is against the law. Formany, marihuana symbolized disorder in a society frustrated byincreasing lawlessness. Insistence on application of the lawtended also to harden views, thereby escalating still further theuse of marihuana as a symbolic issue. The social conflicts underlying the drug's symbolic statushave dissipated somewhat in the past few years; and in some ways,the Commission has similarly noted a partial deflation of themarihuana problem and of the emotionalism surrounding it. We arehopeful that our attempt to clarify the scientific and normativedimensions of marihuana use will further deemphasize, the problemorientation and facilitate rational decision-making. The Need for Perspective This Commission has the task of exploring the marihuanacontroversy from as many vantage points as possible in itsattempt to make sound, realistic and workable policyrecommendations. Because we are dealing essentially with acomplex social concern rather than a simple pharmacologicphenomenon, any social policy decision must discuss the realitiesof marihuana as a drug, marihuana use as a form of behavior, andmarihuana as a symbol. Particularly important is the determination of the longevityof the behavior. Are we dealing with a behavior that is becomingrooted in our culture or are we experiencing an aberration, a fadthat will in time, of its own accord, pass away? The vortex of the marihuana controversy is the present, butthe prudent policy planner must not be blinded by the deluge ofrecent statistics. It is important that we scan the past forclues about the meaning of certain behavior and the promiseoffered by various social policy responses. We are convinced thata wider historical understanding will also go a long way towarddeflating marihuana as a problem. HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE When viewed in the context of American society's ambivalentresponse to the non-medical use of drugs, the marihuana problemis not unique. Both the existing social policy toward the drugand its contemporary challenge have historical antecedents andexplanations. Somewhat surprisingly, until the last half of the19th century, the only drugs used to any significant extent fornon-medical purposes in this country were alcohol and tobacco. American opinion has always included some opposition to thenonmedical use of any drug, including alcohol and tobacco. Fromcolonial times through the Civil War, abstentionist outcriesagainst alcohol and tobacco sporadically provoked prohibitorylegislation. One 18th century pamphleteer advised against the useof any drink "which is liable to steal away a man's sensesand render him foolish, irascible, uncontrollable anddangerous." Similarly, one 19th century observer attributeddelirium tremens, perverted sexuality, impotency, insanity andcancer to the smoking and chewing of tobacco. Despite such warnings, alcohol and tobacco use took deep rootin American society. De Tocqueville noted what hard drinkers theAmericans were, and Dickens was compelled to report that "inall the public places of America, this filthy custom [tobaccochewing] is recognized." Nonetheless, the strain in ourculture opposed to all non-medical drug use persisted and in thelate 19th century gained ardent adherents among larger segmentsof the population. Beginning in earnest around 1870, abstentionists focused thepublic opinion process on alcohol. As science and politics werecalled to the task, public attention was drawn to the liquorproblem. "Liquor is responsible for 19% of the divorces, 25%of the poverty, 25% of the insanity, 37% of the pauperism, 45% ofchild desertion and 50% of the crime in this country,"declared the Anti-Saloon League. "And this," it wasnoted, "is a very conservative estimate." The Temperance advocates achieved political victory during thesecond decade of the 20th century. By 1913, nine states wereunder statewide prohibition, and in 31 other states local optionlaws operated, with the ultimate effect that more than 50% of thenation's population lived under prohibition. Four years later,Congress approved the 18th Amendment and on January 16, 1919,Nebraska became the 36th state to ratify the Amendment, thusinscribing national Prohibition in the Constitution. Although on a somewhat smaller scale and with lesser results,public attention was simultaneously attracted to a growingtobacco problem. Stemming partly from the immediate popularity ofcigarette-smoking, a practice introduced after the Civil War, andpartly from riding the coattails of abstentionist sentiment,anti-tobacconists achieved a measure of success which hadpreviously eluded them. The New York Time editorialized in 1885that: The decadence of Spain began when the Spaniards adopted cigarettes and if this pernicious habit obtains among adult Americans, the ruin of the Republic is close at hand. . . . Between 1895 and 1921, 14 states banned the sale ofcigarettes. Although though there has been some posthumous debate aboutthe efficacy of alcohol Prohibition as a means of reducingexcessive or injurious use, the experiment failed to achieve itsdeclared purpose: elimination of the practice of alcoholconsumption. The habit was too ingrained in the society to beexcised simply by cutting off legitimate supply. In addition, the 18th Amendment never commanded a. popularconsensus; in fact, the Wickersham Commission, appointed byPresident Hoover in 1929 to study Prohibition, attributed theAmendment's enactment primarily to public antipathy toward thesaloon, the large liquor dealers and intemperance rather than topublic opposition to use of the drug. Subsequent observers have agreed that Prohibition wasmotivated primarily by a desire to root out the institutionalevils associated with the drug's distribution and excessive use;only a minority of its supporters opposed all use. And in thisrespect, Prohibition succeeded. Upon repeal, 13 years afterratification, liquor was back, but the pre-Prohibition saloon andunrestrained distribution had been eliminated from the Americanscene. Both the scope of the alcohol habit and the ambivalence ofsupporting opinion are manifested in the internal logic ofProhibition legislation. The legal scheme was designed to cut offsupply, not to punish the consumer. Demand could be eliminatedeffectively, if at all, only through educational efforts. Onlyfive states prohibited possession of alcohol for personal use inthe home. Otherwise, under both federal and state law, theindividual remained legally free to consume alcohol. The anti-tobacco movement was not propelled by theinstitutions outrage or the cultural symbolism surrounding thealcohol problem It never succeeded on a national scale. Localsuccesses were attributable to the temporary strength of theabstentionist impulse, together with the notion thattobacco-smoking was a stepping-stone to alcohol use Lacking theconsensus necessary to reverse a spreading habit, tobacco"prohibition" never extended to possession. Insofar asthe anti-tobacco movement was really a coattail consequence ofalcohol Prohibition, is not surprising that all 14 states whichhad prohibited sale repealed their proscriptions by 1927. By the early 1930's, the abstentionist thrust against alcoholand tobacco had diminished. State and federal governmentscontented themselves with regulating distribution and extractingrevenue. When the decade ended, the general public no longerperceived alcohol and tobacco use as social problems. The twodrugs had achieved social legitimacy. A comparison between the national flirtation with alcohol andtobacco prohibition and the prohibition of the non-medical use ofother drugs is helpful in analyzing the marihuana issue. In 1900,only a handful of states regulated traffic in"narcotic" drugs--opium, morphine, heroin and cocaineeven though, proportionately, more persons probably were addictedto those drugs at that time than at any time since. Estimatesfrom contemporary surveys are questionable, but a conservativeestimate is a quarter of a million people, comprising at least 1%of the population. This large user population in 1900 includedmore females than males, more whites than blacks, was notconfined to a particular geographic region or to the cities, andwas predominantly middle class. This 19th century addiction was generally accidental and wellhidden. It stemmed in part from over-medication, carelessprescription practices, repeated refills and hidden distributionof narcotic drugs in patent medicines. Society responded to thislargely invisible medical addiction in indirect, informal ways.Self -regulation by the medical profession and pharmaceuticalindustry, stricter prescription practices by the stategovernments and regulation of labeling by the Federal Governmentin 1906 all combined in the early years of the new century toreduce the possibility of this accidental drug addiction. About this same time, during the late 19th and early 20thcenturies, attention within the law enforcement and medicalcommunities was drawn to another use of narcotics----the"pleasure" or "street" use of these drugs byethnic minorities in the nation's cities. Society reacted to thisnarcotics problem by enacting criminal legislation, prohibitingthe non-medical production, distribution or consumption of thesedrugs. Within a very few years, every state had passedanti-narcotics legislation, and in 1914 the Federal Governmentpassed the Harrison Narcotics Act. The major differences between the temperance andanti-narcotics movements must be, emphasized. The temperance,movement was a matter of vigorous public debate; theanti-narcotics movement was not. Temperance legislation was theproduct of a highly organized nation-wide lobby; narcoticslegislation was largely ad hoc. Temperance legislation wasdesigned to eradicate known problems resulting from alcoholabuse; narcotic--, legislation was largely anticipatory.Temperance legislation rarely restricted private activity;narcotics legislation prohibited all drug-related behavior,including possession and use. These divergent policy patterns reflect the clear-cutseparation in the public and professional minds between alcoholand tobacco on the one hand, and "narcotics" on theother. Use of alcohol and tobacco were indigenous Americanpractices. The intoxicant use of narcotics was not native,however, and the users of these drugs were either alien, like theChinese opium smokers, or perceived to be marginal members ofsociety. As to the undesirability and immorality of nonmedical use ofnarcotics, there was absolutely no debate. By causing its usersto be physically dependent, the narcotic drug was considered asevere impediment to individual participation in the economic andpolitical systems. Use, it was thought, automatically escalatedto dependence and excess, which led to pauperism, crime andinsanity. From a sociological perspective, narcotics use wasthought to be prevalent among the slothful and immoralpopulations, gamblers, prostitutes, and others who were already"undesirables." Most important was the threat thatnarcotics posed to the vitality of the nation's youth. In short, the narcotics question was answered in unison: thenonmedical use of narcotics was a cancer which had to be removedentirely from the social organism. Marihuana smoking first became prominent on the American scenein the decade following the Harrison Act. Mexican immigrants andWest Indian sailors introduced the practice in the border andGulf states. As the Mexicans spread throughout the West andimmigrated to the major cities, some of them carried themarihuana habit with them. The practice also became common amongthe same urban populations with whom opiate use was identified. Under such circumstances, an immediate policy response towardmarihuana quite naturally followed the narcotics pattern ratherthan the alcohol or tobacco pattern. In fact, marihuana wasincorrectly classified as a "narcotic" drug inscientific literature and statutory provisions. By 1931, all buttwo states west of the Mississippi and several more in the Easthad enacted prohibitory legislation making it a criminal offenseto possess or use the drug. In 1932, the National Conference of Commissioners on UniformState Laws included an optional marihuana, provision in theUniform Narcotic Drug Act, and by 1937 every state, either byadoption of the Uniform Act or by separate legislation, hadprohibited marihuana use. In late 1937, the Congress adopted theMarihuana Tax Act, superimposing a, federal prohibitory scheme onthe state scheme. Not once during this entire period was any comprehensivescientific study undertaken in this country of marihuana, or itseffects. The drug was assumed to be a 'narcotic' to render theuser psychologically dependent, to provoke violent crime, and tocause insanity. Although media attention was attracted tomarihuana use around 1935, public awareness was low and publicdebate non-existent. As long as use remained confined toinsulated minorities throughout the next quarter century, thesituation remained stable. When penalties for narcoticsviolations escalated in the 1950's, marihuana penalties wentright along with them, until a first-offense possessor was afelon subject to lengthy incarceration. With this historical overview in mind, it is not surprisingthat the contemporary marihuana experience has been characterizedby fear and confusion on one side and outrage and protest on theother. As scientific and medical opinion has become better known,marihuana has lost its direct link with the narcotics in thepublic mind and in the statute books. But extensive ambivalence remains about the policies forvarious drugs. Marihuana's advocates contend that it is no moreor less harmful than alcohol and tobacco and should therefore betreated in similar fashion. The drug's adversaries contend thatit is a stepping-stone to the narcotics and should remainprohibited. At the present time public opinion tends to considermarihuana less harmful than the opiates and cocaine and moreharmful than alcohol and tobacco. Interestingly, while marihuana. is perceived as less harmfulthan before, alcohol and tobacco are regarded as more harmfulthan before. In some ways, the duality which previouslycharacterized American drug policy has now been supplanted by anenlightened skepticism as to the variety of approaches to thenon-medical use of various drugs. Despite this shift in attitudes, however, the use of alcoholand tobacco is not considered a major social problem by manyAmericans, while marihuana use is still so perceived. This remains true despite the fact that alcoholism afflictsnine million Americans. According to the National Institute onAlcohol Addiction and Alcoholism of the National Institute ofMental Health: alcohol is a factor in half (30,000) of thehighway fatalities occurring each year; an economic cost to thenation of $15 billion occurs as a result of acoholism and alcoholabuse; one-half of the five million yearly arrests in the UnitedStates are related to the misuse of alcohol (1.5 million offensesfor public drunkenness alone) ; and one-half of all homicides andone-fourth of all suicides are alcohol related, accounting for atotal of 11,700 deaths annually. Similarly, tobacco smoking is not considered a major publicconcern despite its link to lung cancer and heart disease.According to the Surgeon General in The Health Consequences ofSmoking, 1972: cigarette smoking is the, major "cause" of lung cancer in men and a significant "cause" of lung cancer in women; the risk of developing lung cancer in both men and women is directly related to an individual's exposure as measured by the number of cigarettes smoked, duration of smoking, earlier initiation, depth of inhalation, and the amount of "tar" produced by the cigarette; and data from numerous prospective and retrospective studies indicate that cigarette smoking is a significant risk factor contributing to the development of coronary heart disease (CHD) including fatal CHD and its most severe expression, sudden and unexpected death. CULTURAL PERSPECTIVE Realizing the importance of social change in understanding theissues surrounding the use of marihuana and other drugs, theCommission decided early that an objective appraisal of culturaltrends was vital for the, development of policy recommendations.Since neither the increase in marihuana use nor its attendantcontroversy is an isolated phenomenon, we sought a wider culturalperspective. To this end, the Commission sponsored a wide-rangingseminar on "Central Influences on American Life." Withthe cooperation of the Council for Biology in Human Affairs ofthe Salk Institute, we elicited a three-day conversation among 13exceptionally thoughtful and perceptive observers of Americanlife.* *The participants included Jacques Barzun, as moderator, MaryBingham, Claude T. Bissell, Kenneth Boulding, Robert R. Bowie,Theodore Caplow, Jay W. Forrester, T. George Harris. Rollo May,Jay Saunders Redding, Jonas Salk, Ernest van den Haag, and LeroyS. Wehrle. It is well beyond both our mandate and our competence toattempt a definitive presentation of the status of the Americanethical system However, we shall try to suggest some of the moresalient influence in our changing society, recognizing that onlyagainst the backdrop of society's fears, aspirations and valuescan a rational response to marihuana be formulated. Although weare not prepared to identify specific causal connections betweenthese social trends and marihuana use, we do believe that some ofthe major points raised in the discussion of cultural changeprovide essential background in understanding the marihuanaproblem. The Search for Meaning One overriding influence in contemporary America is thedeclining capacity of our institutions to help the individualfind his place in society. As one of the participants at theSeminar observed: A society is stable, peaceful, happy, not when it has rid itself of the tensions-because you never get rid of the tensions, because people's drives will be satisfied in ways that clash and so on-but when a very high proportion of the people feel fulfillment of some sort within the context which the society normally provides. The long-term problem now, for many many people, not just young people, is that this condition is not met. Another noted: What is wrong with our social system, it seems to me, is that it no longer inspires in people a feeling of purpose, meaningfulness and so on. A number of institutional trends have joined to deprive theindividual of a sense of communal inspiration. Perhaps mostimportant is the economic element. Whereas the individual'seconomic achievement formerly gave his life broad social meaningand inspired his existence, automation and technological advancehave tended to depersonalize the individual's role in theeconomy. Instead of the economic system being dependent onindividual productivity, the individual is increasingly dependenton the system. As his work dwindles in significance to the totalsociety, it diminishes in meaning for him. Moreover, as more andmore of our people share the nation's affluence, Horatio Alger'sexample is no longer needed to climb the economic ladder. A particularly emphatic manifestation of the decliningeconomic demand on the individual is the institutionalization ofleisure time. Whereas the economy used to require long hours ofwork, now it barely requires more than a five-day week. Expandingvacation time and reduced work-weeks tend to diminish thestrength of the work ethic. The implications of enforced leisuretime are only now becoming apparent, and the concept of"idle hands are the devil's plaything" has to bereexamined in terms of acceptable forms of non-work behavior.This new time component, allowing for the assertion ofindividuality, has produced both privileges and problems. In the last decade we have seen the beginnings of theinstitutionalization of this leisure ethic. A leisure-timeindustry has sprung up to organize this time period for theindividual. Many Americans, due to the nature of their jobs in anautomated economic system, find little personal satisfaction intheir work, and many are now searching for individual fulfillmentthrough the use of free time. Where meaning is not found ineither work or recreational pursuits, the outcome is likely to beboredom and restlessness. Whether generated by a search forindividual fulfillment, group recreation or sheer boredom, theincreased use of drugs, including marihuana, should come as nosurprise. Another social development which has chipped away atindividual identity is the loss of a vision of the future. In anage where change is so rapid, the individual has no concept ofthe future. If man could progress from land transportation to themoon in 60 years, what, lies ahead? Paralleling the loss of thetechnological horizon is the loss of a vision of what the future,in terms of individual and social goals, ought to look like. Aretimes moving too fast for man to be able to plan or -to adjust tonew ways and new styles? This sense of the collapsing time framewas best summed up by one of the Seminar participants: .... there are great forces that have developed over the last several decades that cause one to lose sight of the distant future. Let me contrast a rural farm family of several decades ago which settled a farm. They expected their children to live there, they can imagine their grandchildren living there-there is an image of the future. There is really no one who [now] has any image of where his great grandchildren will he or what they will do. This comes about because of the nature of industrial society; it comes about because we have retirement plans instead of looking after one's own old age. There area whole set of these [factors]. Now the morality, the ethics get tied into it because ethics are really a long-time horizon concept. It's something you engage in because it's contrary to immediate reward and immediate gratification and so you look to some distant future. But as one loses sight of any future then I think the ethics and morality creep up to the very near term also . . . We have no one who has got an image of this country two hundred years from now, who is trying to create a structure that be believes will exist that long. So a number of these things . . . tie together in terms of the long-term goals and how they have shifted. In any of our systems there tend to be a conflict between the short-term and the long-term goals. If the long-term goals are lost sight of then the short-term expediencies seem to be the things that well up. To the extent that planning for the future no longer gives theindividual his inspiration, he must look to the present. Such aclimate is conducive to pleasure-seeking, instant gratificationand an entire life-perspective which our society has alwayspreviously disclaimed A third force depriving the individual of apresumed place in society is the loss of a sense of community, asense of belonging. Mobility, mass living and rapid travel allconspire to destroy the smaller community. The family moves fromplace to place and then separates with each child going his ownway. This global thinking leaves little time for home-townconcern. The dissipation of geographic roots parallels a socialuprooting. As one of our Seminar participants noted: When you grow up with a, small number of people with whom you have to live for a while, it does something which isn't done now. It forces you to face yourself. It forces you to ask what kind of pet-son you are, because you can't get away with it with a group you're going to have to live with. They know what you really are. The mobility has the effect of making it possible for people to live playing parts for years. It seems to me we see it among the youngsters: role playing as distinguished from being somebody. . . . All of these social trends have their most potent impact onyoung people who are just beginning to develop their values,beliefs and commitments. The adult society has found it easier toadjust to the emergence of the leisure value. Having experiencedit as a gradual process, they see it as a reward for previoustoil. For many of our young, however, a substantial segment ofleisure time may be considered an essential part of living; theyhave known no other experience. Similarly, an adult society,increasingly influenced toward the present, at least hasdeveloped an historical perspective. Also, adult values wereinternalized at a time when a future vision was possible. Formany of the young, however, the present weighs more, heavily.This notion is best reflected in the vociferous youth response tothe Vietnam conflict, the embodiment of a war fought for thefuture, Finally, all of these cultural changes have occurred,especially for the young, in an environment of affluence. Thesuccessful economic system has maximized individual freedom. Butthe individual has been given unlimited choices at exactly thetime when a, value system within which to make such choices is indoubt. Because he has no sense of direction, the result isrestlessness, boredom and an increase in the likelihood ofpresent-oriented choices. Self-destructive drug-taking is oneform such behavior may take. One of our Seminar participantsobserved in this connection: It seems to me that you've got this affluence. So that while most of us grew up with the feeling that the channels within which we were going to have to move and make choices were very narrow, channels for these youngsters look absolutely open. It's an absolutely a, la carte menu-it's the biggest a la, carte menu you can imagine. [This occurs] in a situation in which this sense of radical change is going on so fast that you can't master it, together with a feeling that the society is being operated by very large organizations which you can't get a grip on, giving one a sense of helplessness, of not knowing where to take hold. All these things inherently are disorienting to youngsters and don't give them a, feeling of challenge, [but rather] a doubt as to the meaning of their own lives, of the significance of their being here, [a sense of] being atoms. So then they do act like children in the sense of behaving violently to call attention to themselves. They do a whole lot of other things which, it seems to me, are the sort of things you often see when people feel their lives have no meaning. Skepticism Another major influence in contemporary American life withsubstantial relevance to the marihuana problem is the uneasyrelationship between the individual and society's institutions,particularly the state. For 50 years, there has been a continuingupward flow of power to large institutional units, whether theybe corporate conglomerates, labor unions, universities or theGovernment. We have created a society which "requires theindividual to lean on society," observed one of our Seminarparticipants, "in ways that formerly he did not have to do.He used to lean on the clan, on the family, on the village. Wehave used bureaucracy to deal with these problems." Formany, the Federal Government epitomizes this development,bureaucratizing a social response to the most human of needs. We suspect that the implications of this trend for theindividual, although inevitable, became more visibly apparent inthe 1960's. Mass institutions must deal through rules; theindividual becomes a number. "Intuitively, [the individual]feels that bureaucracies must make man into an object in order todeal with him." So we have a depersonalization at exactlythe time that many individuals are casting about for identity andfulfillment. Simultaneously, technological advance poses the awesomeprospect of 1984: the intrusion of the omnipresent state into theprivate affairs of the individual. Computerized data-banks andelectronic surveillance are perceived as restrictions onindividuality at a time when the desire for personal privacy isascendant. Another cultural feature of governmental bureaucracy duringthe sixties has been failure to match expectations. Governmentpromises the elimination of poverty, the dissipation of racialdiscrimination, the excision of drug abuse, and creates risingexpectations. But government is often ill-equipped or unable toperform such monumental tasks. As individual helplessnessincreases, as the "responsibility" of the bureaucracyenlarges, those in need often feel that the gap between publicdeclaration and performance must be the result of a conspiracy tofail. And for the rest of us, there is the credibility gap. Thenet result is a loss of confidence in society's institutions.Viewed from this perspective, youthful dissent, cynicism anddisobedience of the 1960's were not such surprising consequences. Still another significant feature of institutional life incontemporary America is the lag between purpose andimplementation. That is, some of our social institutions have notyet begun to deal with the consequences of the social andeconomic changes which have occurred over the last severaldecades. The best example, and the one most germane to the youth,is the educational system. Two generations ago, the labor forcecould assimilate the large majority of the nation's youth.Neither a high school nor a college education was prerequisite tooccupational choice or achievement. Increased educationalattainment was presumed to be limited to either the privileged orthe able and would be rewarded by certain careers. Today, however, the labor force grows more quickly than thesystem is able to assimilate it, and the educational system nowserves as custodian as well as teacher. Although we sincerelywish to achieve the democratic ideal of a highly educatedpopulace, we also keep our children in school as long as possiblebecause we have nothing else for them to do. The trend isstrikingly apparent even in the last 20 years. Percent enrolled in school Age 1950 1970 14-15 94.7 98.1 16-17 71.3 90.0 18-19 29.4 47.7 20-24 9.0 21.5 This custodial function confronts educators with a dilemma.Attrition is not in society's best interest; thus, single-mindeddevotion to the highest levels of achievement would bedysfunctional. In a sense, because the system no longer wants toturn away its subjects, the notion of failure has lost itsmeaning. As one of the Seminar participants observed: I think one of the problems is that there is no longer a penalty for failure. We-the educators-have had to lower standards in order to accommodate these people who need no longer fear failure. Of course this has been a cyclical thing, a wheel within a wheel. [If ] there is no longer a penalty for failure, then there is no longer the need to acquire. The changing function of education has been felt in both thesecondary schools and in our institutions of higher learning.Numerous high school graduates cannot read. Colleges and juniorcolleges have sprung up overnight to accommodate the population,but many provide classrooms with little specific purpose. Onlyslowly is the educational system beginning to come to grips withits role in a changed society. At the university level, manyeducators have been appalled at sacrifices which have ensued fromthe custodial feature; rote learning, they contend, hassupplanted citizen and character education. Uncertainty about the role of the educational system has notescaped the students, particularly at the college level. Many ofour youth, pressed into longer attendance, question its need ordesirability. The demand for "relevance" is but anotherreflection of the search for meaning, for an understandable rolein society. Drug use has perhaps provided an outlet for somemembers of this restless generation, uncertain of its place. The Limits of Rationality The social response to the individual's search for meaning hasfostered an ambivalence, an unwillingness to act, a paralysis. Inlarge measure, according to one Seminar member, this default ofauthority reveals the intensity of the search: In the same way we are getting universities that can't teach, families that can't socialize and police forces that can't catch criminals. In every case, the same issue is involved: the subject of authority questions the legitimacy of authority and the exerciser of it is unable to find-very often doesn't even try to find-a defense, because he feels in himself a sympathy, as do so many parents, with the challenge. To a significant extent, society is waiting, hoping that theimpulse for change will settle around certain fundamentalattributes of the American ethic. At the present time, however,no consensus about the nature of these fundamentals exists. Weare all looking for values that have deep roots, as we attempt tosort out the durable from the ephemeral. All of the participants at our Central Influences Seminaragreed that the unique feature of this search was its a rationalquality. As one observer put it: We have been discussing the question of how we change a society. I don't think it's changed by rational intention. As I understand societies, historically and our own, what really is required to change it is something on a deeper level that involves myth, ritual, sacrament-a number of these functions that have always been related to societies. On these you can't just suddenly make up your mind and then prescribe. Regarding our problem of authority, you cannot really ask the question: why can't these people hang onto their authority? They can't hang onto it because what gave them authority is something not of themselves, but part of the society, part of a ritual, a sacrament: a way of behaving in the group which gave them authority, [whether] professorial, parental or policy authority. In each one of these cases, what we see is not the diminishing of these men so much but rather the developing emptiness, the lack of the particular ethic that gave them authority to start with. This is why we are in a terrible dilemma. What is essentially lacking is a system of ethics, morality or religion that gives birth -to the myths, the rituals, the sacraments that are its expression. These touch human beings on the unconscious level. These are the ways we see the world. They are not our conscious thought, but the ways we form ourselves, form each other, love each other or hate each other-in terms not so much of rational intention as a deeper unconscious-conscious and unconscious-which is my definition of a myth; much more of a feeling level, a living level. That is what is not present now. What we need, below and above all of our deliberations, is the growth and development of an ethical system. We just do not have this now. As we move into the 1970's, our society is collectivelyengaged in the task -of determining what America means, and howeach individual should find fulfillment in `a changing age. Fromthis wider perspective of flux emerges an uncertainty about whatthe increased prevalence of marihuana use means for theindividual and the total society. Formulating Marihuana Policy Present symbolism, past implications, and future apprehensionsall combine to give marihuana many meanings. These diversenotions of what marihuana means constitute the marihuana problem.In this atmosphere, the policy-maker's position is precariousinsofar as no assumption is beyond dispute. Accordingly, theCommission has taken particular care to define the process bywhich a social policy decision should be reached. In studying the arguments of past and present observers tojustify a particular kind of marihuana policy, we conclude that amajor impediment to rational decision-making in this area isoversimplification. As suggested earlier, many ingredients areincluded in the marihuana mix-medical, legal, social,philosophical, and moral. Many observers have tended to isolateone element, highlight it and then extrapolate social policy fromthat one premise. In an area where law, science and morality areso intertwined, we must beware of the tendency toward suchselectivity. SCIENTIFIC OVERSIMPLIFICATION It is wrong to assume, as many have done, that a particularstatement of marihuana's effects compels a given social policy orlegal implementation. An accurate statement of the effects of thedrug is obviously an important consideration, but it isconclusive only if the effects are extreme one way or the other.For example, if the use of a particular drug immediately causesthe user to murder anyone in his presence, we have no doubt thata vigorous effort to eliminate use of that drug would be inorder. On the other hand, if the effects of the drug are purelybenign, presenting no danger whatsoever to the user or society,no reason would exist to suppress it. We know of no psychoactive substance, including marihuana,which falls at either of these extremes. Thus, it begs the issueto contend, as some have done, that because we don't know enoughabout the effects of heavy, chronic use, we should maintain thestatus quo. We know a lot about the adverse effects of alcoholismand heavy cigarette smoking, and yet no responsible observersuggests that we should adopt total prohibition for these drugs.Similarly, previous estimates of marihuana's role in causingcrime and insanity were based quite erroneous information; but toinfer from this that marihuana should be considered totallybenign and hence made freely available is also not logical. Bothapproaches are simplistic; both approaches fail to take intoaccount the social context in which the drug is used and thedynamic factors affecting the role that marihuana use may or maynot play in the future. A similar manifestation of scientific oversimplification isthe focus on causality. Many opponents of marihuana use feelcompelled to establish a causal connection between marihuana useand crime, psychosis, and the use of other drugs, while, theiradversaries focus the dispute on negating such relationships. TheCommission believes that this tendency misses the mark. The policy-maker's task is concerned primarily with theeffects of marihuana on human behavior. For both philosophicaland practical reasons, proof of causal relationships is next toimpossible. At the same time, however, the extent to whichmarihuana use is associated with certain behaviors and whetherany significant relationships exist can offer important clues. We must be cautious when dealing with such data. Yet we cannotafford to paralyze the decision-making process simply becauseabsolute "proof " is lacking. Spokesmen on both sidesof the marihuana debate should focus not on causation but insteadon the relevance of the association between various behavioraleffects and marihuana use. PHILOSOPHICAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Some partisans stoutly maintain that the state has no right tointerfere with essentially private conduct or that the state hasno right to protect the individual from his own folly. Some ofthe greatest minds of the Western world have struggled over suchphilosophical issue always with the same outcome: a recognitionof the need to draw a line between the individual and his socialsurroundings. That is, everything an individual does, in privateor not, potentially may affect others. The issue is really todetermine when the undesirable effect upon others is likelyenough or direct enough for society to take cognizance of it andto deal with it. Coupled with this is the further question ofwhether the nature of the behavior and its possible effect issuch that society should employ coercive measures. Advocates of liberalization of the marihuana laws commonlycontend either that the decision to use marihuana is a privatemoral decision or that any harm flowing from use of the drugaccrues only to the user. Defenders of the, present restrictionsinsist that society not only has the right but is obligated toprotect the existing social order and to compel an individual toabstain from a behavior which may impair his productivity.Unfortunately, the issue is not so simple and the line oftendrawn between the private conduct and behavior affecting thepublic health and welfare, is not conclusive or absolutelydefinable. For example, a, decision to possess a firearm, while privateis considered by many to be of public magnitude, requiringgovernmental control. A decision to engage in adulterous conduct,although generally implemented in private, may have publicconsequences if society believes strongly in the desirability ofthe existing family structure. Similarly, excessive alcoholconsumption, in addition to its adverse effects on individualhealth, may impair familial stability and economic productivity,matters with which the total society is concerned. So, while we agree with the basic philosophical precept thatsociety may interfere with individual conduct only in the publicinterest, using coercive measures only when less restrictivemeasures would not suffice this principle merely initiatesinquiry into a rational social policy but does not identify it.We must take a careful look at this complicated question of thesocial impact of private behavior. And we must recognize at theoutset the inherent difficulty in predicting effects on publichealth and welfare, and the strong conflicting notions of whatconstitutes the public interest. Again and again during the course of our hearings, we havebeen startled by the divergence of opinion within differentsegments of our population. Sometimes the disagreement is quitevehement, and relates to the underlying social concerns ofparticular groups. For example, we were told repeatedly byleaders of the urban black communities that they wanted to purgeall drug use from their midst, marihuana included, and that the"legalization" of marihuana would be viewed as part ofa design to keep the black man enslaved. On the other hand, we were informed repeatedly by the activiststudent element that the pre-sent social policy regardingmarihuana was merely a tool for suppression of political dissent,and until the law was changed, there could be no hope ofintegrating the dissident population into the mainstream ofAmerican society. Such statements reemphasize the degree to which marihuana isregarded as a symbol of a larger social concern. The conflicting notions of the public interest by differentsegments of the population reinforced in the Commission'sdeliberations the realization that we have been called upon torecommend public policy for all segments of the population, forall of the American people. The public good cannot be defined byone segment of the population, the old or the young, users ornon-users of marihuana, ethnic minorities or white majority. Atthe same time, the fears of each of these groups must be takeninto consideration in arriving at the basic social objectives ofthe Commission's public policy recommendation. Where such fearsare real, they must be confronted directly; where they areimagined, however, they must be put in perspective and,hopefully, laid to rest. SOCIOLOGICAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Public debate and decision-making in our society suffer fromthe glorification of statistical data. After a particular socialphenomenon, such as marihuana use, has been defined as a problem,armies of social scientific researchers set out to analyze anddescribe the problem. A sophisticated computer technologyinstantly translates millions of bits of data into correlations,probabilities and trends. The most striking findings are then fedto a data-hungry public. The result is data overload. Descriptive information about the nature and scope ofmarihuana use as a behavior is an essential component of thepolicy-maker's knowledge-base. However, such information does notin itself have social policy implications. The policy-maker mustdefine goals and evaluate means; only after he asks the rightquestions will statistical data suggest useful answers.Unfortunately, a tendency exists in the marihuana debate toassign prescriptive meanings to descriptive data without testingthe underlying assumptions. Further, the data have often beenaccumulating in a fragmented way. No overall plan was devisedbeforehand; the result has been an ad hoc use of available datatriggered by individual research interests rather than bylong-term policy needs. What does it mean that 24 million people have tried marihuana?Some have suggested that it means marihuana ought to belegalized. But does it mean the same thing if 15 million triedthe drug once and have decided not to use it again? And does itmean the same thing if popular interest in the drug turns out tobe a passing fancy, which wanes as suddenly as it waxed? On the other side of the controversy, what does it mean that asubstantial percentage of the public would favor increasedpenalties for marihuana use? The prescriptive implications of ademocratic impulse may be offset by a preference for individualfreedom of choice. Also, this segment of public opinion may havebeen influenced by incorrect information, such as unwarrantedbelief in marihuana's lethality or addiction potential. So,although the policy-maker must be aware of political realities,he must not allow his function to be supplanted by public opinionpolls. This is an area which requires both awareness of publicattitudes and willingness to assert leadership based on the bestinformation available. LEGAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Perhaps the major impediment to rational decision-making isthe tendency to think only in terms of the legal system ingeneral and of the criminal justice system in particular. Thisthinking is certainly understandable, given the history ofmarihuana's involvement with the criminal law. Nonetheless, thelaw does not exist in a social vacuum, and legal alternatives canbe evaluated only with reference to the values and policies whichthey are designed to implement and the social context in whichthey are designed to operate. Legal fallacies are apparent on both sides of the marihuanacontroversy. Many of the persons opposed to marihuana use lookexclusively to the law for social control. This reliance on thelaw is stronger today because many of our fellow citizens areuneasy about the diminishing effectiveness of our otherinstitutions, particularly when the non-legal institutions havebeen relatively lax in controlling drug related behavior.Increasing reliance is placed upon the legal system to act notonly as policeman, but as father confessor, disciplinarian,educator, rehabilitator and standard-bearer of our moral code.Little or no thought is given to what impact this over-relianceon the law has on the viability of other social institutions, notto mention it's effect on the legal process. A society opposed to marihuana use need not implement thatpolicy through the criminal law. Non-legal institutions, such asthe church, the school and the family, have great potential formolding individual behavior. Accordingly, the policy-maker mustdelicately assess the capacity of the legal system to accomplishits task and must consider the mutual impact of legal andnon-legal institutions in achieving social objectives. We recognize the short-sightedness of an absolute assumptionthat the criminal law is the necessary tool for implementing asocial policy opposed to marihuana use. But equally short-sightedis the opposing contention which attempts to analyze the lawseparately from its underlying social policy objective. Thisargument assumes that if the law isn't working, or if the costsof enforcing the law outweigh its benefits, the law should,therefore, be repealed. If society feels strongly enough about the impropriety of acertain behavior, it may choose to utilize the criminal law eventhough the behavior is largely invisible and will be minimizedonly through effective operation of other agencies of socialcontrol. Laws against incest and child-beating are good examples.In weighing the costs and benefits of a particular law, one mustprovide a scale and a system of weights. The scale is thenormative classification of behavior, and the system of weightsis the largely subjective evaluation of the importance of thevalues breached by the behavior. This weighing process is what isopen to dispute. In sum, no law works alone. Where an unquestioned consensusexists about the undesirability of a particular behavior and allsocial institutions are allied in the effort to prevent it, as isthe case with murder and theft, the law can be said to"work" even though some murders and thefts may still becommitted. Where society is ambivalent about its attitude towardthe behavior and other institutions are not committed to itsdiscouragement, the law cannot be said to be working, even thoughmany people may not engage in the behavior because it is againstthe law. The question is whether the social policy, which the law isdesigned to, implement, is being achieved to a satisfactoryextent. To determine the role of law regarding marihuana, we mustfirst look to society's values and aspirations, and then definethe social policy objective. If we seek to discourage certainmarihuana-related behavior, we must carefully assess the role ofthe legal system in achieving that objective. The Report In this Chapter, we have tried to put the marihuana problem inperspective. In the remainder of this Report, we explore severalaspects of the phenomenon of marihuana use, its effects, itssocial impact and its social meaning, assessing their relativeimportance in the formulation of social policy. In Chapter II, we consider the effects of the drug on theindividual user, with particular attention to the size of theuser population for whom various effects are relevant. TheCommission emphasizes that this material is related onlyindirectly to its policy-making function. The social policyplanner is concerned not about the effects on the individual perse, but about the impact of any adverse effect on his behaviorand on the larger society and about the meaning of this behaviorin the larger social perspective. The material in Chapter IIserves primarily to educate and inform. In Chapter III, the Commission evaluates the various threatswhich marihuana use is perceived to present to the public safety,public health, and dominant social order. This Chapter isdesigned to assess the social impact of marihuana use, theinitial step in the policy making process. In Chapter IV, we consider what role marihuana use plays andwill play in the life of American society. This is the dynamicelement of marihuana use and is the most intangible of themarihuana realities, but is particularly important from apolicy-planning perspective. This consideration is the one mostoverlooked by contemporary observers and participants in themarihuana debate. Because social meaning is not a directly measurable entity, wemust examine the ways in which society responds to the behaviorand whether such responses, both formal and informal, are fluidor. static. After analyzing public opinion, law enforcementbehavior and the reactions of medical, educational, and othersegments of the population, we then discuss what marihuana usehas come to mean and is likely to mean in the future.Particularly important in this highly speculative endeavor is thewider cultural perspective which we described earlier in thisChapter. In Chapter V, we bring this information to bear on apolicy-making process. After establishing the philosophicalframework, we explore the spectrum of social policy options,choosing the one we judge most suitable to the present time. Thenwe consider the range of legal alternatives for implementing thischosen policy, and select the one we believe to be mostappropriate for achieving it. In an addendum to the Report, we present some ancillaryrecommendations. Some of these recommendations flow from ourbasic premise, others are a result of independent evaluation bythe Commission of other areas of concern. We ask the reader to set his preconceptions aside as we havetried to do, and discriminate with us between marihuana, thedrug, and marihuana, the problem. We hope that our conclusionswill be acceptable to the entire public, but barring that, wehope at the least that the areas of disagreement and theirimplications will be brought into sharper focus. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B23-60IA031-000655-B038-313http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncchap2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112805 text/html 104889HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:27:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:53:45 GMTContent-length: 104670 Marihuana Use and Its Effects Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana - A Signal of Misunderstanding. Chapter II marihuana use and its effects "Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be ourwishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passions, theycannot alter the state of facts and evidence." John Adams(1770) The ultimate objective of the Commission is to evaluate thetotal impact of actual and potential marihuana use oncontemporary American society. This endeavor involves threephases: first, an evaluation of the nature and scope ofcontemporary American marihuana use; second, a carefulreevaluation of the pharmacological effects of the drug on thehuman body with special emphasis on the drug's capacity to alteror modify behavior; and third, an evaluation of the impact ofmarihuana use on society. This chapter deals with the first andsecond phases, and Chapter Three deals with the third. The Marihuana User Cannabis has been used widely for many centuries innonindustrialized countries of Asia and Africa. Today, as inearlier years, use of drug is concentrated primarily among lowersocioeconomic groups. in these countries, the practice isestimated to be confined to a tenth of the lower socioeconomic,male population. Although such use of the drug iswell-established, it offers little direct comparison with theAmerican experience. Although the commercial, industrial and therapeutic value ofthe hemp plant was widely recognized and exploited in the UnitedStates from the earliest days of its history, knowledge and useof its intoxicating and psychoactive properties remained largelyunknown until about 1900. At that time, the custom of smoking marihuana was generallylimited to groups of Mexican itinerant workers in the borderstates of the Southwest. By 1910, marihuana use began to emergein other southern states and cities, particularly New Orleans,and in the port cities along the Mississippi River. In time,these cities became distribution centers for enterprisingsailors. From there, marihuana use spread cross-country to otherurban centers, mining camps, railroad construction sites, farmlabor camps, "bohemian" communities of artists and jazzmusicians, and various other groups outside the mainstream ofAmerican society. Recently, of course, use of the drug has spread to young,white, middle class groups and especially to high school andcollege populations. DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS On the basis of the Commission-sponsored National Survey, wehave concluded that contemporary marihuana use is pervasive,involving all segments of the U.S. population. The Surveyestimated that about 24 million Americans over the age of 11years (15% of the adults 18 and over, and 14% of the 12-17 yearolds) have used marihuana at least once, referred to in thisReport as ever-users. Until recently twice as many males asfemales had used it; the most up-to-date studies of high schoolstudents, college-age individuals, and young adults carried outby the Commission indicate that this sex differential appears tobe diminishing. In many youthful populations use is almostequally distributed between males and females. Marihuana use does not appear to vary significantly by race.With respect to the religious affiliation of the users, Jews andCatholics appear to be slightly overrepresented as compared toProtestants. Usage is highest in cities, towns, and suburbs but notuncommon in rural areas. States in the Northeast and West haveconsiderably higher rates of use than have the North Centralstates, which in turn have significantly higher rates than thosein the South. Use is found in all socioeconomic groups and occupations,though slightly more predominant among persons with above-averageincomes. A New York survey of the state's general populationindicated that ever-use as well as regular use is almost equallyprevalent among sales workers, clerical workers,skilled, semiskilled and unskilled workers, managers, owners,professionals and technical workers. At the same time, the incidence of use seems to vary accordingto educational attainment. Among all adults not now in school, 5%of those with an eighth grade education or less have used thedrug, contrasted with 11% of those who completed some highschool, 14% of those who graduated from high school, 25% of thosewho completed some college and 21 % of those who graduated fromcollege. Age is presently one of the most significant correlates ofmarihuana use. Among the total population, those who have triedor used marihuana at least once, termed ever-users, are heavilyconcentrated in the 16-25 age bracket. Of all the ever-users,about half are in this group. At the same time, however, weshould emphasize that use is by no means confined to teenagersand young adults. The proportion of individuals in different age groups who haveused marihuana is indicated in Figure 1. The incidence of use is greatest among young people: 27% ofthe 16-17 year olds, 40% of the 18-21 year olds, and 38% of the22-25 year olds have tried marihuana; at the low extremes, 6% ofthe 12-13 year olds and 6% of the over-50 generation have usedthe drug. Among those now in school, incidence also seems to rise withincreasing school level: Ever-users represent 44% of thosepersons now in college or graduate school; 30% of high schooljuniors and seniors; 17% of freshmen and sophomores; and 8% ofstudents in junior high school. At the same time, the use of the drug among adults is by nomeans confined to college students. Even among the 18-25 yearolds, 75% of the ever-users are not now in school. The initial patterns of contemporary marihuana use appear tobe shifting; there is a trend toward increased use among collegestudents as well as non-college students. Non-student users nowspan social class, income level and occupational classification.In addition, the proportion -of users increases during the teens,peaks during the young adult years and then falls off rapidly(Figure 1). Having described the incidence of any use of marihuana ever,and demographic characteristics of the 24 million Americans whohave tried the drug, we recognize the need to place thisinformation into perspective. The policymaker must also beconcerned with the patterns of use: frequency, amount consumed ateach smoking, and duration of use. PATTERNS OF USE The most striking of the use patterns revealed in the NationalSurvey is that 41 % of the adults and 45 % of the youth who haveever used marihuana reported that they no longer use the drug.Twenty-nine percent of the adults and 43% of the youth reportedthat they are still using marihuana (see Table 1). When asked whythey bad terminated use, the overwhelming majority of adults(61%) specified, among other reasons, that they had simply lostinterest in the drug. Table I.-EXPERIENCE WITH MARIHUANA Percent of ever-users Frequency Adults Youth Designation (18 and (12-17) over) Have used marihuana but no longer 4145 u se. lExperimenters. Once a month or less 9 15 2-3 times pet month 8 10 Intermittentusers. Once per week 4 9 @ Several times per week 5 4Moderate users. Once daily 1 1 1 More than once daily 2 4 Heavyusers. No answer 30 12 These data indicate that at least 41% of the adults and 45% ofthe youth have used marihuana but have -discontinued use; 9% ofthe adults and 15% of the youth use the drug sporadically, oncea, month or less. These persons can be characterized asexperimental marihuana users.* To ensure an understanding of this section of the Report, somedefinitions are required at this juncture. In this report, theCommission employs the following designations: Frequency of Use Experimental-At least one trial to once a monthor less. Intermittent-Two to 10 times monthly. Moderate-11 times monthly to once, daily. Heavy-Several times daily. Very Heavy-Almost constant intoxication withpotent preparations; brain rarely drug free. Duration of Use Short Term-Less than two years. Long Term-Two to 10 years. Very Long Term-Over 10 years. Twelve percent of the adults and 19% of the youth who haveever used marihuana can be designated intermittent users; theycontinue to use the drug more than once a month, but less thanseveral times a week, probably on weekends. Six percent of theadults and five percent of the youth are moderate users whocontinue to use marihuana several times a week to once daily. Finally, 2% of the adults and 4% of the youth who have everused marihuana are heavy users: they use the drug several timesdaily. A very small fraction of these heavy users may be veryheavy users, who are intoxicated most of their waking hours andprobably use very potent preparations of the drug. In addition to frequency, duration of use is an importantvariable in discussing use patterns and especially whenconsidering drug effects. Most users in this country have smokedthe drug over a short term, that is, less than two years. Othershave used the drug over a long term, two to 10 years. Very fewAmericans can be considered very long term users, that is, over10 years. Another important element of use is the amount of marihuanaused on each occasion. Most intermittent and moderate usersaverage about one-half to one cigarette per occasion, usually atnight. Most heavy users smoke at least one to two cigarettes anoccasion, with a few using as many as five consecutively. As this brief description of use patterns suggests, marihuanause and the marihuana user do not fall into simple, distinctclassifications. Although it is possible to sketch profiles ofvarious marihuana-using populations, no valid stereotype of amarihuana user or non-user can be drawn. The spectrum ofindividuals who use or have used marihuana varies according tofrequency, intensity and duration of use. It is meaningless totalk of "the marihuana user" or "marihuanause" without first clarifying descriptive data. *All respondents for the National Survey were asked tocomplete a self administered questionnaire. This instrumentcovered many sensitive areas, including a series of items onpersonal experience with marihuana and other drugs. Given thenature of the questions, the contractor took every precaution toinsure that the interviewee responded honestly and that hisresponses were kept strictly confidential. Even the interviewerwho orally administered the rest of the Survey was not permittedto view the written instrument. One of the inevitable costs of such confidentiality is therisk that a certain percentage of respondents would not completeone or more of the questions. Where a significant number ofquestions remained unanswered, the questionnaire was nottabulated at all. However, in 30%, of the otherwise completequestionnaires, the adult respondents who had ever used the drugdid not answer the question, "On the average, about howoften do you use marihuana at the present time?" Concerned about the meaning of this non-response rate, the,Commission directed the contractor to conduct a detailed analysiscomparing the non-respondents with all respondents and with thoseindividuals who had never used marihuana at all. On the basis ofthis analysis, we are confident that the overwhelming majority,if not all, of the non-respondents are experimenters. In the flrst place, the demographic characteristics of thenon-respondents coincide closely with those of the non-users andless frequent users. Very few of the young adults, where morefrequent use is concentrated, failed to respond. Secondly, the non-respondents are disproportionately locatedin the geographic regions where use was least prevalent and leastfrequent. For example, 50% of the ever-users in the North Centralregion failed to respond, compared to 71% in the West. Yet only5% of the ever-users in the North Central region continue to usethe drug more than once a week, compared to 21% in the West; andless than .5% of the ever-users in the North Central region usethe drug more than once a day, as compared to 4% in the West. PROFILES OF USERS Several studies by the Commission and many other recentcollege and high school surveys have elucidated a variety ofpersonality types or categories of marihuana users. Theseprofiles relate primarily to the patterns depicted above and tothe meaning of marihuana use for various individuals. Essentiallywe will describe a continuum with much overlapping among thecategories. The reader should understand that groupidentification is at best a hazardous occupation; the traitsdescribed are not exclusive to marihuana users. A much largernumber of individuals who have not used the drug can be similarlydescribed. Experimental Users The first and by far the largest group has been designated as"experimenters" because of their extremely infrequentor non-persistent marihuana usage. Experimentation with the drugis motivated primarily by curiosity and a desire to share asocial experience. These experimenters are characteristicallyquite conventional and practically indistinguishable from thenon-user in terms of life style, activities, social integration,and vocational or academic performance. Disciplined, optimistic, and self-confident, experimentersappear to be as conventional, responsible, goal-oriented andorderly as non-users. Intermittent Users The intermittent users are motivated to use marihuana forreasons similar to those of the experimenters. They use the drugirregularly and infrequently but generally continue to do sobecause of its socializing and recreational aspects. For theintermittent user, marihuana often contributes to theestablishment and solidification of close social relations amongusers similarly inclined. The individual has a sense of belongingto an intimate group. Investigations of behavioral aspects of marihuana smokingclearly demonstrate that marihuana smoking is a social activity,believed by intermittent users to enhance the enjoyment of sharedactivities, especially music, art, films and food. In a Commission-sponsored study to determine the effects ofrepeat doses of marihuana, under free access conditions, thesubjects smoked almost exclusively in groups. A certain number ofthese individuals tended to share much of their leisure time incommon activities, and marihuana, smoking was the focal activityaround which other types of social interactions revolved, such asconversation, watching TV, listening to music and playing games.The intermittent users studied exhibited an increased sense ofwell-being, relaxation, and friendliness during these activities.They were more inclined to seek and emphasize the social ratherthan personal effects of the drug. Intermittent marihuana users, like the experimenters, aregenerally conventional in most respects. They are more liberalpolitically and socially and they tend to stress education forpersonal improvement rather than for recognition or high grades.Like many non-users, these individuals are likely to beself-expressive, intellectually and culturally oriented,creative, and flexible. Placing a high value on experimentationand responsible, independent decision-making, they often manifesta desire to search for new experiences, resulting in somebehaviors which depart from the norms of the larger society.Often accompanying their search is a sense of uncertainty aboutthe future. Moderate and Heavy Users The final groups of marihuana users are the moderate and heavyusers. This range is wide and includes individuals who usemarihuana more than 10 times a month to several times a day.Practically all of the American research effort to date hasfocused on the large majority of individuals who use less often,that is, the experimental and intermittent users. Consequently,not enough is known about characteristics and behavior of themoderate and the heavy users, so it is difficult to distinguishaccurately between the two groups. We suspect however that themoderate users share traits with both the intermittent and theheavy users. Having already discussed the intermittent group, wewill now turn to the characteristics of the heavy group. Heavy users seem to need the drug experience more often. Theirinitial and continued marihuana use is motivated not only bycuriosity and an urge to share a social experience but also by adesire for "kicks," "expansion of awareness andunderstanding," and relief of anxiety or boredom. Generally, the heavy marihuana user's life style, activities,values and attitudes are unconventional and at variance withthose of the, larger society. These individuals are morepessimistic, insecure, irresponsible, and nonconforming. Theyfind routine especially distasteful. Their behavior and mood arerestless and uneven. Heavy users place particularly strong emphasis on impulsiveresponse in the interest of pleasure-seeking, immediategratification, and individual expression. They tend to evidencesocial and emotional immaturity, are especially indifferent torules and conventions, and are often resistant to authority.However, several surveys have also revealed that they tend to becurious, socially perceptive, skillful and sensitive to the needsof others, and possess broadly based, although unconventional,interests. The Boston free-access study permitted the Commission toobserve a group of individuals whose life styles, activities,values and attitudes are representative of a segment of theunconventional youthful subculture. The month-long period ofcontrolled study during the fall prevented the participation ofindividuals who were married, steadily employed, or enrolled inschool. Individuals who smoked marihuana once a week or less weresought by the researchers but were exceedingly unusual among thepopulation available for the study. Consequently, the groupstudies contrasted with the student and full-time workingpopulations in which weekly marihuana use is more common. Forthis reason, the intermittent users studied appeared to besimilar to, rather than different from, the moderate and heavyusers studied. Both groups had used marihuana for an average offive years. Under the study's confined conditions, participants tended tosmoke more marihuana than they did "on the outside."The intermittent users, who by our definition averaged eighttimes a month under outside conditions, averaged three cigarettesa day during the study. The range was from one-half to sixcigarettes daily. The moderate and heavy users, who "on the outside"averaged 33 times a month, now averaged six-and-a-half cigarettesa day. The range was three-and-a-half to eight cigarettes. Indiscussing the Boston study, we will call this group"daily" users. Smoking usually occurred at night, sometimes during theafternoon and only occasionally upon awakening. The intermittentand heavy users usually smoked one cigarette a session. The dailyusers were more likely to smoke more than one a session. A fewindividuals in the daily group could have been consideredconstantly intoxicated on a few occasions during the 21 -dayperiod. The mean age of the subjects studied was 23. Based on IQtesting, they were superior intellectually, although they hadcompleted, on the average, only two-and-a-half years of college.Their job histories were rather erratic, characteristic of apattern of itinerant living. The intermittent users -were from amiddle or upper class background, while the daily users generallyshared a lower socioeconomic status. Broken homes and instancesof alcohol or drug abuse were more common in the familybackgrounds of the daily users. Alcohol was rarely used by the subjects. Use of hallucinogensand amphetamines was significantly more widespread and had begunearlier in the daily user group. In contrast to the intermittentgroup, the daily users almost uniformly reported that marihuanasmoking produced relaxation, noting also increasedalteration in perception or psychedelic-like effects.Similarly, they reported an increased sense of well-being,friendliness, carefreeness and decreased hostility. Additionally,the daily users appeared to demonstrate a moderate psychologicaldependence on the marihuana experience while theintermittent users demonstrated little or no psychologicaldependence. Analysis of social-behavioral aspects of daily users'marihuana smoking clearly demonstrated that it is a pivotalsocial activity around which conversation, other personalinteractions, and much of the users' lives revolve. Smokingalmost exclusively occurred in groups and was the focal activityaround which these groups formed. The daily users exhibited areadiness to take part in but not to initiate a smoking session. In contrast to the intermittent users, all the daily users ina group smoked when marihuana was made available. Marihuanasmoking appeared to be a primary means of reinforcing groupsolidarity. Yet these users were more inclined to seek thepersonal effects of the drug rather than the socializing effectssought by the intermittent users. The social adjustment of the daily users, when judged from atraditional psychiatric standpoint, was impaired. Individualstended to be more withdrawn and to interact less with each otherthan the intermittent users, regardless of the type of activityor state of intoxication. However, the daily users did appear toaccommodate themselves better than the intermittent users to theeffects of the intoxication on social interaction. Despite a relatively high level of scholastic attainment andsuperior intelligence, many of the subjects were performing wellbelow their intellectual capability, usually working at menial,mechanical or artisan tasks. They were not oriented towardachieving the traditional goals of the larger society. Nonetheless, during the period of the Boston study, thesubjects could not be characterized as displaying a generallassitude and indifference, carelessness in personal hygiene orlack of productive activity, all supposed to be characteristic ofvery heavy use. Even during the periods of heaviest marihuanasmoking, they maintained a high level of interest andparticipation in a variety of personal activities, such aswriting, reading, keeping up on current world events, andparticipating in athletic and aesthetic endeavors. Additionally, all of the subjects maintained a desire tocomplete all aspects of the research study. Although they couldbe labeled 'underachievers" in terms of the traditionalstandards of the larger society, these individuals were motivatedto pursue actively the interests and activities of their own subculture. Generally, most studies which have been undertaken indicatethat individuals who are heavy marihuana users cannot find aplace for themselves in conventional society. Their heavymarihuana use may reflect and perhaps perpetuate theirunconventionality while providing social acceptance in one of thenon-conventional subcultures. Very Heavy Users The Commission's analysis of frequency, quantity and durationof marihuana use suggest that the United States is at the presenttime in a fortunate position. All of the studies available to theCommission have indicated that only a minute number of Americanscan be designated as very heavy marihuana users. These studiesuniformly indicate that chronic, constant intoxication with verypotent cannabis preparations is exceedingly rare in this country. The Commission believes that important distinctions must bemade between the daily (moderate and heavy) American marihuanauser and the very heavy hashish or charas user in other parts ofthe world where cannabis is widely cultivated and its use deeplyingrained. Many of the North African and Asian users do notemploy the drug only as an intoxicant in the western sense.Instead, it is frequently used in "folk medicalpractice," in religious rites and as a work adjunctparticularly in those occupations which are physically demanding,monotonous, unintellectual, and offer little possibility ofadvancement. In these countries, very heavy use is typically associatedwith young males from a lower socioeconomic background.Nonetheless, use is more widespread among all ages and elderlychronic users are not uncommon. Generally, these very heavy users consume high amounts of verypotent preparations continually throughout the day so that theyare rarely drug-free. These individuals evidence strongpsychological dependence on the drug, requiring compulsivedrug-taking. Clear-cut behavioral changes occur in these extremecases. The very heavy User tends to lose interest in allactivities other than drug use. A common element of thebehavioral pattern is lethargy and social deterioration. Notsurprisingly, these users have been held in low esteem and veryheavy use has been subject to societal disapproval in almost allcountries. BECOMING A MARIHUANA USER Our attempt to classify marihuana users is primarily fordescriptive purposes. It does not imply that all individuals whoresemble any of the categories are necessarily marihuana users.Nor is it implied that all marihuana users fit neatly orprecisely into these slots. There is no "typical"marihuana user, just as their is no typical American. The mostnotable statement that can be made about the vast majority ofmarihuana users-experimenters and intermittent users-is that theyare essentially indistinguishable from their non-marihuana usingpeers by any fundamental criterion other than their marihuanause. But if most users and non-users of marihuana essentially areindistinguishable, why have some people chosen to use the drugand others not, and why have some people continued to use it andothers not? An important part of the explanation is that use ofmarihuana, like all human behavior, occurs within specific socialand cultural settings. The individual's biologicalcharacteristics and personality probably play an important rolein determining the pattern his use will take. However, thecultural and social setting play a larger role in determiningwhether be will use it at all. Numerous studies have demonstrated that the young person whochooses to use marihuana differs in some important sociologicalrespects from his peer who does not choose to do so. Thesedifferences relate to his willingness to experiment with a drug,especially a forbidden one. in short, the process of becoming amarihuana user is not a " seduction of the, innocent"as is often portrayed. Based on interrelated familial, social andcultural factors, persons, especially young persons, who maychoose to use marihuana can be predicted statistically. Parental Influence The decision to use marihuana is related to parental lifestyle. Parents provide the most important example of acceptabledrug-taking behavior for their children. That marihuana usersfrequently have medicine-taking, cigarette-smoking, orliquor-drinking parents has been demonstrated. In a series ofCanadian studies, grade and high school students who said theirmothers took tranquilizers daily were three times more likely totry marihuana than the students who did not so report. Beyond the influence of a drug-taking example, parents havethe primary influence on their childrens' acquisition of skills,values and attitudes necessary to be mature and responsibleadults. Many parents have oriented their children toward becomingindependent, competent, educated, and adaptive adults. Simultaneously, many young people observe in their parents'lives the trend toward shorter work periods, earlier retirementand increased emphasis on leisure time activities. It appearsthat the incidence of adolescent marihuana use is stronglycorrelated with this trend toward increased leisure time. Situational Factors and BehavioralCorrelates All studies of the ever user, including theCommission-sponsored National Survey, have established thatmarihuana smoking is significantly correlated with a number ofdemographic variables. Males, college students, and residents ofmetropolitan areas, especially in the Northeast and West, aregenerally overrepresented in proportion to their percentage ofthe total population. Among the behaviors statistically correlated with marihuana,use are radical politics, visits to psychiatrists, sexualfreedom, and separate residences from parents. The mostsignificant behavior seems to be use of legal drugs, especiallyalcohol and tobacco. Young people who choose to experiment withmarihuana are fundamentally the same people, socially andpsychologically, as those who use alcohol and tobacco. Forexample, in a study of high school youngsters, only 3% of all thenonsmokers in the sample had ever tried marihuana, compared with50% of all the current cigarette smokers. Similarly, for alcoholdrinking outside the family setting, only 2% of all thenondrinkers had tried marihuana, as compared to 27% of thedrinkers. The National Survey tends to confirm the closeassociation between marihuana use and cigarette smoking andalcohol use. Among all the adults sampled in the Survey, 71% hadsmoked cigarettes and 39% are current smokers. Similarly, ofadult non-marihuana users, 70% have smoked cigarettes and 38% arecurrent smokers. These percentages increase somewhat formarihuana users: 87 have smoked cigarettes and 54% are currentcigarette smokers. In regard to alcohol consumption, 40% of all the adultssampled indicated that they had not consumed beer or bard liquorin the 30 days prior to the survey. Marihuana users tended tohave consumed alcohol more often than non-marihuana users (Table,2). Table 2.-LIQUOR CONSUMPTION DURING 30-DAYPERIOD 1-4 5-10 11 or No 0 days days days moreanswer days Percent of nonmarihuana users. . 4519 6 7 21 Percent of marihuana users...... 2630 12 8 24 Social Group Factors One of the most influential factors in determining behavior incontemporary America among adolescents and young adults is peergroup influence. Knowing other people who use marihuanapredisposes the individual to use marihuana, and havingmarihuana-using friends provides the social opportunity for thecurious. Ile individual who is already part of a, social groupwhich uses marihuana indicates by this choice that his attitudesand values are already to some degree compatible with illicitdrug use. Social peer groups are especially influential upon individualswho have not yet become "successful" adults, such asadolescents, college students and young adults, who spend a greatdeal of time and effort competing for status in situations wherestatus opportunities are minimal. The social peer group providesan opportunity for achieving status among equals by demonstratingcompetence and autonomy. Outstanding performance in athletics,organizations or academics demonstrates competence but notautonomy because these activities are adult-oriented andcontrolled. Additionally, only a relative few are able to excel. Opportunity to prove oneself is more readily available in thepeer group. Often, adolescents participate in forms of delinquentbehavior, termed symbolic infractions, in order to demonstrateautonomy and competence to their peers. These include joy-riding,vandalism, sexual promiscuity, underage drinking, violation ofrules of decorum and dress, and purposeless confrontation withauthority. Marihuana use has recently been added to the list ofinfractions and offers several advantages for adolescents andyoung adults. Most important, it provides a shared groupexperience which offers the, shy, lonely, socially awkwardneophyte a means of entrance to the group, complete with its ownceremonial initiation. Repetition of the behavior serves toincrease closeness and commitment to the group. Usually theexperience is pleasurable and the individual is able to controlhis level of intoxication. This delinquency is viewed asrelatively harmless to oneself and others, although its symbolicimpact on parents and authority is often greater than that ofother common infractions. Therefore, a, subtle process of acquiring attitudes favorableto drug use, of having friends and acquaintances who define themarihuana experience in acceptable and pleasurable terms, and ofhaving a social belief system which prepares one to accept theconversion process to begin with, are all powerful complementaryfactors which direct a young person toward marihuana use. At thispoint, the use of marihuana provides further opportunities foracquiring new marihuana using friends and entering the socialmilieu of marihuana, users. The Dynamics of Persistent Use The cultural and social factors sketched above, in combinationwith the individual's somatic and psychic characteristics,determine the pattern of his drug behavior once he has chosen toexperiment with it. The majority of individuals who reach thispoint progress no further and often discontinue marihuana use.The most common explanation for discontinuing use is loss ofinterest; the effect lost its novelty and became boring. Otherless common reasons are fear of legal hazards, social pressure,and concerns over physical and mental drug effects. Among theinfrequently noted reasons are: interference with otheractivities; replacement by alcohol; unavailability; cost;unpleasant experiences; fear of moral transgression; orprogression to other forms of non-drug interests such as yoga,transcendental meditation, agrarian communes, esoteric religionand restrictive diets. For those who continue use, psychosocial factors are importantdeterminants of the use patterns. Many marihuana users arestrongly committed to traditional society in which they desire torise socially. They have chosen to participate fully in thetraditional adult-oriented activities and the formalachievement-reward system. Their peer groups consist primarily ofsimilarly oriented individuals. The infrequent use of marihuanaby these persons is a social activity for fun and satisfiescuriosity. Those individuals who continue to use marihuana morefrequently appear to be different types of people and orientedtoward a different part of the social system. Most of themmaintain stable career orientations and continue to functionwithin the broader society. But they feel more burdened by thetraditional system of social controls and more removed fromcontemporary society's institutions. These individuals tend toturn away from more traditional adult-oriented reward systems andintensify their peer-group orientation. Their interests andactivities emphasize an informal "in-crowd,"out-of-school or work orientation. The meaning of marihuana useby this peer group emphasizes the ideological character of usage.In contrast to the infrequent type of user, these individualsseem to build their self-identity around the marihuana-using peergroup. BECOMING A MULTIDRUG USER The more one smokes marihuana, the more involved hisinterpersonal relationships are likely to become with his peerswho share the experience with him. As he spends more time withthis group, he begins to sever his contacts with conventionalindividuals and conventional routines. He may eventually viewhimself as a drug user and be willing to experiment with otherdrugs which are approved by his peer group. Only ;a small portionof the marihuana users who reach this stage are likely to becomepersistent, frequent users of these other drugs. The majorityappear to experiment only. Epidemiologic Studies The Commission's studies have confirmed the associationbetween marihuana usage and the consumption of other drugs forcuriosity and pleasure. This association holds for all drugs,including over-thecounter and prescription pain relievers,tension relievers, sleeping pills, and stimulants as well ashashish, methamphetamines, cocaine, LSD and mescaline, andheroin. The National Survey showed that current marihuana usersare about twice as likely to have used any illicit drugs than arethose who have ceased using marihuana (Table 3). Table 3.-ILLICIT DRUG USE BYADULTS Have used Currently but no using Substance Never used marihuana longer usemarihuana marihuana (percent) (percent) Hashish Less than 0.5 percent 28 63 LSD or mescaline Less than 0.5 percent 11 28 Methamphetamine Less than 0.5 percent 10 23 Cocaine Less than 0.5 percent 4 10 Heroin Less than 0.5 percent 1 4 The Commission additionally has contracted a study of 105selected, middle class, young, working adults from California,who are marihuana smokers. Of this sample, 11% were dailymarihuana users and 47% used it several times a week; 33% used itseveral times a month; 6% used it once to several times a year;and 3% had used it but were not currently using marihuana. Thestudy indicates that while most of the subjects were frequentmarihuana users, the incidence of other drug use was relativelylow (Table 4). Table 4.-FREQUENCY OF OTHER DRUG USE BYMARIHUANA USERS Percent who use marihuana Percent Substance who Once to SeveralSeveral never several times timesDaily used times a month aweek marihuana a year Hashish 42 31 21 5 0 LSD 96 4 0 0 0 Mescaline 79 19 0 0 2 Psilocybin 96 4 0 0 0 STP, DMT 100 0 0 0 0 Heroin 98 2 0 0 0 Codeine 87 11 0 0 2 Amphetamines 89 7 0 4 0 Barbiturates 86 10 4 0 0 Cocaine 75 19 2 4 0 Glue 100 0 0 0 0 With the exception of marihuana and hashish, no drug was usedby more than 25% of this population and this use was almostexclusively experimental. Interestingly, the more exotic drugs,mescaline and cocaine were more frequently used (21% and 25% ofthis sample respectively) than the common dangerous drugs: LSD(4%), heroin (2%), codeine (11%), barbiturates (14%), andamphetamines (11%). Among high school students, marihuana, is normally the, firstillicit drug used, although several recent studies have suggestedthat a significant number of students initiate illicit use, withother drugs. Of the marihuana users, a majority have used noother illicit drug, and they tend to be experimental orintermittent users of marihuana. The more frequently the adolescent uses marihuana, the morelikely he is to experiment with other drugs. For example, in onerecent study of San Diego high school students of predominantlywhite middle socioeconomic background, 80% of the students whoused marihuana weekly or more often had used other drugs, and 50%of this group had used LSD. In contrast, 33% of the less thanweekly users bad used other drugs. Profiles and Dynamics The personality profile of the heavy marihuana user discussedearlier includes elements propelling him toward heavy involvementin the multiple-drug-using-subculture. Heavy drug use by theseindividuals may reflect and aggravate a total alienation anddisaffiliation from American society and its institutions. Thisgroup hopes to find in drug use more than simple, fun or relieffrom boredom. The heavy use of drugs represents a shift into thedrug subculture and an adoption of a totally new life style. Someobservers feel that this shift provides a new identity whichallows the individual to counteract his apathy and search formeaning in a society he views as unloving, lonely, andmeaningless. He seeks to become involved with what he describesas the exciting, relevant, "real" experience of life.Additionally, he believes drug use provides new feelings andawareness needed to overcome barriers between himself, others,and the natural world. The drug culture as a community also helps to meet the needsof the individual. It provides a ready supply of drugs, unitescommon experiences and secrets that enhance the drug experience,and protects the individual against undesired experiences andagainst "the outside world." Most important, theculture instills self-confidence by reassuring the individualthat he has been wise in choosing this new identity. Frequently, these are individuals who express feelings ofloneliness, isolation and over-protection from their home andfamily. One frequent pattern involves an intimate, dominatingmother and a distant, unemotional father. In some cases, thedrug-use ritual and the, sense of community closeness offered bythe drug subculture appear to satisfy certain personal needs.Additionally, joining the subculture provides a release fromsheltered life, a test of competence, an opportunity toparticipate, and a chance to express anger. When the anger isturned inward instead of directed at society and family, drug usebecomes a form of passive, self-destructiveness. Sociocultural Factors After the individual views himself as a drug user and hasbecome immersed in the drug-using subculture, the drugs hechooses to experiment with and his pattern of use are determinedprimarily by non-drug factors well beyond the simple propertiesof the psychoactive chemical. These factors are predominantlysocioeconomic and sociocultural, although psychic and somaticfactors also play a role in determining who will continue and howintensively. The availability of a distribution system which stocks theother drugs is essential. Most often, contact with thisdistribution system is increased by having friends oracquaintances who use or sell other drugs. However, much of themarihuana selling takes place, at the customer level betweenfriends, and involves little profit and relatively smallquantities of the drug. The marihuana user who only buys haslittle contact with the professional multidrug dealing system.However, the user-buyer-seller of marihuana is more involved withthe multidrug system, uses more himself and has more friends whouse and sell other drugs. This factor of being a seller ratherthan only a buyer-user is influential in determining the degreeof an individual's involvement with and commitment to the use ofother drugs. Marihuana use does not itself determine which drugs theheavily involved user will choose to use. Generally, theselection of other drugs is influenced by the social group. Forexample, blacks and whites have roughly equal rates of trying andusing marihuana, but their choice of other drugs and the stylesof drug use are quite different and distinctive, due to theirfrequently different sociocultural backgrounds. Additionally, onerecent study of white high school and college students revealeddifferent patterns of further drug use among males and females.Men and women used marihuana in equal numbers, but the men whoused other drugs tended to use hallucinogens while the womentended to use amphetamines. An extensive survey of drug use among 3,500 liberal artsundergraduates attending 14 campuses in the New York areademonstrated the racial character of drug use among thispopulation (Table 5). Table 5.-RACIAL CHARACTER OF DRUG USE Meth- Amphet- Hallu- Percentage tried drugs Heroin Cocaineamphet- amine cinogens mine Blacks................ 9 16 59 13 Whites................ 4 7 1119 21 According to recent studies, heroin usage is not common amongwhite marihuana users. Heroin is most strongly linked tomarihuana use in black and Spanish-speaking ghettos where manyfeel they have little chance of personal advancement andself-fulfillment. In such communities, a segment of thepopulation constructs new illegitimate but accessible avenues forsocial coping. For some this involves the hustle (non-violentstealing) and the excitement of obtaining and using heroin andcocaine. They regard marihuana as a "cool" drug and useit for its social and calming effects. In contrast, studies have demonstrated that the psychedelicsare more often used by the white, middle to upper middle class,collegeeducated populations. The typical use of these drugs inhigh school college and working populations is episodic andexperimental, and is usually discontinued rather rapidly incontrast with marihuana use, which for many persons is of longduration. In many instances, psychedelic drug use begins almostsimultaneously with marihuana. For a few, drug use becomes an ideologic focus, reflectingdisillusionment with society and rejection of the"establishment." These and other motives, includingmere pleasure-seeking, lead to continued use of LSD and otherhallucinogens. Marihuana is viewed as a dilute LSD and is oftenused to enhance or prolong the effects of that drug. Sometimes itis encountered after first LSD use. Methamphetamine, or "speed," use is morecharacteristic of those lower socioeconomic white, youth who arenot school or work oriented. Living for the moment is thecharacteristic attitude of the speed scene. The speed user viewsmarihuana as he does alcohol and uses it for fun or for itscalming effects. For these three groups of illicit drug users, marihuana usehas different meanings and is secondary in importance to the useof the other drugs. Whether or not marihuana leads to other druguse depends on the individual, on the social and cultural settingin which the drug use takes places, and on the nature of the drugmarket. Its use, however, is neither inevitable nor necessary. The Effects of Marihuana on the User The previous section has attempted to paint a broad picture ofthe marihuana user. This section will deal with the, drug and itseffects on these individuals. The meaning of drug often varies with the context in which itis used. The physician would define a drug as any substance usedas a medicine in the treatment of physical or mental disease.Today, due to the influence of many factors, the layman may focuson the negative connotations of drugs, such as the stupefying,poisoning, habit-forming misuse of the opiate drugs. Theconsiderably wider and more scientific definition of a drug whichwill be used in this section is: any chemical substance which hasan action on living tissues. A psychoactive drug is any substance capableof modifying mental performance and individual behavior byinducing functional or pathological changes in the centralnervous system. As defined, psychoactive drugs exert their major effect on thestate of the mind including emotions, feelings, sensibility,consciousness and thinking. The definition implies neitherpositive nor negative meanings. Chemical substances are notinherently good or bad. All substances, including medicines andfoods, which man has chosen to consume have certain desiredeffects (whether therapeutically beneficial or pleasurable) andundesired effects (whether detrimental or unpleasant). Forexample, eating food is certainly a necessary and pleasurableactivity. However, obesity plays an important role in manydiseases, including diabetes, high blood pressure and heartattacks, and tends to limit physical activities. The classification of any drug effect as either beneficial orharmful often greatly depends on the values the classifier placeson the expected effects. This is especially relevant with respectto the psychoactive drugs such as tranquilizers, stimulants,coffee, cigarettes, alcohol, marihuana and other licit or illicitdrugs. For all of these drugs, the weights of benefit and harmare difficult to determine when viewed merely in terms of theirstated effects. BOTANY AND CHEMISTRY Marihuana refers to a preparation derived from a plant,cannabis sativa L. The preparation contains varying quantities ofthe flowers and their resinous secretions, leaves, small stemsand seeds. These plant parts contain many chemical substances.The chemical substance which produces the major drug effects istetrahydrocannabinol (THC). According to current information, theamount of THC present determines the potency of the preparation.Hereinafter, any reference to drug content or drug effect ofmarihuana will, for all practical purposes, mean that oftetrahydrocannabinol. The drug content of the plant parts is variable, generallydecreasing in the following sequence: resin, flowers, leaves.Practically no drug is found in the stems, roots or seeds. Thepotency and resulting drug effect of marihuana fluctuates,depending on the relative proportions of these plant parts in themarihuana mixture. Most marihuana available in this country comes from Mexico andhas a THC content of less than 1%. Marihuana of American originoften contains less than two-tenths of 1% THC. Marihuanaoriginating in Jamaica and Southeast Asia often has a 2% to 4%THC content. Marihuana is the least potent preparation of the plant.Jamaican ganja, containing primarily the flower tops and thesmall leaves or bracts, has a THC content of about 4% to 8%depending on the mixture. Indian ganja is less potent. The mostpotent preparation is hashish (charas) which is composed of onlythe drug-rich resinous secretions of the flowers. Generally, theTHC content of hashish is 5 % to 12 %. FACTORS INFLUENCING DRUG EFFECT A number of variable factors exert an important influence onthe psychopharmacologic effects of marihuana in man, as is truefor all drugs. Failure to take these factors into considerationprobably accounts for a large part of the inconsistency andcontroversy surrounding the description of the drug effect. Dosage The dosage or quantity of the drug (tetrahydrocannabinol)consumed is the most important variable. As with most drugs, thelarger the dose taken, the greater the physical and mental effectwill be and the longer the effect will last. The effect of a highdose of marihuana on an individual would be quite different fromthe effect of a low, usual "social" dose. Method of Use The method of use has a bearing upon the drug effect. Themethod is directly related to both dosage and time lapse beforethe drug effect is felt. Injection directly into a vein deliversthe total dose immediately, producing a rapid, maximal responseof minimal duration. Smoking and inhalation cause rapid but lessefficient delivery of the dose; variable quantity of the drug isdestroyed during burning or escapes into the air and does notreach the lungs. Oral ingestion produces different effects,according to the system in which the drug is dispersed.Generally, oral ingestion diminishes the drug effect, butprolongs it. Metabolism Another factor which influences the effect of the drug ismetabolism. During the metabolic process, the body cells,principally in the liver and lungs, chemically alter drugsubstances, changing their activity and providing for theirelimination from the body. Increasing evidence indicates thatmarihuana is first changed by the body in a way that activates orenhances the drug effect and is subsequently altered in a waythat inactivates the drug prior to its removal from the body. The rate and direction of these metabolic steps cansignificantly influence the effect of marihuana. For instance,individuals with extensive exposure to marihuana or other drugsmetabolize more rapidly, and perhaps differently, from thoseindividuals with no drug exposure. Set and Setting An important variable in discussing the effect of marihuana onthe user is the social and emotional environment; that is, theindividual's "set" and "setting." "Set" refers to a combination of factors that createthe "internal environment" of the individual, includingpersonality, life style, and philosophy, past drug experiences,personal expectations of drug effect, and mood at the time of thedrug experience. "Setting" refers to the external environment andsocial context in which the individual takes the drug. Thesefactors are most influential when drugs are taken at low dosagesand, like marihuana, produce minimal physical and subtlesubjective mental effects. The effect of marihuana generally willbe quite different for an intermittent social adult smoker fromthat of a youth deeply involved in the youthful drug subculture.These factors partially account for the belief of a marihuanauser that he is experiencing a "high" in certainexperiments even when he is given a non-marihuana substance(placebo) but is told it is marihuana. Tolerance Another important factor that determines the immediate effectof any drug is tolerance. Tolerance has two differentconnotations. The first, initial tolerance, is a measure of theamount of a drug which a subject must receive on first exposureto produce a designated degree of effect. A variety of innate andenvironmental factors contributes to initial tolerance amongindividuals. Different individuals require varying amounts of thedrug to attain the same physical and mental effect. The second connotation, which shall be referred to when we usethe word tolerance, is that of an acquired change in tolerance.That is, within the same individual, as a result of repeatedexposure to the drug, the same dose of the drug may produce adiminishing effect so that an increased amount of the drug isrequired to produce the same specified degree of effect. Tolerance develops at differential rates to given effects ofthe same drug. If tolerance has developed to one specific effect,it has not necessarily developed to other specific effects. By definition, the development of tolerance is neitherbeneficial nor detrimental. If tolerance develops rapidly to thedesired mental effect of a "high" but slowly to thebehavioral or physical effects, rapid increase in dose would benecessary in order to have the desired effect, and progressivebehavioral and physical disruption would be seen. This is thepattern for amphetamines. However, if tolerance develops slowly or not at all to thedesired mental effects but more rapidly to the behaviorally orphysically disruptive effects, no dosage increase or only aslight one would be necessary and the unpleasant and undesiredeffects would progressively diminish. With regard to marihuana, present indications are thattolerance does develop to the behaviorally and physicallydisruptive effects, in both animals and man, especially at highfrequent doses for prolonged time periods. Studies in foreigncountries indicate that very heavy prolonged use of very largequantities of hashish leads to the development of tolerance tothe mental effects, requiring an increase in intake to reach theoriginal level of satisfaction. However, for the intermittent usepattern and even the moderate use pattern, little evidence existsto indicate the development of tolerance to the desired"high," although the high may persist for a shortertime period. During the Boston free-access study, no change wasapparent in the level of the high produced by a relatively largedose of the drug over a 21-day period of moderate to heavysmoking. The fact that some individuals smoke more of the drug thanothers may merely reflect a desire for a different level of"high." There is a tendency to develop a tolerance tothe physical effects and behaviorally disruptive effects,especially the depressant effects, in heavy daily users. Thedevelopment of such behavioral tolerance of this nature mayexplain the fact that experienced marihuana smokers describe alower occurrence rate of undesirable drug effects. Thedevelopment of tolerance may also explain why these smokersexhibit normal behavior and competent performance of ordinarytasks, while not appearing intoxicated to others even though theyare at their usual level of intoxication. Reverse Tolerance Repeated exposure to marihuana has been said to cause anindividual to need lesser amounts of the drug to achieve the samedegree of intoxication. This "reverse tolerance" may berelated to one's learning to get high or to the recognition ofthe subtle intoxication at low doses. Or perhaps, such tolerancereflects an increase in the body's ability to change the drug toan active chemical. To date, the existence of "reversetolerance" has not been substantiated in an experimentalsetting. Duration of Use Tolerance development is only one of a variety of occurrenceswhich possibly are related to repetitive use of marihuana. Anydiscussion of drug effect must also take into account the timeperiod over which the drug use occurs. Immediate effects of asingle drug experience must be contrasted with effects ofshort-term use and the effects of longterm use in order to detectany cumulative effects or more subtle, gradually occurringchanges. This issue of an individual's change over a period of years isquite complex; a multitude of factors other than marihuana usemay affect his life. As previously defined, short-term refers toperiods of less than two years, long-term to periods of two to 10years, and very long-term to periods greater than 10 years. Mostof the American experience involves short-term and long-term use,with low doses of weak preparations of the drug. Patterns of Use The drug effect of marihuana can be realistically discussedonly within the context of who the user is, how long he has usedmarihuana, how much and how frequently he uses it, and the,social setting of his use. In general, for virtually any drug, the heavier the pattern ofuse, the greater the risk of either direct or indirect damage.For purposes of this discussion, the patterns of use developed inthe first section of this chapter will be utilized. Becausefrequency of use is presently the, primary determinant of usepatterns in this country, we employ similar designations: (1) The experimenter who uses marihuana,at most a few times over a short term and then generally ceasesto use it, or uses once a month or less; (2) The intermittent user who usesmarihuana, infrequently, that is more than once monthly but lessthan several times a week; (3) The moderate user who uses it fromseveral times a week to once daily, generally over a long term; (4) The heavy user who uses it severaltimes a day over a long term and; (5) The very heavy user who isconstantly intoxicated with high tetrahydrocannabinol contentpreparations, usually hashish, over a very long term. Again, these classifications are not intended to be rigid butare designed to facilitate a discussion of the many usagepatterns. Definition of Dependence Before describing the effect of marihuana, onthe user, two additional definitions are required. They concernthe concept of dependence which has so clouded public andprofessional consideration of psychoactive drugs. Throughout theremainder of this report, we refer Separately to psychologicaland physical dependence, defined as follows: Psychological dependence is the repeateduse of psychoactive drugs leading to a conditioned pattern ofdrug-seeking behavior. The intensity of dependence varies withthe nature of the drug, the method, frequency, and duration ofadministration, the mental and physical attributes of theindividual, and the characteristics of the physical and socialenvironment. Its intensity is at its peak when drug-seekingbecomes a compulsive and undeviating pattern of behavior. Physical dependence is the state oflatent hyper-excitability which develops in the central nervoussystem of higher mammals following frequent and prolongedadministration of the morphine-like analgesics, alcohol,barbiturates, and other depressants. Such dependence is notmanifest subjectively or objectively during drug administration.Specific symptoms and signs, the abstinence syndrome, occur uponabrupt termination of drug administration; or with morphinelikeagonists by administering the specific antagonists. EFFECTS RELATED TO PATTERNUSE Set out below is a brief summary of effects of marihuana,related to frequency and duration of use. The remainder of theChapter discusses the effects of immediate, short-term, long-termand very long-term use of the drug. Experimenters and intermittent users ------ Little or nopsychological dependence. Influence on behavior related largely to conditioning to drug use and its social value to the user. No organ injury demonstrable. Moderate users ------------ Moderatepsychological dependence in- creasing with duration of use. Behavioral effects minimal in stable per- sonalities, greater in those with emo- tional instability. Probably little if any organ injury. Duration of use increases probability of escalation of all effects including shift from moderate to heavy use. Heavy users -------------- American "pothead." Strong psychological dependence. Detectable behavior changes. Possible organ injury (chronic diminution ofpulmonary function). Effects more easily demonstrable with long-termuse. Very heavy users ---------- Users in countrieswhere the use of cannabis has been indigenous for centuries. Very strong psychological dependence to pointof compulsive drug seeking and use. Clear-cut behavioral changes. Greater incidence of associated organ injury. IMMEDIATE DRUG EFFECTS The immediate effects are those which occur during the drugintoxication or shortly following it. The user is aware of someof these effects, for they often cause him to use the drug. Atthe same time, many changes may occur in his body which can bemeasured by others but are not obvious to him. Subjective Effects A description of an individual's feelings and state ofconsciousness as affected by low doses of marihuana is difficult;the condition is not similar to usual waking states and is theresult of a highly individual experience. Perhaps the closestanalogies are the experience of day dreaming or the moments justprior to falling asleep. The effect is not constant and acyclical waxing and waning of the intensity of the intoxicationoccurs periodically. At low, usual "social" doses, the intoxicatedindividual may experience an increased sense of well-being;initial restlessness and hilarity followed by a dreamy, carefreestate of relaxation; alteration of sensory perceptions includingexpansion of space and time; and a more vivid sense of touch,sight, smell, taste, and sound; a feeling of hunger, especially acraving for sweets; and subtle changes in thought formation andexpression. To an unknowing observer, an individual in this stateof consciousness would not appear noticeably different from hisnormal state. At higher, moderate doses, these same reactions areintensified but the changes in the individual would still bescarcely noticeable to an observer. The individual may experiencerapidly changing emotions, changing sensory imagery, dulling ofattention, more altered thought formation and expression such asfragmented thought, flight of ideas, impaired immediate memory,disturbed associations, altered sense of self-identity and, tosome, a perceived feeling of enhanced insight. At very high doses, psychotomimetic phenomena may beexperienced. These, include distortions of body image, loss ofpersonal identity, sensory and mental illusions, fantasies andhallucinations. Nearly all persons who continue to use marihuana describethese usual effects in largely pleasurable terms. However, othersmight call some of these same effects unpleasant or undesirable. As discussed earlier, a wide range of extra-drug factors alsoinfluences marihuana's effects. The more the individual usesmarihuana and the longer he has been using it, the more likelythe experiences will be predominantly pleasurable, and the lesslikely the effects will be unpleasant. An increasingsensitization to those effects viewed as pleasant occurs as theuser has more experience with the drug. Persons subject to unpleasant reactions may eliminatethemselves from the using group although the occasionalexperience of an unpleasant effect does not always discourageuse. Body Function A large amount of research has been performed in man andanimals regarding the immediate effect of marihuana on bodilyprocesses. No conclusive evidence exists of any physical damage,disturbances of bodily processes or proven human fatalitiesattributable solely to even very high doses of marihuana.Recently, animal studies demonstrated a relatively large marginof safety between the psychoactive dose and the physical andbehavioral toxic and lethal dose. Such studies seemed to indicatethat safe human study could be undertaken over a wide dose range. Low to moderate doses of the drug produce minimal measurabletransient changes in body functions. Generally, pulse rateincreases, recumbent blood pressure increases slightly, andupright blood pressure decreases. The eyes redden, tear secretionis decreased, the pupils become slightly smaller, the fluidpressure within the eye lessens and one study reports that theeyeball rapidly oscillates (nystagmus). A minimal decrement in maximum muscle strength, the presenceof a fine hand tremor, and a decrease in hand and body steadinesshave also been noted. Decreased sensitivity to pain andoverestimation of elapsed time may occur. The effects of marihuana on brain waves are still unclear andinconsistent. Generally, the intoxication produces minimal,transient changes of rapid onset and short duration. Sleep timeappears to increase, as does dreaming. Investigation of the effects of marihuana on a wide variety ofother bodily function indices has revealed few consistentlyobserved changes. These few consistently observed transient effects on bodilyfunction seem to suggest that marihuana is a rather unexcitingcompound of negligible immediate toxicity at the doses usuallyconsumed in this country. The substance is predominantly apsychoactive drug. The feelings and state of consciousnessdescribed by the intoxicated seem to be far more interesting thanthe objective state noted by an observer. Mental Function Marihuana, like other psychoactive substances, predominantlyaffects mental processes and responses (cognitive tasks) and thusthe motor responses directed by mental processes (psychomotortasks). Generally, the degree of impairment of cognitive andpsychomotor performance is dose-related, with minimal effect atlow doses. The impairment varies during the period ofintoxication, with the maximal effect at the peak intoxication.Performance of simple or familiar tasks is at most minimallyimpaired, while poor performance is demonstrated on complex,unfamiliar tasks. Experienced marihuana users commonlydemonstrate significantly less decrement in performance thandrug-naive, individuals. The greater his past marihuana experience, the better theintoxicated individual is able to compensate for drug effect onordinary performance at usual doses. Furthermore, markedindividual variation in performance is noted when all else isheld constant. The effect of marihuana on cognitive andpsychomotor performance is therefore highly individualized andnot easily predictable. Effects on emotional reactions and onvolition are equally variable and are difficult to measure underlaboratory conditions, but can be significant. The Intoxicated State Studies of intoxicated persons have suggested possibleexplanations for the subtle effects on mental processes producedby marihuana, Generally, a temporary episodic impairment ofshort-term memory occurs. These memory voids may be filled withthoughts and perceptions extraneous to organized -mentalprocesses. Past and future may become obscured -as the individualfocuses on filling the present momentary memory lapse. His senseof self -identity may seem altered if he cannot place himself inhis usual time frame. This altered state of mind may be regarded by the individualas pleasant or unpleasant. The important factors of dosage andset and setting play a most important role in this determination.When the nature of the drug-taking situation and thecharacteristics of the individual are optimal. the user is apt todescribe his experience as one of relaxation, sensitivity,friendliness, carefreeness, thoughtfulness, happiness,peacefulness, and fun. For most marihuana users who continue touse the drug, the experience is overwhelmingly pleasurable. Unpleasant Reactions However, when these circumstances are not optimal, theexperience may be unpleasant and an undesirable reaction to themarihuana intoxication occurs. In these instances, anxiety,depression, fatigue or cognitive loss are experienced as ageneralized feeling of ill-being and discomfort. A heavy sluggishfeeling, mentally and physically, is common in inexperiencedmarihuana smokers who overshoot the desired high or in personswho might orally ingest too large a dose. Dizziness, nausea,incoordination, and palpitations often accompany the "toostoned" feeling. Anxiety States "Novice anxiety reactions" or feelings of panicaccount for a majority of unpleasant reactions to marihuana. Whenthe distortion of self image and time is recognized by theindividual as drug-induced and temporary, the experience isviewed as pleasurable. Anxiety -and panic result when thesechanges cause the individual to fear that the loss of hisidentity and self-control may not end, and that he is dying or"losing his mind." These anxiety and panic reactionsare transient and usually disappear over a few hours as thedrug's effects wear off, or more quickly with gentle friendlyreassurance. The large majority of these, anxiety reactions occur inindividuals who are experimenting with marihuana. Most oftenthese individuals have an intense underlying anxiety surroundingmarihuana use, such as fears of arrest, disruption of family andoccupational relations, and possible bodily or mental harm. Oftenthey are older and have relatively rigid personalities with lessdesire for new and different experiences. The incidence of these anxiety reactions may have decreased asmarihuana use has become acceptable to wider populations, as thefears of its effects have lessened and as users have developedexperience in management of these reactions. Psychosis Rare cases of full-blown psychotic episodes have beenprecipitated by marihuana. Generally, the individuals hadprevious mental disorders or had poorly developed personalitiesand were marginally adjusted to their life situation. Often theepisode occurred at times of excessive stress. These episodes arecharacteristically temporary. Psychotherapy and sometimesmedications are useful in prompt control and treatment of thispsychological reaction. In addition, rare nonspecific toxicpsychoses have occurred after extremely high doses. This state ofnonspecific drug intoxication or acute brain syndrome isself-limited and clears spontaneously as the drug is eliminatedfrom the body. Conclusions In summary, the immediate effect of marihuana on normal mentalprocesses is a subtle alteration in state of consciousnessprobably related to a change in short-term memory, mood, emotionand volition. This effect on the mind produces a varyinginfluence on cognitive and psychomotor task performance which ishighly individualized, as well as related to dosage, time,complexity of the task and experience of the user. The effect onpersonal, social and vocational functions is difficult topredict. In most instances, the marihuana intoxication ispleasurable. In rare cases, the experience may lead to unpleasantanxiety and panic, and in a predisposed few, to psychosis. SHORT-TERM EFFECTS The effect of an enormous daily oral dose of the drug (up toabout one hundred thousand times the minimal behaviorallyeffective human dose) was recently studied in rats and monkeysfor three months. A severe, generalized nervous system depressionwas evident the first few days. Evidence of cumulative toxicitywas observed at these doses. Severe central -nervous systemdepression produced fatalities in some rats in the first few daysuntil tolerance developed. Later, extreme hyperactivitydeveloped. The monkeys experienced severe central nervous systemdepression and one group showed mild hyperactivity, but allrapidly returned to normal behavior after the development oftolerance to these effects. Minimal dose-related toxic effects onbodily organs were noted at autopsy at the conclusion of theexperiment. These non-specific findings of unknown meaningincluded bypocellularity of the bone marrow and spleen andhypertrophy of the adrenal cortex. A 28-day study employing intravenous administration of fromone to ten thousand times the minimal effective human dose tomonkeys produced -similar findings clinically. In the high dosegroups delayed deaths from acute hemorrhagic pneumonia werepossibly caused by accumulation of clumps of THC in the lungproducing irritation similar to that seen at the injection sites.No other organ pathology was noted. These animal studiesillustrated that the margin of safety between active dose andtoxic dose was enormous. A few studies have recently been carried out to observe theeffect of a few weeks of daily marihuana smoking in man. Theamount smoked was a relatively large American dose. Frequency ofuse was once to several times daily. During the 21-day Boston free-access study, no harmful effectswere observed on general bodily functions, motor functions,mental functions, personal or social behavior or workperformance. Total sleep time and periods of sleep wereincreased. Weight gain was uniformly noted. No evidence of physical dependence or signs of withdrawal werenoted. In the heaviest smokers, -moderate psychologicaldependence was suggested by an increased negative mood aftercessation of smoking. Tolerance appeared to develop to the immediate effects of thedrug on general bodily functions (pulse rate) andpsychomotor-cognitive performance (time estimation, short-termmemory, and shootinggallery skill) but not to the"high." Marihuana intoxication did not significantlyinhibit the ability of the subjects to improve with practicethrough time on these psychological-motor tasks. Neither immediate nor short-term (21 day) high-dose marihuanaintoxication decreased motivation to engage in a variety ofsocial and goal-directed behaviors. No consistent alteration thatcould be related to marihuana smoking over this period of timewas observed in work performance of a simple task, participationin aspects of the research study, or interest and participationin a variety of personal activities, such as writing, reading,interest and knowledge of current world events, or participationin athletic or aesthetic activities. Marihuana smoking appeared to affect patterns of socialinteractions. Although use of the drug was found to be a groupsocial activity around which conversation and other types ofsocial behavior were centered, it was not uncommon for some orall of the smokers to withdraw from the social interaction andconcentrate on the subjective drug experience. During the first part of the smoking period, both intermittentand daily users demonstrated a marked decrement in totalinteraction. Total interaction continued to diminish amongintermittent users but increased above presmoking levels amongthe daily users during the later parts of the smoking period. Thequality of the interaction was more convivial and lesstask-oriented when marihuana was available to the group. Additionally, an assessment of the effect of marihuana onrisktaking behavior revealed that daily users tended to becomemore conservative when engaging in decision-making underconditions of risk. LONG-TERM EFFECTS Our knowledge about marihuana is incomplete, but certainbehavior characteristics appear to be emerging in regard to longterm American marihuana use which, for the most part, issignificantly less than 10 years. These impressions wereconfirmed in the Boston free-access study. The group of Americanyoung adults studied averaged five years (range 2-17 years) ofintermittent or daily use, of marihuana. No significant physical, biochemical, or mental abnormalitiescould be attributed solely to their marihuana smoking. Someabnormality of pulmonary function was demonstrated in many of thesubjects which could not be correlated-with quantity, frequencyor duration of smoking marihuana and/or tobacco cigarettes. (Oneother investigation recently completed uncovered no abnormalitiesin lung or heart functioning of a group of non-cigarette smokingheavy marihuana users). Many of the subjects were in fair to poorphysical condition, as judged by exercise tolerance. The performance of one-fifth of the subjects on a battery oftests sensitive to brain function was poorer on at least one,index than would have been predicted on the basis of their IQscores and education. But a definite relationship between thepoor test scores and prior marihuana or hallucinogen use couldnot be proven. In the past few years, observers have noted various social,psychological and behavioral changes among young high school andcollege age Americans including many who have used marihuanaheavily for a number of years. These changes are reflected by aloss of volitional goal direction. These individuals drop out andrelinquish traditional adult roles and values. They becomepresent rather than future oriented, appear alienated frombroadly accepted social and occupational activity, and experiencereduced concern for personal hygiene and nutrition. Several psychiatrists believe they have detected clinicallythat some heavy marihuana-using individuals appear to undergosubtle changes in personality and modes of thinking, with aresulting change in life style. In adopting this new life style,a troubled youth may turn toward a subculture where drug use anduntraditional behavior are acceptable. This youthful population resembles in many respects themarihuana smoker described in the Boston study. No evidenceexists to date to demonstrate that marihuana use alone causedthese behavioral changes either directly or indirectly. Manyindividuals reach the same point without prior marihuana use oronly intermittent or moderate use; and many more individuals usemarihuana as heavily but do not evidence these changes. For someof these young people, the drop out state is only a temporaryphase, preceding a personal reorganization and return to a moreconventional life style. If heavy, long-term marihuana use is linked to the formationof this complex of social, psychological and behavioral changesin young people, then it is only one of many contributingfactors. VERY LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF HEAVY AND VERY HEAVYUSE Knowledge of the effects of very heavy, very long-term use ofmarihuana by man is still incomplete. The Commission hasextensively reviewed the world literature as well as ongoingstudies in Jamaica and Greece, and carefully observed very heavy,very long-term using populations in countries in other parts ofthe world, such as Afghanistan and India. These populations smokeand often drink much stronger drug preparations, hashish andganja, than are commonly used in America. From theseinvestigations, some observable consequences are becoming muchclearer. Tolerance and Dependence Some tolerance does occur with prolonged heavy usage; largedrug doses are necessary for the desired effects. Abruptwithdrawal does not lead to a specific or reproducible abstinencesyndrome and physical dependence has not been demonstrated in manor in animals. The very heavy users studied did evidence strongpsychological dependence, but were able to cease use for shortperiods of time. In these users, withdrawal does induce, symptoms characteristic ofpsychological dependence. The anxiety, restlessness, insomnia,and other non-specific symptoms of withdrawal are very similar inkind and intensity to those experienced by compulsive cigarettesmokers. Although the distress of withdrawal exerts a very strongpsychogenic drive to continue use, fear of withdrawal is, in mostcases, not adequate to inspire immediate criminal acts to obtainthe drug. General Body Function In the Jamaican study, no significant physical or mentalabnormalities could be attributed to marihuana use, according toan evaluation of medical history, complete physical examination,chest x-ray, electrocardiogram, blood cell and chemistry tests,lung, liver or kidney function tests, selected hormoneevaluation, brain waves, psychiatric evaluation, andpsychological testing. There was no evidence to indicate that thedrug as commonly used was responsible for producing birth defectsin offspring of users. This aspect is also being studied further. Heavy smoking, no matter if the substance was tobacco organja, was shown to contribute to pulmonary functions lower thanthose found among persons who smoked neither substance. All theganja smokers studied also smoked tobacco. In Jamaica, ganja isalways smoked in a mixture with tobacco; and many of the subjectswere heavy cigarette smokers, as well. In a study of a Greek hashish-using population preliminaryfindings revealed poor dentition, enlarged livers, and chronicbronchitis. Further study is required to clarify the relationshipof these to hashish use, alcohol or tobacco use, or general lifestyle of this user population. Social Functioning Similarly, the Jamaican and Greek subjects did not evidenceany deterioration of mental or social functioning which could beattributed solely to heavy very long-term cannabis use. These individuals appear to have used the drug withoutnoticeable behavioral or mental deviation from their lowersocioeconomic group norms, as detected by observation in theircommunities and by extensive sociological interviews,psychological tests and psychiatric examination. Overall life style was not different from non-users in theirlower socioeconomic community. They were alert and realistic,with average intelligence based on their education. Mostfunctioned normally in their communities with stable families,homes, jobs, and friends. These individuals seem to have survivedheavy long-term cannabis use without major physical or behavioraldefects. Mental Functioning The incidence of psychiatric hospitalizations for acutepsychoses and of use of drugs other than alcohol is notsignificantly higher than among the non-using population. Theexistence of a specific longlasting, cannabis-related psychosisis poorly defined. If heavy cannabis use produces a, specificpsychosis, it must be quite rare or else exceedingly difficult todistinguish from other acute or chronic psychoses. Recent studies suggest that the occurrence of any form ofpsychosis in heavy cannabis users is no higher than in thegeneral population. Although such use is often quite, prevalentin hospitalized mental patients, the drug could only beconsidered a. causal factor in a, few cases. Most of these were,short-term reactions or toxic overdoses. In addition, aconcurrent use of alcohol often played a role in the, episodecausing hospitalization. These findings are somewhat surprising in view of thewidespread belief that cannabis attracts the mentally unstable,vulnerable individual. Experience in the United States has notinvolved a level of heavy marihuana, use comparable to theseforeign countries. Consequently, such long-lasting psychicdisturbances possibly caused by heavy cannabis use have not beenobserved in this country. Motivation and Behavioral Change Another controversial form of social-mental deteriorationallegedly related to very long-term very heavy cannabis use isthe "amotivational syndrome." It supposedly affects thevery heavy using population and is described world-wide as a,loss of interest in virtually all activities other than cannabisuse, with resultant lethargy, amorality, instability and socialand personal deterioration. The reasons for the occurrence ofthis syndrome are varied and hypothetical; drug use is only oneof many components in the socioeconomic and psychoculturalbackgrounds of the individuals. Intensive studies of the Greek and Jamaican populations ofheavy long-term cannabis users appear to dispute the solecausality of cannabis in this syndrome. The heavy ganja andhashish using individuals were from lower socioeconomic groups,and possessed average intelligence but had little education andsmall chance of vocational advancement. Most were married andmaintained families and households. They were all employed, mostoften as laborers or small businessmen, at a level whichcorresponded with their education and opportunity. In general, their life styles were dictated by socioeconomicfactors and did not appear to deteriorate as a result of cannabisuse. The Jamaicans were working strenuously and regularly atgenerally uninteresting jobs. In their culture, cannabis servesas a work adjunct. The users believe the drug provides energy forlaborious work and helps them to endure their routine tasks. In contrast, others have described Asian and Africanpopulations where heavy to very heavy hashish or charas smokingfor a very long time is associated with clear-cut behavioralchanges. In these societies, the smokers are mostly jobless,illiterate persons of the lowest socioeconomic backgrounds. Theygenerally begin to use the drug in their early teens and continueits use up to their 60's. The users prefer to smoke in groups of two to 20, generally ina quiet place out of the reach of non-smokers. Weakness,malnutrition and sexual difficulties, usually impotence, a-recommon. Some of them report sleep disturbances. Most users who have used the drug for 20 to 30 years are lazyand less practical in most of their daily acts and reluctant tomake decisions. However, their ability to perform non-complicatedtasks is as good as non-smokers. Although the smokers think they become faster in their dailywork, a general slowness in all their activities is noticed byothers. This user population is typically uncreative. They makelittle if any significant contribution to the social, medical oreconomic improvement of their community. SUMMARY Once existing marihuana, policy was cast into the realm ofpublic debate, partisans on both sides of the issueover-simplified the question of the effects of use of the, drugon the individual. Proponents of the prohibitory legal systemcontended that marihuana, was a, dangerous drug, while opponentsinsisted that it was a harmless drug or was less harmful thanalcohol or tobacco. Any psychoactive drug is potentially harmful to theindividual, depending on the intensity, frequency and duration ofuse. Marihuana is no exception. Because the particular hazards ofuse differ for different drugs, it makes no sense, to compare theharmfulness of different drugs. One may compare, insofar as theindividual is concerned, only the harmfulness of specificeffects. Is heroin less harmful than alcohol because, unlikealcohol, it directly causes no physical in-jury? Or is heroinmore harmful than alcohol because at normal doses its use is moreincapacitating in a behavioral sense? Assessment of the relative dangers of particular drugs ismeaningful only in a wider context which weighs the possiblebenefits of the drugs, the comparative scope of their use, andtheir relative impact on society at large. We consider thesequestions in the next Chapter, particularly in connection withthe impact on public health. Looking only at the effects on the individual, there, islittle proven danger of physical or psychological harm from theexperimental or intermittent use of the natural preparations ofcannabis, including the resinous mixtures commonly used in thiscountry. The risk of harm lies instead in the heavy, long-termuse of the drug, particularly of the most potent preparations. The experimenter and the intermittent users develop little orno psychological dependence on the drug. No organ injury isdemonstrable. Some moderate users evidence a degree of psychologicaldependence which increases in intensity with prolonged durationof use. Behavioral effects are lesser in stable personalities butgreater in those with emotional instability. Prolonged durationof use does increase the probability of some behavioral andorganic consequences including the possible shift to a heavy usepattern. The heavy user shows strong psychological dependence onmarihuana and often hashish. Organ injury, especially diminuationof pulmonary function, is possible. Specific behavioral changesare detectable. All of these effects are more apparent withlong-term and very long-term heavy use than with short-term heavyuse. The very heavy users, found in countries where the use ofcannabis has been indigenous for centuries, have a compulsivepsychological dependence on the drug, most commonly used in theform of hashish. Clear-cut behavioral changes and a greaterincidence of associated biological injury occur as duration ofuse increases. At present, the Commission is unaware of anysimilar pattern in this country. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B23-61IA031-000655-B039-18http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncc3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112818 text/html 105438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:28:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:07 GMTContent-length: 105219 Social Impact of Marihuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Chapter III Social Impact of marihuana use "Man is a creature who lives not uponbread alone but principally by catchwords." -Robert LouisStevenson, Virginia Puerisque (1881) Implicit in existing social and legal policy toward marihuanais the view that society suffers in some way from use of thedrug. When the widespread practice of marihuana smoking appearedin the United States in the early decades of the 20th century,the medical, law enforcement, newspaper, and legislativecommunities immediately indicted the drug. They assumed that thedrug posed serious dangers to individual health; but moreimportantly, they viewed it as a menace to the public order.Crime, insanity and idleness were thought to be the inevitableconsequences of its use. That some of these original fears were unfounded and thatothers were exaggerated have been clear for many years. Yet, manyof these early beliefs continue to affect contemporary publicattitudes and concerns. Consequently, one of the Commission'smost important tasks is to evaluate carefully all data relevantto the social impact of marihuana use. We must determine whetherand in what respects social concern is justified. What is mythand what is reality? The literature pertaining to -the presumed effects andconsequences of marihuana use still reveals a wide diversity ofopinion about social impact. Careful scrutiny is inhibited by theprevalence of hearsay, rhetoric and undocumented assertions aboutthe effects and consequences of marihuana use. Nonetheless,evidence is mounting and a number of significant trends haverecently emerged. In the previous Chapter we explored theevidence regarding the nature and scope of contemporary marihuanause, and the effects of the drug on the individual user. Now wemust consider the impact on society of behavior resulting fromuse of marihuana. In dealing with the behavioral consequences of marihuana, use,the Commission has made, a concerted effort to review andevaluate the enormous body of existing popular and scientificliterature, and has itself initiated new empirical research,including national surveys, retrospective studies and controlledlaboratory experiments. Awareness of the difficulties involved in investigating aninherently complex social phenomenon and applying its researchfindings to policy decisions has fostered particular sensitivityto the quality of previous and Commission-sponsored research. Assuch, considerable attention was given to such basic researchquestions as: What behavioral effects are most relevant in assessing theconsequences of marihuana use? What measures produce the most valid data concerning giveneffects? What reliance should be placed on various research techniques,such as self-reporting, controlled experiments, clinicalobservations and statistical relationships? What generalizations can be made from particular populationsstudied? What are the limits of given data in terms of inference.interpredation and attribution of cause? With respect to the Commission's own research program, theprocess of selection and allocation of resources was indeeddifficult, and some areas of inquiry have undoubtedly been eitherneglected or shortchanged. Nonetheless, we believe that thestudies undertaken and information gathered will addsignificantly to our understanding of the conditions andcircumstances under which marihuana use is likely to affectadversely the public safety, public health and welfare, anddominant social order. Marihuana and Public Safety The belief that marihuana is causally linked to crime andother antisocial conduct first assumed prominence during the1930's as the result of a concerted effort by governmentalagencies and the press to alert the American populace to thedangers of marihuana use. Newspapers all over the country beganto publish lurid accounts of "marihuana atrocities." Inthe absence of adequate understanding of the effects of the drug,these largely unsubstantiated stories profoundly influencedpublic opinion and gave birth to the stereotype of the marihuanauser as physically aggressive, lacking in self-control,irresponsible, mentally ill and, perhaps most alarming,criminally inclined and dangerous. The combination of thepurported effects of the drug itself plus the belief that it wasused by unstable individuals seemed to constitute a significantdanger to public safety. Now, more than 30 years later, many observers are skepticalabout the existence of a cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana use and antisocial conduct. MARIHUANA AND CRIME Over the years, there have been several hypotheses about therelationship between marihuana and antisocial conduct. Theearliest view was that marihuana causes or leads to thecommission of aggressive and violent criminal acts such asmurder, rape and assault. These acts are committed, it has beenargued, because marihuana allegedly produces a relaxation ofordinary inhibitions, a weakening of impulse control and aconcomitant increase in aggressive tendencies while the user isunder its influence. Marihuana's alleged criminogenic role is not always limited toviolent or aggressive behavior. Some commentators also postulatethat marihuana leads to or causes non-violent forms of criminalor delinquent conduct, ranging from sexual promiscuity to grandlarceny. Underlying this second causal hypothesis are theassumptions that marihuana frequently impairs judgment, distortsreality and diminishes, at least temporarily, the user's sense ofpersonal and social responsibility. Regular or heavy use over anextended period of time is felt to interfere, perhapsirreversibly, with the orderly development of psychosocial andmoral maturity. As indicated above, however, a growing uncertainty prevailsabout ,the existence of a causal link between marihuana use andantisocial conduct. In fact, recent surveys, including severalsponsored by the Commission, suggest that large segments of theprofessional public, particularly the law enforcement andcriminal justice communities, are no longer willing to assert a,cause-effect relationship but observe, instead, the existence ofa statistical association. The Issue of Cause and Effect The controversy over the cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana use and criminal, violent or delinquent behavior posesa number of serious problems for the investigators Proponents andopponents of the causal view tend to rely on different kinds ofevidence and to call upon different types of experts, therebydiffering substantially in the kinds of information they acceptas relevant, reliable or valid. Practitioners, such as police and probation officers forexample, frequently cite case examples in which apprehendedoffenders are found to be in possession of marihuana at the timeof arrest. The mere presence of the drug or the fact that anoffender is a known user of marihuana is sometimes deemedsufficient to establish a causal link between the marihuana andthe offense.* Empiricists, on the other hand, would deny that the simplepresence of the drug constitutes a satisfactory demonstration ofa causal relationship between marihuana use and the crime inquestion. They would defer, instead, to the results of empiricalstudies designed explicitly to test the assertion. Essentially,they emphasize that even if some offenders do use marihuana, anequal or larger number of offenders do not, and there arecertainly large numbers of marihuana users in thepopulation-at-large who never engage in the kinds of antisocialconduct deemed to be related to or caused by the use of the drug. Proving any positive and direct relationship, be it causal orotherwise, between two inherently complex social phenomena isfraught with enormous difficulties. The relationship of marihuanause to crime, violence, aggression or juvenile delinquencypresents no exception. Before examining the evidence with respectto the existence of a causal connection, certain basicconsiderations deserve at least brief mention here. To prove, the existence of a positive and direct relationship,one would be required to demonstrate that the alleged offenderwas, indeed, a marihuana, user; that he was under the influenceof the drug at the time he committed the offense; and that thecrime was directly attributable to the effects of the marihuana.The kinds of evidence necessary to establish these facts are noteasy to obtain. First, evidence of the use of marihuana by the accused isgenerally dependent upon either direct admission of use, hearsayevidence, or inferences derived from knowledge of possession(that is, the offender was found to have marihuana on his personor in his possession at the time of arrest). Second, because no chemical tests presently exist outside thelaboratory to identify the presence of marihuana in the body ofthe accused, it is difficult if not impossible to prove that theoffender was definitely under the influence of marihuana when hecommitted the offense. Third, in order to prove that the marihuana represented thesignificant contributory or precipitating variable, all otherfactors possibly related to the offense would have to be examinedand excluded. The problems of validation are further compounded byadditional variations in behavior attributable to: (a) thepharmacological potency of the drug; (b) possible adulteration ofthe marihuana; (c) the interaction of marihuana with other drugssimultaneously ingested; (d) differing individual response tosimilar dosage levels; (e) the time-action function; (f) thecumulative effect of marihuana use; and (g) various social,psychological and situational variables such as set and setting,individual expectations, personal predispositions or preexistingimpulse disorders. Despite the inherent complexities of the issue and thedifficulties in securing reliable and valid evidence, arelatively large body of research is now available pertaining tothe criminogenic effects of marihuana upon the individual and thenature and extent to which the drug constitutes a danger topublic safety. In the following section, we present the availableevidence and assess the strength and direction of the allegedrelationships between marihuana use and violent or aggressivebehavior and also non-violent forms of criminal and delinquentbehavior. *In the widely publicized Licata case of the 1930's. forexample, a 16-year-old cannabis user was charged with the axmurder of his family and the offense was directly attributed tothe effects of marihuana. There was, however. no preciseinformation available regarding the use of marihuana in relationto the crime. Nor. in the various accounts of the case, was theregenerally any reference to the fact that several of the boy'srelatives had previously been committed to mental institutions;that the police hall, about one year prior to the offense (andpresumably before the youth's alleged use of marihuana) attemptedto commit him for his bizarre behavior; or that shortly after thecrime, the boy began to exhibit the symptoms of paranoidschizophrenia. Marihuana and Violent Crime As indicated earlier, the belief that marihuana causes orleads to the commission of violent or aggressive acts firstemerged during the 1930's and became deeply embedded in thepublic mind. Until recently, however, these beliefs weregenerally based on the anecdotal case examples of law enforcementauthorities, a few clinical observations and severalquasi-experimental studies of selected populations comprised ofmilitary offenders, convicted or institutionalized criminals ordelinquents and small groups of college students. Few effortswere made to compare the incidence of violent or aggressivebehavior in representative samples of both user and non-userpopulations. Even in these early observations and investigations, however,no substantial evidence existed of a causal connection betweenthe use of marihuana and the commission of violent or aggressiveacts. Indeed, if any relationship was indicated, it was not apositive and direct causal connection but in inverse or negativestatistical correlation. Rather than inducing violent -or aggressive behavior throughits purported effects of lowering inhibitions, weakening impulsecontrol and heightening aggressive tendencies, marihuana wasusually found to inhibit the expression of aggressive impulses bypacifying the user, interfering with muscular coordination,reducing psychomotor activities and generally producing states ofdrowsiness lethargy, timidity and passivity. In fact, only a small proportion of the marihuana users amongany group of criminals or delinquents known to the authoritiesand appearing in study samples had ever been arrested orconvicted for such violent crimes as murder, forcible rape,aggravated assaultor armed robbery. When these marihuana-usingoffenders were compared with offenders who did not use marihuana,the former were generally found to 'have committed lessaggressive behavior than the latter. In an effort to accumulate data on the relationship betweenmarihuana use and aggressive or violent criminal behavior, theCommission sponsored several studies designed to assess thepurported causal relationship. First, the Commission wanted to tap the unique experience ofthe law enforcement and criminal justice communities.Representative samples of prosecuting attorneys, judges,probation officers and court clinicians were asked their opinionsabout the relationship between marihuana use and the commissionof aggressive or violent criminal acts. When asked to evaluatethe statement that "most aggressive acts or crimes ofviolence committed by persons who are known users of marihuanaoccur when the offender is under the influence ofmarihuana," three-quarters of the judges, probation officersand clinicians indicated either that the statement was probablyuntrue or that they were unsure of its accuracy. Of these threegroups, a greater proportion of clinicians (76.5%) thought thestatement false than did the probation officers (60%)and judges(44.2%). In a separate mail survey of the chief prosecuting attorneysin the 50 states-the group which has often supported the causalhypothesis-52% of the respondents stated that they either did notbelieve or were uncertain of the truth of the proposition thatuse of marihuana leads to aggressive behavior. We have already noted that only a small fraction of theoffender populations in past studies were found to have beenarrested for crimes of violence. Similarly, in aCommission-sponsored study of 1,776 16to-21-year-olds arrested infive New York counties for marihuana law violations between 1965and 1969, onlv a small percentage bad either previously orsubsequently come to the attention of authorities for suchoffenses as assault or robbery. In fact, less than 1% of theoffenders in this sample had been arrested for these offensesprior to their first marihuana arrest, and less than 3% wereknown to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for these offensessubsequent to their marihuana violation. Perhaps more important than professional opinion or theincidence of violent offenses in an offender population, however,is the determination of the extent to which marihuana use isrelated to violent or aggressive behavior in the generalpopulation. In a Commission-sponsored survey, face-to-face interviews wereconducted with a representative sample of 559 West Philadelphiaresidents in order to ascertain the extent of marihuana use inthis heterogeneous population and the relative involvement ofmarihuana users and nonusers in violent criminal behavior. Incorroboration of the earlier findings, the researchers found nosignificant differences in the proportions of users andnon-users; who stated that they had committed any of theaggressive or violent crimes enumerated. Further, no findings indicated that marihuana was generally orfrequently used immediately prior to the commission of offensesin the very small number of instances in which these offense'sdid occur. In contrast, however, the aggressive and violentoffenders in this sample did report with significantly greaterfrequency the use of alcohol within 24 hours of the offense inquestion. These findings should be considered in fight of an earlierWest Coast study of disadvantaged minority-group youthfulmarihuana users, many of whom were raised in a combative andaggressive social milieu similar to that found in several of theWest Philadelphia sampled neighborhoods. The data show thatmarihuana users were much less likely to commit aggressive orviolent acts than were those who preferred amphetamines oralcohol. They also show that most marihuana users were able tocondition themselves to avoid aggressive behavior even in theface of provocation. In fact, marihuana was found to play asignificant role in youth's transition from a "rowdy"to a "cool," non-violent style. The Commission is aware of the claim that a few emotionallyunstable or impulsive individuals have become particularlyaggressive or impulsive under the influence of marihuana. As wehave noted, some newspaper accounts have attributed sensationalhomicides or sexual assaults to marihuana-induced transitorypsychotic states on the part of the user. No evidence exists,however, to indicate that marihuana was responsible forgenerating or creating excessive aggressiveness or impulsivity inindividuals having no prior history of impulse or personalitydisorder. The most that can be said is that in those rareinstances, marihuana may have aggravated a preexisting condition. In sum, the weight of the evidence is that marihuana does notcause violent or aggressive behavior, if anything, marihuanagenerally serves to inhibit the expression of such behavior.Marihuana-induced relaxation of inhibitions is not ordinarilyaccompanied by an exaggeration of aggressive tendencies. No evidence exists that marihuana use will cause or lead tothe commission of violent or aggressive behavior by the largemajority of psychologically and socially mature individuals inthe general population. Marihuana and Non-Violent Crime A second hypothesis reflecting the statements of significantnumbers of government officials is that marihuana plays a majorrole in the commission of other, essentially non-violent, formsof criminal and delinquent behavior. In general, those espousing this more general cause-effectrelationship assume that the drug frequently produces, inaddition to the lowering of inhibitions, impairment of judgment,distortion of reality and at least temporary reduction of a senseof personal and social responsibility. Indeed, the earlierstereotype of the marihuana user was that of an immoral,physically debilitated, psychologically unstable and criminallymarginal man whose state of severely and irreversiblyunderdeveloped psychosocial and moral maturity was said to derivedirectly from his continued use of marihuana. As indicated earlier, neither the inherent complexities of theissue nor the previously inconclusive empirical evidence hasdeterred the formulation and expression of strong opinions aboutthe relationship of marihuana use to crime and delinquency.Opinion in this area, quite apart from the empirical evidence,has long assumed critical importance in the development of socialpolicy. The Commission has addressed the issue in three differentways. One was to assess the state of current public andprofessional opinion relative to the general proposition thatmarihuana causes or leads to the commission of criminal ordelinquent acts. A second approach was to review the professionalliterature addressed to the issue, and a third was to initiateempirical investigations of our own. The opinion surveys found that substantial numbers of personsraised serious questions about the existence of a causalrelationship between marihuana use and criminal or delinquentbehavior. Confusion and uncertainty about the existence of such arelationship have been expressed by both youth and adults,including practicing professionals in the criminal justicesystem. Recent data suggest that some of this confusion may be theresult of a fairly widespread misconception about the addictionpotential of marihuana. To the extent that persons believemarihuana users are physically dependent on the -drug, they mayassume that, like the heroin user, the marihuana user commits hisoffenses in order to support what is perceived as a drug habit;and that, like the heroin model, offenses are committed moreoften in the desperate attempt to obtain the drug rather thanunder its influence following use. There is no evidence that thisis the case, even for those who use the drug heavily. In the Commission-sponsored National Survey, the respondentswere asked whether they agreed or disagreed with the statementthat "many crimes are committed by persons who are under theinfluence of marihuana." Fifty-six percent of the adultpopulation and 41% of the youth indicated agreement. As in theSurvey generally, there was a significant difference of opinionaccording to age in the adult population. While 69% of theover-50 age group agreed with this statement, only aboutone-third of the 18-to-25 age group and the 14-to-17-yearoldsagreed. One of every four youth respondents and 18% of the adultssaid they were "not sure" of the existence of such arelationship between marihuana use and crime. Much greater consensus exists, even between generations,regarding the association of alcohol and crime. While 56% of alladults expressed their belief that many crimes are committed bypersons under the influence of marihuana, 69% of these sameadults believed that alcohol was related in the same way. Only 7%felt unsure about the alcohol crime relationship, in contrast to18% who expressed uncertainty about the relationship betweencrime and marihuana. The Commission also surveyed opinion within the criminaljustice community. A sample of 781 judges, probation officers andcourt clinicians replied to a questionnaire which askedrespondents to indicate whether or not their professionalexperience led them to believe that "use of marihuana causesor leads to antisocial behavior in the sense that it leads one tocommit other criminal or delinquent acts." Of allrespondents, 27% believed this to be the case. Within eachprofessional group, 34% of the judges, 18% of the probationofficers and 2% of the clinicians indicated their agreement. On the assumption that some, proportion, however small, ofmarihuana users might ultimately be arrested for non-drugoffenses, these officials were also asked to assess the relative,truth of the statement that "most non-drug offensescommitted by persons who are known users of marihuana or arefound to have marihuana on their person or in their possessionoccur when the offender is under the influence ofmarihuana." Seventy-one percent of the responding judges,75% of the probation officers and 85% of the court clinicianseither thought the statement false or were unsure of itsaccuracy. Respondents likewise rejected, however, the proposition thatthese crimes perpetrated by marihuana users occur when theoffender is attempting to obtain the drug rather than while underits influence; 65.6% of the judges, 64.6% of the probationofficers and 78.3% of the court clinicians either denied or wereunsure of the truth of this proposition. In short, marihuana, is not generally viewed by participantsin the criminal justice community as a major contributinginfluence in the commission of delinquent or criminal acts. This increasing professional skepticism is buttressed by theweight of research findings. A comprehensive review of theliterature revealed that in the various offender populationsstudied for this purpose, only a small percentage were marihuanausers. In only a handful of cases did researchers report thatcriminal conduct followed the use of marihuana. Generally, therate of self -reported, non-drug crime did not significantlydiffer between users and non-users. Both of the Commission-sponsored studies (the New York andPhiladelphia studies referred to earlier) corroborated thisresearch consensus. In the Philadelphia study, for example, lessthan 10% of the sample were known to the police, and there wereno significant differences among marihuana users and non-users inthe sample who reported the commission of major criminal actswhen statistical controls were applied. Further, most of thefirst offenses committed by users occurred prior to their use ofmarihuana, and only in rare instances did the offensesimmediately follow (within 24 hours) upon the use of marihuana(five cases out of 741 first offenses and 19 cases out of 516most recent offenses). Likewise, the New York study revealed that about one-fifth of-the marihuana law violators arrested between 1965 and 1969 werefound to have previous arrest records. Of those with previousarrests, the great majority of offenses (86%) involved trafficviolations and minor violations of the vagrancy statutes. In but10% of the cases the previous arrests were for assault, robbery,burglary or larceny. In essence, neither informed current professional opinion norempirical research, ranging from the 1930's to the present, hasproduced systematic evidence to support the thesis that marihuanause, by itself, either invariably or generally leads to or causescrime, including acts of violence,, juvenile delinquency oraggressive behavior. Instead the evidence suggests thatsociolegal and cultural variable's account for the apparentstatistical correlation between marihuana use and crime ordelinquency. A Sociocultural Explanation The persistent belief that some relationship exists betweenmarihuana use and crime is not without statistical support.Undoubtedly, the marihuana user of the 1920's and 1930's wasoverrepresented in the nation's jails and penitentiaries and inthe general crime and delinquency statistics. Especially duringthe late 1920's and early 1930's when the nation was preoccupiedwith lawlessness, the translation of this statistical correlationinto a causal hypothesis is not surprising. The increasing incidence of use in the mid-sixties by white,affluent, middle class, high school youth, college students andadults has occasioned a reevaluation of the marihuana user and areexamination of the crime issue. The overwhelming majority ofthe new marihuana offenders have had no previous arrests, andcome from the normally low risk, middle and upper socioeconomicpopulation groups. Recent public opinion surveys suggest that considerable socialdisapproval is attached to the "hippie" life style,unconventional mode of dress and apparent disregard for the lawdisplayed by many of these individuals. Nonetheless, fewerpersons are now willing to classify as criminal those marihuanausers whose only contact with the law has been as a result oftheir marihuana use. Perceptions have undergone a change as aresult of the increased usage of marihuana among youth of thedominant social class. Nonetheless, a statistical associationremains. First, the majority of both marihuana users and offendersother than actual marihuana law violators fall into the14-to-25-year age group. Second, the majority of those arrestedfor marihuana law violations as well as other delinquent orcriminal acts were, and to a much lesser degree, still are, drawnfrom the same "high risk" populations, such as minoritygroups, socially and economically disadvantaged, young, male,inner-city residents. Third, various offender populations subjected to study oftenincluded a number of marihuana users, although it was not themarihuana violations per se but other, more serious criminalconduct that originally brought most of them to the attention ofthe authorities. Finally, during the past five years, marihuanalaw violators have increasingly swelled the crime and delinquencystatistics; in most cases, their only contact with the law hasbeen for these marihuanaspecific offenses. The Philadelphia study corroborated this continuingstatistical association. The simple relationship between usingmarihuana and committing offenses was positive and statisticallysignificant, and there was also a high correlation betweenfrequency of smoking marihuana and committing offenses. Thesedirect associations were reduced to insignificance, however, uponfurther analysis of the data, and other explanations for thecoincidence of marihuana use and crime became evident. Theseincluded: race, education, age, the use of other drugs, andhaving drug-using friends. We conclude that some users commit crimes more frequently thannon-users not because they use marihuana but because they happento be the kinds of people who would be expected to have a highercrime rate, wholly apart from the use of marihuana. In mostcases, the differences in crime rate between users and non-usersare dependent not on marihuana use per se but on these otherfactors. In summary, although the available evidence suggests thatmarihuana use may be statistically correlated with the incidenceof crime and delinquency, when examined in isolation from theother variables, no valid evidence was found to support thethesis that marihuana' by itself, either inevitably, generally oreven frequently causes or precipitates the commission of crime,including acts of violence, or juvenile delinquency. Within this framework, neither the marihuana user nor the drugitself can be said to constitute a danger to public safety. For,as two researchers have so cogently stated for the Commission,"Whatever an individual is, in all of his cultural, socialand psychological complexity, is not going to vanish in a puff ofmarihuana smoke." MARIHUANA AND DRIVING Within the context of public safety another issue which meritsattention is the extent to which drivers under the influence ofmarihuana constitute a hazard on the nation's streets andhighways. Although in recent years increasing attention has beengiven to this issue, at present little empirical evidence existsto inform discussion. To assess the actual and potential impact of marihuana ontraffic safety, a number of basic research questions must beanswered. the extent to which marihuana, users actually drive whileunder the influence of the drug the extent to which marihuana users driving while"high" commit traffic violations and are involved intraffic accidents the amounts of marihuana consumed immediately prior to thecommission of traffic violations or the involvement in trafficaccidents and the drug's role in these events the nature and extent to which marihuana actually impairspsychomotor skills, judgment and driving performance To date, the generalizations made concerning the effects ofmarihuana on driving behavior have generally been based onstatistical studies of traffic violations and accidents andinferences drawn from more general studies of the physiologicaland psychological consequences of marihuana use, such as changesin pulse rate, reaction time, neuromuscular coordination, timeestimation and spatial perceptions. Such studies pose serious limitations in the nature,reliability and validity of the data. The basic problems derivefrom difficulties in identifying and attributing cause. A majorobstacle in such retrospective analysis is the inability toseparate the effects of marihuana from those possibly engenderedby the use of other drugs, such as alcohol, tranquilizers andamphetamines. Finally, conclusive analysis is impossible until areliable technique is developed for measuring the level ofmarihuana present in the body of the driver at the time of hisviolation or accident. Prospective experimental studies of actual reactions to roadconditions and traffic emergency situations would undoubtedlyprovide the most reliable and valid data, but such studies wouldthemselves endanger the public and have not been undertaken.Researchers have relied, therefore, on controlled laboratorysimulator studies and direct interviews with those who haveadmitted to driving while under the influence of marihuana. With respect to the simulator studies , the available evidencesuggests that while, in some cases, marihuana has producedinterference with certain motor or mental abilities which affectdriving behavior, these effects were generally believed to bereadily overcome by the exercise of extreme caution by the driverand a significant reduction in speed. The few driving simulator tests completed to date havegenerally revealed no significant correlations between marihuanause and driving disabilities. Comparison of the simulator scoresof users and nonusers, however, did reveal small butnonsignificant differences in the number of speedometer errorsmade. These simulator studies also examined the comparative effectsof alcohol and marihuana on driving scores. The findings of onestudy, though controversial, suggested that intoxicationresulting from low doses of marihuana was less detrimental todriving performance than was the presence of alcohol at thelegally prohibited blood level of .10%. The methodological limitations of the study raise seriousquestions about the reliability and validity of the findings. Asone critic has noted, "It does not follow automatically thatlack of effect of a drug on the simulated task will correlatewith lack of effect on the actual task." Further , the useof dissimilar doses of alcohol and marihuana has led anothercritic to assert that "finding that a heavy dose of alcoholcaused more impairment than a mild dose of marihuana is neithersurprising nor helpful in assessing the relative effects of thetwo drugs in the relative doses in which they are normallyused." Recent research has not yet proven that marihuana usesignificantly impairs driving ability or performance. TheCommission believes, nonetheless, that driving while under theinfluence of any psychoactive drug is a serious risk to publicsafety; the acute effects of marihuana intoxication, spatial andtime distortion and slowed reflexes may impair drivingperformance. That the risk of injury may be greater for alcoholthan for marihuana matters little. Obviously, Much more research needs to be undertaken in thisarea. Hopefully, recent studies sponsored by the NationalInstitute of Mental Health and other agencies will soon providethe concrete information that is needed. Marihuana, Public Health and Welfare As the feared threat to public safety through violent crimehas diminished in recent years, policy-makers and the public havebegun increasingly to view marihuana and other illicit drug useas a public health concern. The National Survey indicates thatAmerican adults regard drug abuse as the third most pressingproblem of the day, closely following the economy and Vietnam.However, public attitudes reflect considerable confusion aboutthe facts concerning marihuana and drugs in general. This confusion has resulted from too little understanding ofthe motives for drug use as well as inadequate knowledge of theclassification of drugs according to their main effects. Legalpenalties have frequently mirrored this confusion, and theresulting inconsistencies cause, many young people to loseconfidence in adult authority. Even in the medical profession,much uncertainty is evident, and for most of the general publicthere is no clear authority to whom they can turn for guidance. A PUBLIC HEALTH APPROACH The Commission broadly defines public health concerns as allhealth problems which affect people en masse and are therebydifficult to treat on a traditional physician-to-patient basis.This category would include social and economic dependence andincapacity. A health problem which spreads to other susceptiblemembers of the society cannot be controlled by the individualphysician. This view coincides with the concept of preventivemedicine, recognizing that all public health problems must bedealt with on both an individual and societal level. To illustrate, the increasing incidence of deaths due to lungcancer subsequent to chronic, heavy tobacco usage is a majorpublic health concern. In this instance, prevention of smokingand ascertaining the cause of the malignancies, rather than theindividual treatment of each case by a physician, define thepublic health dimension. A major concern exists because thepopulation at risk is large and growing, and the risk of harm isgreat. In addition to the risk of large numbers of the populace beingaffected, the issue of contagion must also be examined. Unlikeinfectious diseases such as influenza and smallpox, where theperson affected " catches" the ailment unintentionally,those individuals who use marihuana choose to come into contactwith it. The contagion model is relevant only insofar as socialpressure from proselytizing friends and social contacts play arole in spreading the use of the, drug. This dimension existswith marihuana, as well as alcohol and tobacco. After assessing the potential harm to the individual andsociety, the size of the population at risk and the contagionaspect, society must determine the nature of the controlmechanism used to deal with the problem, and how nine]) of itshealth resources, manpower and facilities will be allocated tomeet the perceived threat to the public health. Therefore, ananalysis of the relative risk of marihuana use must beundertaken. We must examine not only the effects of the drug onthe individual but also determine which groups are at risk andwhy. Practically all substances consumed by man are potentiallydangerous to the physical or mental health of the individual ifused irresponsibly or by particularly sensitive persons. Certainsubstances are sufficiently complex in their effects thatsocietal control is necessary to reduce risk, for example,fluorides added to the water supply, prescription drugs, and foodadditives. The degree of concern and control varies, depending onrelative public health dangers. The Population At Risk Before the dangers can be assessed, the population at riskmust be defined. Viewing the public health picture on a largescale, the United States in 1972 may still be consideredfortunate with regard to marihuana usage. While it is the thirdmost popular recreational drug, behind alcohol and tobacco, ithas not been institutionalized and commercialized. Most of the Americans who have used marihuana have been merelyexperimenting with it. As noted in Chapter 1, there are 24million Americans who have tried marihuana at one time oranother, with 8.3 million still using it. Of those who have quit,most say they have simply lost interest in it. The same Surveyshows that experience with marihuana peaks in the18-to-25-year-old group and falls off sharply thereafter. A factof some significance is that at least 71% of all adults (18-yearsand older) and 80% of youth (12-to-17-years) have never usedmarihuana at all.* The Survey also indicates that the majority of those youth andadults who continue to use marihuana do so intermittently, thatis, between one and 10 times a month. These individuals areclassified as intermittent marihuana smokers who use the drug forits socializing effects. They are, for the most part, ordinaryAmericans who are either in school or are employed. About 2% of those who have ever used marihuana, or 500,000people, now use the drug heavily. They use the drug several timesa day. These individuals use marihuana for its personal drugeffects in addition to its socializing effects. Generally, theirlife styles, values, attitudes, behaviors and activities areunconventional. Marihuana plays an important role in their lives.Because the risk of psychological, and perhaps physical, harmfrom marihuana increases with the frequency quantity and durationof its use, these heavy marihuana users constitute the greatestat-risk population in the United States today. The heavy marihuana user presents the greatest potentialconcern to the, public health. It is the Commission's opinionthat these heavy marihuana users constitute a source of contagionwithin American society. They actively proselytize others into adrug-oriented way of life. The effectiveness of peer grouppressure has been described earlier in Chapter II We anticipate that this at-risk population would increase innumber should a policy of institutionalized availability beadopted toward marihuana. Although marihuana is readily availableillicitly in the United States today, a policy permitting itslegal distribution could be expected to bring about an increasein users, with some percentage of them becoming heavy users. Itis the availability of the drug, coupled -with a governmentalpolicy of approval or neutrality, that could escalate this groupinto a public health and welfare concern. While this isspeculative, it is a concern which cannot be dismissed. Theexperience with the rise in the use of tobacco and alcohol makesclear the probable consequences of commercial exploitation. Another concern of the Commission is the experience of othercountries which have large heavy user populations. While thepattern of behavior in one country is not automatically similarto a pattern of behavior in another country, the existence ofheavy user populations constitutes a serious public healthconcern which must be avoided in this country. The availabilityof the drug alone does not seem to determine increased usage;supply and governmental inaction appear to tip the balance towardincreased use. The proportion of our population susceptible tothis pattern of use is conjectural but good preventive publichealth requires limiting the number to an irreducible minimum. *In the self-administered instrument, several separatequestions were utilized to elicit the respondent's experiencewith marihuana. This technique permitted an analysis ofconsistency of responses, and also minimized the possibility ofnonresponse. Nevertheless, 14% of the adults and 6% of the youthdid not respond to enough of these questions to ascertain whetherthey had ever tried marihuana or not. Percentage who- Adult Youth Ever used ------------------------------------- 15 14 Never used ------------------------------------ 71 so No response ----------------------------------- 14 6 Confusion and Fact One of the primary sources of confusion surrounding the use ofmarihuana and other psychoactive drugs is the ambiguity of theterm "drug abuse." In many quarters the excessive useof any drug is considered drug abuse, regardless of the effect ofthe drug on the individual or his behavior. In order to clarifythis issue the Commission defines psychoactive drug abuse asfollows: Drug abuse is the use of psychoactive drugsin a way likely to induce mental dysfunction and disorderedbehavior. It should be emphasized that demonstrable pathology of organsystems, including the brain, is not a necessary characteristicof psychoactive drug abuse. There are numerous non-psychoactivedrugs which can induce extensive organ pathology but do notmodify behavior; such drugs leave their imprint primarily on theindividual, not on society. The Commission believes that many ofthe perplexing issues relating to psychoactive drugs, includingmarihuana, can be clarified if drug abuse refers only to theimpact of drug-induced behavior on society. Three types of such drug-induced behavior are consideredunacceptable in most organized societies: (1) aggressivenessleading to violence; (2) loss of psychomotor control; (3) mentalor physical disorder leading to social and economic incapacity ordependency. This is not to say that society is unconcerned about theharmful effects of psychoactive drugs on the individual, or thatsuch effects do not merit the attention of public healthofficials. Cigarette smoking, although affecting primarily theindividual, is surely a matter of public health concern. Webelieve, however, that the term drug abuse, with its attendantsocietal disapprobation, should be reserved for drug taking whichhas a more direct effect on society through disordered behavior. Beyond the confusion surrounding the term drug abuse, arational evaluation of the public health impact of marihuana useis also inhibited by extensive misinformation about the drug.Recently, a great deal of research has increased significantlyour knowledge about marihuana. Further research data arenecessary before ;a conclusive statement about marihuana andpublic health can be made. However, enough is known today todiscuss some of the public perceptions in detail. And sufficientdata are presently available to allow for rationaldecision-making. ASSESSMENT OF PERCEIVED RISKS The Commission believes that marihuana. is perceived by theAmerican public to present the following risks to the publichealth: lethality potential for genetic damage or teratogenicity immediate adverse physical or mental effects long-term physical or mental effects including psychosis and"amotivation" syndrome "addiction" potential * progression to other stronger drugs, especially heroin Lethality The Commission's National Survey revealed that 48% of adultsbelieve that some people have died from marihuana use. A carefulsearch of the literature and testimony of the nation's healthofficials has not revealed a single human fatality in the UnitedStates proven to have resulted solely from ingestion ofmarihuana. Experiments with the drug in monkeys demonstrated thatthe dose required for overdose death was enormous and for allpractical purposes unachievable by humans smoking marihuana. Thisis in marked contrast to other substances in common use, mostnotably alcohol and barbiturate sleeping pills. Of comparative note, 89% of all adults in the same Surveybelieve that some people have died from using alcohol. Thisindicates that public opinion regarding alcohol and its potentiallethality is more accurate than it is for marihuana. At the sametime, factual knowledge regarding the inherent danger in using asubstance, for example alcohol, seemingly does not deter manypersons from using it irresponsibly. Potential For Genetic Damage The thalidomide tragedies of the 1950's have taught us toponder carefully the possibility of genetic damage subsequent toany drug use. The much publicized controversy regarding LSD andsubsequent genetic damage has led investigators to studymarihuana and its possible genetic effects. Although a number ofstudies have been performed, at present no reliable evidenceexists indicating that marihuana causes genetic defects in man. Early findings from studies of chronic (up to 41 years), heavy(several ounces per day) cannabis users in Greece and Jamaicaalso failed to find such evidence. In all its studies, theCommission found no evidence of chromosome damage or teratogenicor mutagenic effects due to cannabis at doses commonly used byman. However, since fetal damage cannot be ruled out, the use ofmarihuana like that of many other drugs, is not advisable duringpregnancy. Immediate Effects The intoxicant effects of marihuana on the mental function ofthe user does have potential health significance both for theindividual and others with whom he may come in contact. Becausemarihuana is a psychoactive drug, it is important to examine theacute toxic effects which may occur in certain predisposedindividuals and which increase with the potency of thepreparation. The Commission has reviewed numerous clinical studiesdescribing acute panic reactions and transient psychotic-likeepisodes which occur as acute effects of the drug intoxication.In addition, a predisposed individual might experienceaggravation of a latent psychotic state or other underlyinginstability. Although severe abnormal psychological states arerare when compared to the total number of marihuana users, lesserproblems are not rare, and they may endanger both the individualand those around him at the time of their occurrence. Theindividual contemplating use is not capable of predicting whetherhe is predisposed by his particular circumstances to anundesirable mental reaction. The undesirable consequencesoccurring while an individual is involved in complex tasks suchas driving or operating machinery or tasks requiring finepsychomotor precision and judgment are all too imaginable. From a public health point of view, the immediate effects ofmarihuana intoxication on the individual's organs or bodilyfunctions are of little significance. By and large these effects,which have been carefully outlined in Chapter 11 of the Report,are transient and have little or no permanent effect upon theindividual. Effects Of Long-Term, Heavy Use To determine the long-term chronic effects of heavy marihuanause, the Commission has carefully reviewed the world literatureand contemporary studies of heavy, chronic (up to 41 years)cannabis users in the world. In addition, lower socioeconomicpopulations in Afghanistan, Greece, and Jamaica have beenexamined. Effects On The Body These recent studies in Greece and Jamaica report minimalphysical abnormalities in the cannabis users as compared withtheir non-using peers. Minimal abnormalities in pulmonary function have been observedin some cases of heavy and very heavy smokers of potent marihuanapreparations (ganja or hashish). However, one study concluded thecause was smoking in general no matter what the substance. Theother study could not express any conclusion because of theabsence of a control population. Such decrements in normalpulmonary capacity may represent early warning signals in thedevelopment of chronic lung disease. They must be considered inany program of early prevention of disease and future disability. No objective evidence of specific pathology of brain tissuehas been documented. This fact contrasts sharply with thewell-established brain damage of chronic alcoholism. Effects On The Mind No outstanding abnormalities in psychological tests,psychiatric interviews or coping patterns have been conclusivelydocumented in studies of cannabis users in other countries of theworld. Further research in this important area is necessarybefore definite conclusions can be drawn relating or linkingmarihuana to mental dysfunction because available psychologicaltests do not measure certain higher mental functions veryaccurately. Cannabis use has long been known to precipitate short-termphychotic-like episodes in predisposed individuals or those whotake excessive doses. Some observers report that the prevalenceof shortterm psychoses as well as the psychotic episodes oflonger duration in heavy cannabis users are compatible with theprevalence rate of psychosis in the general population and,therefore, may not be attributable to cannabis use. In fact, somebelieve that in populations under stress where marihuana iswidely used, occurrence of the acute psychotic-like episodesoccur less often than one would expect in such a population.Other researchers have disagreed with these conclusions, and thematter is still controversial. Effects On Motivation The Commission is deeply concerned about another group ofbehavioral effects that have been described in other nations asbeing associated with the heavy, long-term use of cannabis. Thisbehavioral condition has been termed the "amotivationalsyndrome." An extreme form has been reported in populationsof lower socioeconomic males in several developing nations. Thesereports describe lethargy, instability, social deterioration, aloss of interest in virtually all activities other than drug use.This state of social and economic disability also results inprecipitation and aggravation of psychiatric disorders (overtpsychotic behavior) and possible somatic complications among veryheavy, very long-term users of high potency cannabis products.However, in the populations so far observed in Jamaica, Greece,and Afghanistan, physical and psychosocial deterioration was notreported. The life styles of these populations appeared to beconditioned by cultural and socioeconomic factors. Someresearchers believe cannabis' may serve to keep these individualsstratified at this lower socioeconomic level. The occurrence of a similar, though less intense, syndrome hasbeen identified recently with heavy marihuana use among youngpersons in the Western world, including the United States. Someclinicians have described the existence of a complex of subtlesocial, psychological and behavioral changes related to a loss ofvolitional goal direction in certain individuals, including somelong-term heavy users of marihuana. Such persons appear to orientonly to the present. They appear, alienated from generallyaccepted social and occupational activities, and they tend toshow a reduced concern for personal hygiene and nutrition. Some clinicians believe that this picture is directly causedby the action of marihuana. However , other behavioral scientistsbelieve that among impressionable adolescents, marihuana-inducedsuggestibility may facilitate the rapid adoption of new valuesand behavior patterns, particularly when the drug is taken in asocially alienated subculture that advocates and stronglyreinforces such changes. Whichever interpretation one accepts, the fact is apparentthat the chronic, heavy use of marihuana may jeopardize socialand economic adjustments of the adolescents We believe this isone concern which merits further research and evaluation. On thebasis of past studies, the chronic, heavy use of marihuana, seemsto constitute a high-risk behavior, particularly amongpredisposed adolescents. This consideration is especiallycritical when we consider the adolescent who is in the throes ofa normally turbulent emotional process. The Commission hasreviewed numerous reported studies and heard the testimony ofseveral clinicians dealing with heavy users of marihuana whoexhibit this particular behavior pattern. Although the UnitedStates does not, at the present time, have a large number of suchpersons within its population, the incidence is too frequent toignore. Expanded epidemiologic studies are imperative to obtain abetter understanding of this complex behavior. Addiction Potential Unfortunately, fact and fancy have become irrationally mixedregarding marihuana's physiological and psychological properties.Marihuana clearly is not in the same chemical category as heroininsofar as its physiologic and psychological effects areconcerned. In a word, cannabis does not lead to physicaldependence. No torturous withdrawal syndrome follows the suddencessation of chronic, heavy use of marihuana. Although evidenceindicates that heavy, long-term cannabis users may developpsychological dependence, even then the level of psychologicaldependence is no different from the syndrome of anxiety andrestlessness seen when an American stops smoking tobaccocigarettes. Progression To Other Drugs As noted in Chapter 11, to say marihuana leads to any otherdrug avoids the real issue and reduces a complex set of variablesto an oversimplified premise of cause and effect. If any onestatement can characterize why persons in the United Statesescalate their drug use patterns and become polydrug users, it ispeer pressure. Indeed, if any drug is associated with the use ofother drugs, including marihuana, it is tobacco, followed closelyby alcohol. Study after study which the Commission reviewedinvariably reported an association between the use of tobacco,and, to a lesser extent, of alcohol with the use of marihuana andother drugs. The fact should be emphasized that the overwhelming majorityof marihuana users do not progress to other drugs. They eitherremain with marihuana or foresake its use in favor of alcohol. Inaddition, the largest number of marihuana users in the UnitedStates today are experimenters or intermittent users, and 2% ofthose who have ever used it are presently heavy users. Onlymoderate and heavy use of marihuana is significantly associatedwith persistent use of other drugs. Some persons in our society are interested in experimentingwith a series of drugs, and there is no uniformity regardingwhich drug these multidrug users take first. In some cases, thedrug used is a matter of preference; in others, a matter ofavailability; and in further instances, it matter of groupchoice. Citizens concerned with health issues must consider thepossibility of marihuana use leading to use of heroin, otheropiates, cocaine or hallucinogens. This so-called stepping-stonetheory first received widespread acceptance in 1951 as a resultof testimony at Congressional hearings. At that time, studies ofvarious addict populations repeatedly described most heroin usersas marihuana users also. The implication of these descriptionswas that a causal relationship existed between marihuana andsubsequent heroin use. When the voluminous testimony given atthese hearings is seriously examined, no verification is found ofa causal relationship between marihuana use and subsequent heroinuse. Again, we must avoid polarity on this issue. To assume thatmarihuana use is unrelated to the use of other drugs would beinaccurate. As mentioned earlier, the heavy or very heavymarihuana users are frequently users of other drugs. Thestepping-stone theory holds that the adolescent begins the use ofillicit drugs with marihuana, and later proceeds to heroin in thesearch for greater thrills. The opposing viewpoint holds that thelarge majority of marihuana users never become heroin addicts anddenies the validity of a causal relationship. In the National Survey, among the adult respondents, 70%thought that marihuana makes people want to try stronger drugssuch as heroin; 56% of the youth in the 12-to-17-year-oldcategory agreed with the same statement. These perceptionscontrast with another finding in the same Survey which revealedthat 4% of current marihuana users have tried heroin. On theother hand, very few respondents perceived alcohol and tobacco tobe precipitants of other drug use. Studies of the escalation process demonstrate that the ratesof progression vary from one group to another and from onesegment of the population to another. There is no set proportionof marihuana users who "escalate" to the use of otherdrugs. The other drugs which some marihuana smokers use varyaccording to the social characteristics of the population inquestion. Within some groups, heroin may be the choice; in othergroups, it may be LSD. Marihuana use per se does not dictate whether other drugs willbe used; nor does it determine the rate of progression, if andwhen it, occurs, or which drugs might be used. As discussed inChapter 11, the user's social group seems to have the strongestinfluence on whether other drugs will be used; and if so, whichdrugs will be used. PREVENTIVE PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERNS The hallmark of a good health care delivery system ispreventing as much illness as possible. This objective isachieved by means of immunizations, regular routine checkups, andeducational programs. Education programs regarding marihuana have been notablyineffective, partly due to an exaggeration of the effects ofusing the drug and partly because the effects of the opiates andmarihuana have been compared inaccurately. As a result, manypersons have developed a conscious or unconscious denial ofnearly all dangers associated with marihuana use. Some educatorsbelieve that drug programs merely sharpen the curiosity ofchildren and tempt them to use drugs which they otherwise wouldnot use. Others believe that the responsibility should not belodged with the schools but rather with the home or thecommunity. Because of the uncertainty about the efficacy of these,programs, education programs dealing with drug usage simply donot exist in the school systems of a number of major cities; inothers, token programs are offered in response to the demand thatsomething be done. Health educators have the responsibility tohelp this vulnerable group of Americans become aware of alloptions so that they are able to make enlightened choices. The educational role of physicians and other clinical healthpersonnel should not be underestimated. The National Survey showsthat the public believes young people should receive informationconcerning marihuana first from schools and second from familyphysicians. The health professional has a unique position as bothteacher and confidant to an individual struggling with a"drug abuse" problem. Honest, sincere, and confidentialguidance from a physician may prevent later difficulties to boththe individual and the society. The Commission believes thataction must be taken to inform and support the physician in hisrole as confidant and counsellor to those seeking assistance. Considering the current patterns of marihuana use in theUnited States, the need for treatment and/or rehabilitation doesnot appear necessary for the vast majority of persons who areexperimenting with the drug or using it intermittently. Rather,these persons need to be realistically educated regarding thepotential hazards they face. To this end, a comparison of thepersonal and public health risks of marihuana and those ofheroin, cocaine, amphetamines, and other drugs would be useful. A concern for public health also requires thoughtfulconsideration of the consequences of any change in public policy.We have objectively appraised the present scope of public healthconcerns concluding that the most serious risk lies with thepopulation of heavy users, which is, at this time, quite small inthis country. Now, we must soberly consider the likely effect of adoption ofa social policy of neutrality or approval toward marihuana use.Any legal policy which institutionalizes availability of the drugcarries with it a likely increase in the at-risk population. Thisfactor is not necessarily conclusive in itself , but it doesweigh heavily for the policymaker. Even though the proportion ofheavy users in the total using population might not increase ifsuch a social or legal policy were adopted, the absolute numberof heavy users would probably increase. Thus, we would have anincrease in the at-risk segment of the populace. A greater stresswould thereby be placed on the general health care deliverysystem in all the areas of health concern described earlier. Regardless of emerging social policy, greater emphasis must beplaced on educating our youth regarding the prospective dangersinherent in expanded marihuana use. This anticipatory guidancecan serve to defuse or at least forestall a potentially serioussocial phenomenon. Summary From what is now known about the effects of marihuana, its useat the present level does not constitute a major threat to publichealth. However, this statement should not lead to complacency.Marihuana is not an innocuous drug. The clinical findings ofimpaired psychological function, carefully documented by medicalspecialists, legitimately arouse concern. These studies identifymarihuana-related problems which must be taken into account inthe development of public policy. Unfortunately, thesemarihuana-related problems, which occur only in heavy, long-termusers, have been over generalized and overdramatized. Two percent of those Americans who have ever used marihuanaare now heavy users and constitute the highest risk group. Strongevidence indicates that certain emotional changes have takenplace among predisposed individuals as a result of prolonged,heavy marihuana use. The clinical reports in the literaturedescribing transient psychoses, other psychiatric difficulties,and impairment of cognitive function subsequent to use ofmarihuana and of other drugs do not prove causality but cannot beignored. The causes of these emotional difficulties are much toocomplex to justify general conclusions by the public or thepress. The mass media have frequently promoted such clinicalreports to appear as far reaching events affecting the entirepopulation. The clinician sees only the troubled Population ofany group. In evaluating a public health concern, the essentialelement is the proportion of affected persons in the generalgroup. The people responsible for evaluating public healthproblems must concern themselves with the proportion of peopleout of the total population who are affected by any specificcondition. The highest risk groups should be identified as thesource of primary concern. A recognition that a majority ofmarihuana users are not now a matter of public health concernmust be made so that public health Officials may concentratetheir attention where it will have maximum impact. The concept of relative risk is crucial to an evaluation ofthe impact of marihuana on public health. We believe thatexperimental or intermittent use of this drug carries minimalrisk to the public health, and should not be given overzealousattention in terms of a public health response. We are concernedthat social influences might cause those who would not otherwiseuse the drug to be exposed to this minimal risk and the potentialescalation of drug-using patterns. For this group, we mustdeglorify, demythologize, and deemphasize the use of marihuanaand other drugs. The Commission reemphasizes its concern about the smallminority of heavy, long-term marihuana users who are exposed to amuch greater relative risk of impaired general functioning incontemporary America. Public health officials should concentratetheir efforts on this group. Fortunately, the group has to datenot grown sufficently in size to warrant its being considered amajor public health concern. We retiterate, too, the public health implications of anincrease in the at-risk population. We suspect that such anincrease is most likely if a sudden shift in social policysignificantly increased availability of the drug. One of thefactors we consider in Chapter V when evaluating the varioussocial policy options and legal implementations is the effect ofeach policy on incidence and patterns of use. Regardless of howheavy this particular variable will weigh in that process, wemust state that a significant increase in the at-risk populationcould convert what is now a minor public health concern in thiscountry to one of major proportions. Marihuana And The Dominant Social Order For more than 30 years it has been widely assumed that themarihuana user constitutes a threat to the well-being of thecommunity and the nation. Originally, the users were consideredto be "outsiders" or marginal citizens. Included weresuch people as hustlers, prostitutes, itinerant workers, merchantseamen, miners and ranchhands, water-front day laborers anddrifters, many of whom were drawn from the lower socioeconomicsegments of the population. Concerns about marihuana use expressed in the 1930's relatedprimarily to a perceived inconsistency between the life stylesand values of these individuals and the social and moral order.Their potential influence on the young was especially worrisome.When marihuana was first prohibited, a recurrent fear was thatuse might spread among the youth. And in the late 1930's and1940's, the attraction of young people to jazz music was thoughtto be in part related to marihuana use by this"outsider" population. Throughout this early period, American society, in reaction toits fear of the unfamiliar, translated rumor about thecriminality and immorality of the marihuana user into"unquestioned fact" which, in turn, was translated intosocial policy. From the mid-thirties to the present, however, socialperceptions have undergone significant change in response to theemergence of new and challenging social problems. As marihuana,use has spread to include the affluent, middle class, white highschool and college-age youth as well as minority group members oflower socioeconomic circumstances in urban core areas, theconcept of marginality has become blurred. Also, as the use of marihuana has increased, those individualsformerly labeled as marginal and threatening have been replacedby a more middle class, white, educated and younger population ofmarihuana smokers. A stereotyped user no longer exists, andtherefore, the question now properly focuses on who poses athreat to the dominant order. The Adult Marihuana User Despite the fact that substantial numbers of adults usemarihuana, society does not appear to feel greatly threatened bythis group, probably because included in the group are aconsiderable number of middle class individuals who are regularlyemployed and whose occupational and social status appear to besimilar to those of peers and colleagues who do not usemarihuana. In the course of its fact-finding effort, the Commission hasmet with several groups of socially and economically"successful" marihuana users in the professions of law,medicine, banking, education and business. In most cases, thesepersons, in their external appearances, seemed to be mature andresponsible adults whose social attitudes and behavior did notmark them as radical ideologues or essentially irresponsibleindividuals. For the most part, use of marihuana by adults has been foundto be more directly related to the facilitation of socialinteraction (much like the adult use of alcohol in socialgatherings) than to any other factor. Although their marihuanasmoking behavior is illegal, most adult users are not ordinarilyconsidered by their peers to be criminal nor is their usegenerally likely to result in arrest. Because the adult user generally maintains low visibility, isprimarily a recreational user, is not usually involved in radicalpolitical activity and maintains a life style largelyindistinguishable from his non-using neighbors, he is notordinarily viewed as a threat to the dominant social order. Inshort, aside from his use of marihuana, the adult recreationaluser is not generally viewed as a significant social problem. The Young Marihuana User The widespread use of marihuana by millions of young people ofcollege and high school age has been viewed by many as a directthreat to the stability and future of the social order. Many parents, adults in general, and government officials haveexpressed concern that young people who use marihuana oftenreject the essential values and traditions upon which the societyis founded. Some have suggested that youthful marihuana use is,in itself, an indication of the rejection of responsibility and asign of reckless hedonism which may well interfere with anorderly maturation process. Others see youthful marihuana use aspart of a pattern of conduct which produces dropping out,underachievement and dependency. In short, the mass character of youthful marihuana use hasbeen frequently interpreted as a rejection of theinstitutionalized principles of law and a lack of concern forindividual social responsibility, which threatens the social andpolitical institutions. Implicit in this view is the assumption that a young personwho uses marihuana in spite of the law cannot be expected toassume an individually and socially responsible, adult role. Thestrength of this fear is drawn largely from the vocal and visible"counterculture" to which marihuana is often tied. Notsurprisingly, the concerns posed by an alternate youthful lifestyle are extended to the drug itself. Threats to the social order are often seen, for example, inthe character of youthful leisure time activities, such asattendance at rock concerts, occasioned by the high mobility andaffluence of today's youth. They are also seen in the new modesof speech and dress and in the seemingly casual manner of theirday-to-day living. Equally troublesome for many, however, is theidea of intentional intoxication for purposes of recreation. Such conduct and the more casual attitude toward sexualrelationships as well as participation in radical politics haveprovoked increasing concern throughout the adult society. TheNational Survey illustrates the extent to which the older adultperceives youthful marihuana use as part of a much larger patternof behavior which bodes ill for the future of the nation. First, the older the adult respondent, the more likely he wasto picture the marihuana user as leading an abnormal life. Only9% of the over-50 generation agreed with the statement that"most people who use marihuana lead a normal life."Nineteen percent of the 35to-49 age group and 29% of the26-to-34-year-olds were of the same belief. Conversely, half ofthe young adults (18-to-25) considered most marihuana usersnormal. This fact is not surprising since many of theircontemporaries are marihuana users. Second, the marihuana user, as envisioned by adults, istypically a youthful dropout from society. He doesn't like to bewith other people, is uninterested in the world around him, isusually lazy and has an above-average number of personalproblems. Third, the less optimistic the adult respondent was about thenation's youth, the more likely he was to oppose alteration ofthe marihuana laws and to envision major social dislocations ifthe laws were changed. Fifty-seven percent of the adultpopulation in general agreed with the statement, "ifmarihuana were legal, it would lead to teenagers becomingirresponsible and wild." Among those adults who mostdisapproved of youthful behavior in general, 74% agreed with thequoted statement. Similarly, 84% of the non-approving adultsfavored stricter laws on marihuana. As we discussed in Chapter I, marihuana's symbolic role in aperceived generational conflict has brought marihuana use intothe Category of a social problem. Today's youthful marihuana useris seen as a greater threat to the social order than either themarginal user of earlier times or the adult user of the present.Since the concerns about marihuana today relate mostly to youth,the remainder of this section will focus on these youth-relatedissues. 'THE WORLD OF YOUTH Youth of today are better fed, better housed, more mobile,more affluent, more schooled and probably more bored with theirlives than any generation which has preceded them. Adults have difficulty understanding why such privileged youngpeople should wish to offend by their language and appearance andspend so much effort trying to discredit those institutions ofsociety which have made possible the privileges which those youthenjoy. Many adults perceive the present level of youthfuldiscontent to be of a greater intensity than has been true ofpast generations. Marihuana has become both a focus and a symbol of thegeneration gap and for many young people its use has become, anexpedient means of protest against adult values. Adults in positions of authority, parents, teachers, policyofficials, judges, and others often view marihuana use as thesign of youth's rejection of moral and social values and of thesystem of government under which they live. The problem is thatboth youth and adults tend to make pronouncements and arefrequently unable to reason together in logical fashion. Insteadthey overstate their positions in such a way that effectiveresolution of their differences becomes very difficult. In effect, each group takes the rhetoric of the other at facevalue. For youth, however, marihuana use plays many roles, onlyone of which is a symbolic assault on adult authority and values. Marihuana use, for many young people, has become a part of aritual. It takes on the aspect of participating in a sharedexperience which, for some if not all, is enjoyable in itself.For many, it becomes an even more interesting experience becauseit is forbidden. Some of the rituals concerned with the purchase, storage,preparation, and use of marihuana take on a mystique similar tothe time of Prohibition when people went through certain ritualsnecessary to get a drink in a speak-easy. The three knocks and"Joe sent me" cues have been replaced by thenot-so-secret handshakes, the new vocabulary of youth and otherexclusionary devices to delineate the "in" group. The use of marihuana is attractive to many young people forthe sense of group unity and participation which develops aroundthe common use of the drug. This sense tends to be intensified bya sense of "common cause" in those circumstances whereusers are regarded as social or legal outcasts. They know, too, that many of their peers who share themarihuana experience and also share the designation of lawbreakerare, in reality, productive and generally affirmative individualswho are interested neither in promoting the downfall of thenation nor in engaging in acts which would harm the generalwell-being of the community. In short, many youth have found marihuana use to be apleasurable and socially rewarding experience. They have foundthat the continuance of this behavior has brought them morepleasure than discomfort, more reward than punishment. Youth have increasingly come to see law enforcement activitydirected at marihuana use as an unreasonable and unjustifiablerejection of their generation. Most of these youth have grown upwith a positive image of the police as protectors of society.Now, many are confronted with the possibility of police intrusioninto their private lives and the threat of a criminal record. Theunfortunate result, in many instances, has been a blanketrejection and distrust of both the agents and institutions ofgovernment. In part, marihuana use as a social behavior is an unintendedbyproduct of the formal and informal educational process. Somepersons even suggest that youthful drug usage is a"success" in terms of the educational and socializationprocess. Our society values independence of thought,experimentation, and the empirical method, often reinforcing thisattitude by such advertising cliches as "make up your ownmind," "be your own man...... judge for yourself." Although experimentation with regard to drugs should not beconsidered a "success, the Commission does believe that theeducational efforts necessary to discourage this curiosity, whichmay be valuable in other matters, have not succeeded. Weunderstand why teenagers and young adults encouraged over theyears to make up their own minds have not been restrained byexaggerated accounts of marihuana's harmful effects, or by themore recent assertions that a true evaluation of marihuana usesrequires more research. The Scottish verdict of "notproven" does little to restrain youthful curiosity. In the previous Chapter, we emphasized the difference betweenthe vast majority of experimenters and intermittent users and thesmall group of moderate and heavy users who generally use drugsother than marihuana as well. The former do not differsignificantly from non-users on many indices of socialintegration. Various studies indicate that they maintain normalpatterns of living and social interaction, and are employed,competent citizens. On the other hand, there undoubtedly are a number of personswho have used marihuana and have exercised poor judgment,performed inadequately, or behaved irresponsibly while under thedrug's influence, thus jeopardizing themselves or others. Thefact remains, however, that a certain number of these personswere immature and irresponsible individuals even prior tomarihuana use, who would be expected to have poor or impairedjudgment whether or not marihuana was involved. The marihuana user is not, for the most part, a socialisolationist or a severely disturbed individual in need oftreatment or confinement. Most users, young or old, demonstratean average or above-average degree of social functioning,academic achievement and job performance. Their general image ofthemselves and their society is not radically different from thatof their non-marihuana-using peers. The majority of both groupstends to demonstrate equal interest in corporate concerns. Based upon present evidence, it is unlikely that marihuanausers will become less socially responsible as a result of theirmarihuana use or that their patterns of behavior and values willchange significantly. WHY SOCIETY FEELS THREATENED Society appears to be concerned about marihuana use primarilybecause of its perceived relationship to other social problems.We noted in the discussion of marihuana and public health thatthe focus of social concern should be the heavy users and thepossibility that their numbers will increase. Here we considerthe perceived impact of marihuana use upon the institutions andproclaimed goals of the society. Dropping Out Many parents have a genuine fear that marihuana use leads toidleness and "dropping out." During the 1960's,marihuana use, as well as the use of other psychoactive drugs,became equated with unconventional youth life styles. When anumber of young people adopted unconventional life styles, manyadults tended to view long hair, unkempt appearance and drugs assymbols of counterculture. They concluded that anyone who allowed his hair to grow orgave little attention to his clothing or appearance was probablya drug user with little or no motivation to achieve and nointerest in conventional goals. A number of researchers and clinicians have observed the useof marihuana or hashish in other societies, particularly amongpoor, lower class males. Some have observed that many of theseindividuals are generally unmotivated and ordinarily appear toshow little aspiration or motivation to improve their way oflife, regardless of whether they are judged by the standards ofthe more prosperous members of their own society or by middleclass standards of contemporary American society. One of the problems with this type of analysis is that itfails to perceive the social and cultural realities in which thephenomenon takes place. In the Middle East and in Asia wherehashish is used, the societies, in all instances, are highlystratified with people in the lower classes having virtually nosocial or economic mobility. Poverty, deprivation and diseasewere the conditions into which these people were born and inwhich they remain, regardless of whether they use cannabis. Inthis context, a person's resignation to his status in life is notlikely to be caused or greatly influenced by the effects ofcannabis. Any society will always have a certain number ofpersons who, for various reasons, are not motivated to strive forpersonal achievement or participate fully in the life of thecommunity. Therefore, the determination is difficult to makewhether cannabis use influences a person to drop out and, if itdoes, to what extent. Some individuals possess particular personality as well aspsychosocial characteristics which in specified instances couldproduce amotivation or dropping out. However, little likelihoodexists that the introduction of a single element such asmarihuana use would significantly change the basic personalityand character structure of the individual to any degree. Anindividual is more likely to drop out when a number ofcircumstances have joined at a given point in his lifetime,producing pressures with which he has difficulty in coping. Thesepressures often coincide with situations involving painful ordifficult judgments resulting from a need to adjust to thepressures of the social environment. Many young people, particularly in the college population, areshielded in their earlier years from experiences which might beemotionally stressful or unpleasant. Some young people, sosheltered, are neither equipped to make mature and independentjudgments nor prepared to enjoy the new-found freedom of theuniversity or college in a mature and responsible way. Some ofthese students are often unable to cope with social or academicadversity. After being sheltered for so long, some of these youngpeople may be easily attracted to experiences which promise newexcitement and to fall under the influence of a peer group whosevalues and living patterns may be inimical to a productive,healthy and continuous process of personal growth and maturity.In these instances, marihuana serves as the medium by which theseindividuals encounter social and psychological experiences withwhich they are ill-equipped to cope. Certain numbers of these young people have demonstrated whatis described as amotivation long before the smoking of marihuanabecame fashionable. Adolescence is often a particularly difficultperiod of searching in many directions at the same time. Inaddition to seeking a concept of "self" the adolescentis, at the same time, attempting to comprehend the nature of theworld around him and to identify his status and role in society. Different individuals, with different backgrounds,socialization patterns, belief systems and levels of emotionalmaturity cope with the period of transition from childhood toadulthood in different ways., For a small number, dropping outmight be one of these coping mechanisms whether or not they usemarihuana. For others, the response to the difficult adjustmentsof adolescence takes other forms, some of which are more,acceptable, "normal" and easier for adults tounderstand. The young person who does not find it possible to cope withthe pressures of his adolescent developmental period in waysconvenient to the understanding of adult society should not berejected, stigmatized or labeled. He requires both support andunderstanding and the opportunity to participate in roles whichhave meaning for him and in ways in which he feels comfortable.For a certain number of young people, marihuana and the mystiqueof the experience eases this passage by helping them share theirfeelings, doubts, inadequacies and aspirations with peers withwhom they feel safe and comfortable. Dropping Down Apart from the concern over youthful dropping out andidleness, there is also widespread concern about "droppingdown" or underachieving. Parents frequently express fear that marihuana will undermineor interfere with academic and vocational career development andachievement by focusing youthful interests on the drug and thoseassociated with the drug subculture. Some parents makeconsiderable sacrifices for their children to go to school, andthe fears that marihuana might undermine the academic, emotionaland vocational development of their young are quiteunderstandable. The Commission reviewed a number of studies related tomarihuana use by high school and college youth. No conclusiveevidence was found demonstrating that marihuana by itself isresponsible for academic or vocational failure or "droppingdown," although it could be one of many contributoryreasons. Many studies reported that the majority of young peoplewho have used marihuana received average or above-average gradesin school. In part, underachievement is related to a view of what oneindividual judges to be the achievement capacity of another. Thisjudgment is often made without concern for what the individualhimself feels about his potential, his interests and his goals.Perceptions about achievement also frequently fail to take intoconsideration the individual feelings about the goals of hispeers and the values of the larger society, including therelative prestige and status attached to various academicprograms, occupations and professions. Youth and Radical Politics Aside from the issue of unconventional life styles and theconcerns evoked by them, the other major concern of the sixtieswhich related to youth and drugs was radical politics. During the latter half of the decade, youthful anti-war groupswere organized on many of the nation's college campuses and highschools. These groups could be divided into two segments. Thelargest segment consisted of concerned, sometimes confused,frustrated and well-meaning petition signers and demonstrators.Within this large group there was a small coterie of individualswho constantly sought to turn the demonstration into aconfrontation and to protest for peace by means of violence. Thesecond segment consisted of organizations of individuals whosestated purpose was to undermine the social and politicalstability of the society through violent means. What must be clearly understood, however, is that among theyoung people, and some not so young, who protested against thewar in Vietnam, only a minority were bent on violence andmanipulated and corrupted these otherwise peaceful demonstrationsfor their own purposes. At the various gatherings, a number of the young peopleprotesting in these mass groups did smoke marihuana. We willnever know how many were initiated to marihuana use during thecourse of these peace demonstrations. The fact remains, however,that in the large campins, such as those in Washington, marihuanawas involved in two ways. First, there was the "normal"use in which the smoking was part of the social experience.Individuals came together and smoked, in part, to acknowledge andstrengthen group solidarity. Second, another quite differentaspect of the marihuana use at these gatherings said, in effect,"we know it's illegal but go and arrest all of us for doingit. . . ." This aspect can perhaps best be characterized asa symbolic challenge to authority. Unfortunately, however, the media, particularly television andsome of the news magazines, sometimes portrayed the image of agroup of young people plotting the overthrow of the nation byviolent means while under the influence of marihuana. In thoserelatively few instances where explosives and other violent meanswere employed, the evidence points to a cold and calculated planwhich was neither conceived nor executed under the influence ofmarihuana. As a result of these protests and demonstrations, therefore,radical politics has been seen by many as a mechanism throughwhich large numbers of young people would be introduced tomarihuana as well as to other drugs. Radical political activityor mass political protest is viewed by some as a threat to thewelfare of the nation and is assumed to be aided and encouragedby our enemies. The involvement of large numbers of youth in politicalactivism and the concomitant public concern about drug use havebeclouded the issue of marihuana use and have led to a broadeningof the concerns about marihuana on the part of adults. Some of the radical movement's leaders abetted this tendencyby pointing out the alleged irrationality and unfairness of themarihuana laws to recruit members to their ranks. Not surprisingis the fact that 45% of the adult respondents in the NationalSurvey felt that marihuana is often promoted by people who areenemies of the United States. Nor is it surprising that thisbelief is a function of age. While 22% of all young people(12-to-17 years of age) and 26% of young adults (18-to-25 years)identified marihuana with national enemies, more than one-half(58%) of those persons 50 years and older did so. Youth and the Work Ethic Of the many issues related to youth and the use of marihuana,one that greatly troubles many adults, is youthful attitudestoward work. The work ethic in our society is based on a beliefthat work is a good and necessary activity in and of itself. The traditional view holds that work is not only a right andmoral act but that it keeps people from mischief and from wastingtime on harmful recreational pleasures. The rationale for thisthesis is that work in American society has served as the primarymeans by which persons acquired the treasured symbols of society. In fact, throughout much of our history, with the exception ofthe small number who inherited or married wealth, no ethicalalternative to work existed. In recent years, the increasedemphasis placed upon leisure time activities has resulted inshorter work weeks, longer vacation periods and more paidholidays. Among the concerns of the adults about today's youthfulattitudes toward work and leisure are that young people seem toenjoy their recreational pursuits so much that they forget thatto a considerable degree their enjoyment is paid for by the laborof others. Many young people do not express the same level of concern astheir parents did about preparing themselves for a career and"getting ahead in the world." In part, this attitude isattributable to the fact that increasingly, the results of thislabor are not tangible, material goods. Service occupationsgenerally do not produce such tangible products, and even inmanufacturing industries the individual worker is usually tooremote from the product to feel any pride or interest in it. Inboth instances, the traditional symbol of the "manhood"of work, a tangible product, is no longer present. In sum, society has become increasingly disturbed by certainattitudes of today's youth which seem to stress pleasure, fun,and enjoyment without a counterbalancing concern for adisciplined and sustained work effort. Nevertheless, the numberof young people who view work as unimportant is small whencompared to the total number of young people. The Commission hasfound no evidence to suggest that the majority of youth areunwilling or incapable of productive and disciplined workperformance. In fact, the great majority of young people areperforming their tasks in industry, the professions and educationquite effectively. Although many young people delay entry into the work force toenjoy the fruits of our prosperous society, this delay does notmean they will not one day contribute their best efforts to thecontinued growth and advancement of the nation. The Changing Social Scene The present confusion about the effects of youthful marihuanause upon the dominant social order is caused by a variety ofinterrelated social concerns, many of them emotionally chargedissues, including anti-war demonstrations, campus riots, hippielife styles, the rising incidence of crime and delinquency andthe increased usage of all illicit drugs. The focus of concernabout marihuana is aggravated by the data overload mentioned inChapter 1, by the outpouring of incidental information about thedrug and its effects in a form and volume far beyond the capacityof the readers or listeners to assimilate or interpret. Ratherthan informing the public, much of the data disseminated hasproduced frustration and misinterpretation of the informationpresented. Adult society, including parents and policy-makers, finds itdifficult to comprehend and account for many of the attitudes andbehavior of the young, including the use of marihuana. In manycases the adults are still influenced by the myths of an earlierperiod which overstated the dangers of the drug. At a time ofgreat social change and turbulence, the tendency to depend on the"traditional wisdom," and its moral justification, is astrong one. Just as youth must try to understand and appreciate thestrengths of the institutions of our society, adults must try tounderstand the times through the eyes of their children. Wheremarihuana is concerned, society must try to understand its rolein the lives of those who use it. The key to such understandinglies in the changes which have taken place in society withinrecent years and the effects these changes have had on succeedinggenerations of youth. The increased use of marihuana is only oneof these effects. One focal point in discussion between generations is thecontrast between the use of marihuana and the use of alcohol.Many young people perceive that marihuana is less dangerous thanalcohol in terms of its addiction potential and long-termphysical and psychological consequences. Many believe also thatmarihuana - and other psychoactive drugs make it possible toexpand their perceptions and see this as a perfectly legitimateobjective. Viewed against the background of the profound changes ofrecent years in the fields of economics, politics, religion,family life, housing patterns, civil rights, employment andrecreation, the use of marihuana by the nation's youth must beseen as a relatively minor change in social patterns of conductand as more of a consequence of than a contributor to these majorchanges. When the issue of marihuana use is placed in this context ofsociety's larger concerns, marihuana does not emerge as a majorissue or threat to the social order. Rather, it is mostappropriately viewed as a part of the whole of society's concernsabout the growth and development of its young people. In view of the magnitude and nature of change which oursociety has experienced during the past 25 years, the thoughtfulobserver is not likely to attribute any of the major socialproblems resulting from this change to marihuana use. Similarly,it is unlikely that marihuana will affect the future strength,stability or vitality of our social and political institutions.The fundamental principles and values upon which the societyrests are far too enduring to -go up in the smoke of a marihuanacigarette. CliffSchaffer's Home Page