WT01-B24-1IA031-000655-B039-49http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncchp4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112839 text/html 63284HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:28:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:40 GMTContent-length: 63066 Social Response to Marihuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter IV social response to marihuana use "I find the great thing in this world is not so muchwhere we stand, as in what direction we are moving: To reach theport of heaven, we must sail sometimes with the wind andsometimes against it-but we must sail and not drift, nor lie atanchor." Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table(1858) A general interpretation of the National Survey indicates thatroughly one-quarter of the American public is convinced thatcriminal sanctions should be withdrawn entirely from marihuanause. Another fourth of the public is equally convinced thatexisting social and legal policy is appropriate, and wouldordinarily jail possessors, with the exception of young firstoffenders. Approximately half of the citizenry is confused aboutwhat marihuana means and ambivalent about what society ought todo about its use. This half of the population is unenthusiasticabout classifying the marihuana user as a criminal, but isreluctant to relinquish formal control over him. In considering social and legal policy alternatives, theCommission has analyzed the pattern of social response tomarihuana use. The Initial Social Response As we noted in Chapter I, the initial social reaction tomarihuana use was shaped by the narcotics policy adopted by theFederal Government. In the early legislation, marihuana wasofficially characterized as a narcotic on the basis of the widelyshared assumption that it was a habit-forming drug, leadinginevitably to a form of dependence. Although the medicalcommunity was aware that marihuana was distinguishable from theopiates in that it did not produce physical dependence, nofunctional distinction was drawn; it was assumed that most userswere psychologically compelled to continue using the drug. As onepsychiatrist noted in 1934, the marihuana "user wants torecapture over and over again the ecstatic, elated state intowhich the drug lifts him . . . The addiction to cannabis is asensual addiction: it is in the services of the hedonisticelements of the personality." The notion of psychological dependence is still ill-defined,and was understood even less in the early days of Americanmarihuana use. The Commission has concluded that the automaticclassification of marihuana as "addictive" was derivedprimarily from an underlying social perception of the substrataof society which used the drug: aliens, prostitutes, and personsat the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder. Additional characteristics of the opiates were alsotransferred to marihuana. Particularly important in this regardwas the association of marihuana with aggressive behavior andviolent crime. One district attorney in New Orleans, wheremarihuana use was particularly common, wrote in 1931: It is an ideal drug to cut off inhibitions quickly . . . Atthe present time the underworld has been quick to realize thevalue of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelicts tothat of a master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint, and toits influence may be attributed many of our present day crimes.It has been the experience of the Police and ProsecutingOfficials in the South that immediately before the commission ofmany crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged inby criminals so as to relieve themselves from the naturalrestraint which might deter them from the commission of criminalacts, and to give them the false courage necessary to commit thecontemplated crime. By 1931, those states in which marihuana use was at all commonhad formally responded with a total eliminationist policy. Theygenerally amended the preexisting narcotics legislation toinclude marihuana. Meanwhile, in 1929, the Federal Governmentalready had classified marihuana officially as a"habit-forming drug along with the opiates and cocaine, inthe legislation which established two federal "farms"for treating narcotics addicts in Fort Worth, Texas, andLexington, Kentucky. During the 1930's, the remaining states criminalized marihuanause by adopting the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, in which the drugwas included (optionally) in the definition of narcotic drugs.Then, in 1937, Congress adopted the Marihuana Tax Act, completingthe initial period of official response to marihuana use. A difference of opinion among historians still exists as towhy policymakers thought national legislation was necessary atthat time. Whatever the reason, however, Congress respondedswiftly, without much attempt to learn the facts about the drugand its use. The assumptions underlying that legislation weresummarized in the Report of the House Ways and Means Committee: Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed and allpower of directing and controlling thought is lost. Inhibitionsare released. As a result of these effects, it appeared fromtestimony produced at the hearings that many violent crimes havebeen and are being committed by persons under the influence ofthis drug. Not only is marihuana used by the hardened criminalsto steel them to commit violent crimes, but it is also beingplaced in the hands of high-school children in the form ofmarihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Cases were citedat the hearings of school children who have been driven to crimeand insanity through the use of this drug. Its continued useresults many times in impotency and insanity. When Congress escalated penalties for narcotics offenses in1951 and again in 1956, marihuana was included, with thefollowing effects: Possession Minimum sentence First offense ------------------------------------------ 2years Second offense ---------------------------------------- 5years Third and subsequent offense --------------------------- 10years Fine ------------------------------------------------- $20,000 Sale Minimum sentence First offense ------------------------------------------ 5years Second and subsequent offense --------------------------- 10years Sale to minor by adult ---------------------------------- 10years Parole or probation were made unavailable to all except firstoffenders in the possession category. The perceptions of 1937 were perpetuated in the comments ofSenator Price M. Daniel, Chairman of the Senate subcommitteeconsidering the 1956 Act, although by now an important new factorhad been added: Marihuana is a drug which starts most addicts in the use ofdrugs. Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some ofthe worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to thehabit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then tothe final destruction of the persons addicted. The Change With the adoption of marihuana use by middle and upper classcollege youth in the mid-60's, the exaggerated notion of thedrug's dangers and the social tension so widespread during thisperiod combined to reopen the question of the impact of marihuanause. But governmental policy held to the appropriateness ofexisting law. Arrests, prosecutions, convictions and sentences ofimprisonment all increased at both the federal and state levels.Marihuana arrests by the U.S. Bureau of Customs increasedapproximately 362% from fiscal year 1965 to 1970. Arrests by theBureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, an agency which concernsitself primarily with sale, rose 80% from 1965 to 1968. Becausemajor responsibility for enforcing the possession laws lies atthe state level, state arrests rose dramatically (1,000%) duringthe five years from 1965 to 1970. Although the data compiled bythe Federal Bureau of Investigation are not comprehensive, theFBI sample tracks the continuing increase of state arrests (Table6). Table 6.-STATE MARIHUANA ARRESTS Year Arrests Percentage increase 1965 18,815 1966 31,119 65.39 1967 61,843 98.73 1968 95,870 55.02 1969 118,903 24.02 1970 188,682 58.68 In the wake of this upsurge in marihuana arrests, the criminaljustice system faced a far from usual "criminal"population. Nonetheless, judging from federal figures, the numberof people prosecuted, convicted, and incarcerated did risesubstantially as prosecutors and judges attempted to carry outthe law. Beginning in 1966, however, the proportion of defendantsultimately convicted declined gradually, as did the percentage ofdefendants who were incarcerated, and the average length of theirsentences. This response reflected an attempt to -mitigate theharshness of the law as applied to this new user population. By1968, the trend toward leniency seemed to have temporarilyleveled off, before it accelerated again in 1969 (Table 7). Paralleling the vigorous law enforcement effort between 1965and 1968 was a punitive reaction in the schools and large numbersof students using marihuana were suspended, expelled or referredto the police. Similarly, the military's first reaction to thesurge of marihuana use took the form of court-martial,administrative punishment, or discharge from the service. Table 7.-DISPOSITION OF FEDERAL MARIHUANA ARRESTS Year Total defendants Percent convicted Percent incarcerated Average length of sentence (in months) 1964 85 49 1965 523 90 52 58.2 1966 746 87 45 53.7 1967 941 80 38.5 51.0 1968 1,433 79 39.4 51.2 1969 2,189 76 34.3 52.6 1970 2,082 73 27.4 46.7 1971 3,323 60 28.5 39.9 The family, however, suffered the most from the suddenconflict between accepted norms and this expression of youthfulindependence. The use of drugs, particularly marihuana, became asignificant barrier between parent and child. Many young peopleadopted marihuana as a symbol of their uneasiness with society'sprevailing norms. As noted in Chapter 1, the sudden increase in marihuana useprecipitated extensive research by the medical and scientificcommunities. By 1969, a consensus emerged holding that many ofthe earlier beliefs about the effects of marihuana wereerroneous. Available U.S. data seemed to indicate that dependenceon the drug was rare, as was the incidence of psychosis amongmarihuana users. Particularly important was the recognition thatthere was little, if any, convincing proof that marihuana causedaggressive behavior or crime. As such findings accumulated,public attention was drawn increasingly to the consequences ofexisting policy: soaring arrests, convictions and in some states,lengthy sentences. Policy-makers, in social institutions and government, as wellas the public began to believe that the harshness of the criminalpenalties was far out of proportion to the dangers posed by thedrug. As users were incarcerated, newspapers and televisionstations often brought the matter to public attention,particularly when the arrested youngster came from a prominentfamily. Official response to this development was twofold: a trendtoward leniency in marihuana cases within the legal system, and arecognition by policy-makers of widespread uncertainty regardingthe effects of marihuana. Reflecting the first response, the courts, prosecutors andpolice applied existing law more leniently, and the law-makers inmost states and at the federal level changed the letter of thelaw, reducing the penalties for possession of marihuana,generally to a misdemeanor (up to a year in jail). In theprocess, they repealed the mandatory minimums which had been ofmajor concern to the judiciary. By June 1970, 24 states and the District of Columbia hadreduced the penalties, although 34 states and the District stillclassified marihuana as a narcotic. Meanwhile, on the federallevel, Congress had been considering the Nixon Administration'scomprehensive proposal to overhaul the national government'spatchwork of drug legislation. Since the passage of the Harrison Narcotics Act in 1914,federal drug laws had taken the form of tax measures, an approachcompelled for constitutional reasons. The Marihuana Tax Act of1937 followed the same format. The result, however, was a complexset of offenses involving order forms and registrations. When theSupreme Court declared certain aspects of the Tax Actunconstitutional in 1969, revision of the law became essential.Taking up the challenge, the Administration proposed a majorpiece of legislation which tightened control over pharmaceuticaldistributions and also reappraised the penalty structure fornarcotics and dangerous drug offenses. Possession of all drugs, including marihuana, was reduced to amisdemeanor. Special treatment for first offenders was provided,allowing expungement of the record upon satisfactory completionof a probationary period. Casual transfers of marihuana weretreated in the same manner as possession. After a series ofwide-ranging hearings, Congress passed the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act, and on October 27, 1970, thePresident signed it into law. After passage of the new federal drug law, the Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws adopted a Uniform ControlledSubstances Act, conforming in structure and emphasis to thefederal law. Although the Uniform Act specifies no penalties, theCommissioners recommended that possession of all drugs be amisdemeanor. At this writing, 42 of the states and the District of Columbiaclassify possession as a misdemeanor or have adopted specialprovisions so classifying possession of small amounts ofmarihuana. In half of the remaining eight jurisdictions, thecourts have discretion to sentence possessors as misdemeanants. In 11 jurisdictions, casual transfers are treated in the samemanner as possession, and in 27 jurisdictions, conditionaldischarge is available to certain classes of offenders. The second characteristic of the 1969-70 official response wasits acknowledgment of uncertainty. No longer perceived as a majorthreat to public safety, marihuana use had now become primarilyan issue of private and public health. Scientific researcherswere asked to define the nature and scope of the health concern.In a sense, lawmakers took the minimum official action dictatedby social and scientific realities, but were uncertain where togo from there. The need to know more about the effects of thedrug, particularly its chronic, long-term effects, became thecore of official response. Many states appointed special task forces and commissions toreport on marihuana and drug abuse in general. Congress directedthe Department of Health, Education and Welfare to file annualReports on Marihuana and Health and, in the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970, established thisCommission. The Current Response In addition to an objective appraisal of the effects ofmarihuana use, this Commission was directed to evaluate theefficacy of existing law. The marihuana laws were and still arethe focus of much public debate. We have recognized from theoutset that a meaningful evaluation of the law is dependent uponan understanding of objectives and the social context in whichthe law operates. Particularly important in this connection arethe attitudes and practices of society's non-legal institutionsand the general direction of public opinion. In order to comprehend the entire range of contemporary socialresponse, the Commission launched a threefold inquiry. First, wedesigned a series of projects designed to ascertain opinion andbehavior within the criminal justice system. Included were ananalysis of all marihuana arrests during the last six months of1970 in six metropolitan jurisdictions, a similar study of allfederal marihuana arrests during 1970, an opinion survey of alllocal prosecuting attorneys, and a similar survey of attitudesamong a representative sample of Judges, probation officers, andcourt clinicians. We next focused on the practice and opinion of the medical,clerical, educational, and business communities. To this end, wesolicited written responses from representative groups, invitedvarious spokesmen to testify before us, made numerous fieldvisits to secondary schools, colleges and universities andsurveyed opinion in free clinics and university health services.We also launched a study of drug use and abuse in industry whichwill be covered in our second Report on drug abuse. Finally, we commissioned the National Survey of public opinionabout marihuana to which we have previously referred. THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM How does the criminal justice system respond when an enormousincrease in an illegal conduct, of a primarily private nature,makes full enforcement of the law impossible, and when there iswidespread doubt about the rationale for making the conductillegal? This question guided our analysis of the responses andopinions from members of the criminal justice system. Law Enforcement Behavior On the basis of a detailed study of all federal marihuanaarrests during 1970 and of a sample of state arrests during thelast half of 1970 in Cook County, Illinois; Dallas, Texas; Omaha,Nebraska; Tucson, Arizona; San Mateo County, California; and theWashington, DC Metropolitan Area, we present the followingfindings. FEDERAL The federal authorities make little or no effort toseek out violators of laws proscribing possession of marihuana.The Federal Government ceded responsibility for enforcement ofpossession laws to the states several years ago. However, in thecourse of general enforcement activity, the Federal authoritiesdo make possession arrests. If a person is arrested at theFederal level for possession or casual transfer of small ormoderate amounts of marihuana, the case generally is eitherdropped or turned over to the states for prosecution. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs does notconcentrate much of its energy on marihuana. By its own estimate,approximately 6% of its investigative efforts are directed atmarihuana offenses. Most BNDD marihuana arrests occur as a resultof the agency's general investigation into the commercialdistribution of all drugs. The overwhelming majority of all federal marihuana arrestsoccur at or near the borders, as the Bureau of Customs, sometimesin cooperation with the Border Patrol of the Immigration andNaturalization Service, attempts to interdict the importation ofthe drug. State At the state level, where enforcement of the possession lawsis focused, about 93% of the arrests in our sample were for thisoffense. Yet, there was little formal investigative effort toseek out violators of the possession laws. Instead, 69% of allmarihuana arrests arose from spontaneousor accidental situationswhere there had been no investigation at all. Well over half ofthese spontaneous arrests occurred when police stopped anautomobile and saw or smelled marihuana. The remainingspontaneous arrests occurred when police stopped persons on thestreet or in a park and discovered marihuana. In an additional 16% of the cases, the marihuana arrestresulted from police follow-up of a phoned tip or similar lead.In less than 11% of all the cases was there any significantpolice involvement. (Scope of investigation was unknown in about4% of the cases). Because of this enforcement pattern, arrests were concentratedamong the young. Typically the arrestee was a white male, inschool or employed in a blue collar job, without a prior record.Of those arrested at the state level: * 58% were under 21; 30% were between 21 and 26; 10% were over26 (2% unknown) * 85% were male; 15% were female * 77% were white; 21% were black; 2% were Spanish speaking * 27% were students, 2% were military; 28% were employed inblue collar jobs; 15% were employed in white collar jobs; 11%were unemployed (16% unknown) * 44% had not been arrested previously; 31% had been arrestedpreviously (in 25% of the cases, the extent of prior contact wasunknown) ; only 6% of the arrestees had been previouslyinearcerated Such arrestees generally possessed only small amounts ofmarihuana. Of our entire sample of 3,071 arrests: 67% were for possession of less than one ounce (18% were for less than one gram; 23% were for between one and 5 grams; 26% were for between 5 and 30 grams) 7% were for possession of between one ounce and 4 ounces 8% were for possession of over 4 ounces 13% were for possession of unknown quantities 3 % were for transfer of less than one ounce 3% were for transfer of over one ounce,* Offenders at the state level were generally arrested ingroups. * 29 % were arrested alone * 24% were arrested with one other person * 43% were arrested with two or more other persons (4%unknown) Faced with this population of offenders, the criminaljustice System responded often by dismissing or diverting to anoncriminal institution the young first-offense possessor ofsmall amounts. Adult Cases At least 48% of the cases were terminated in the defendant'sfavor: The police themselves disposed of l0% of the cases, refrainingfrom filing charges, or diverting the case, to some otherinstitution. The prosecution declined to file complaints in an additional7% of the cases. An additional 28% of the cases were dismissed in the course ofpretrial judicial proceedings. In 3% of the cases, the defendant was acquitted at trial. *Because the figures have been rounded off, the total is notalways 100%. Juvenile Cases At least 70% of the cases were terminated in the youth'sfavor: The police themselves disposed of 21% of the cases, refrainingfrom referring the youth to juvenile authorities or diverting thecase to some other agency. An additional 48% of the cases were dismissed either becausethe juvenile officer responsible for filing a delinquencypetition refused to do so, or because the judge dismissed thecase prior to trial. in 1% of the cases, the juvenile was found innocent. Of the entire sample of arrests, both adult and juvenile, 33%of those apprehended were ultimately sentenced,, after pleadingguilty or being found guilty. (Since 11% of the 3,071 cases -werestill pending at the time of our study, and disposition wasunknown in 2% of the cases, the figure may be as high as 40% ofall arrests). Of those convicted for possession of marihuana, 24% wereincarcerated, usually for a year or less. Most of the remainingpersons were put on probation, although some were fined only. Bycomparison, of those convicted of sale (5% of the convictedindividuals), 65% were incarcerated, usually for over a year. In short, in the 2,610 cases where disposition was final andwas available to 6% of those apprehended were ultimatelyincarcerated. From this analysis of enforcement behavior. it appears thatthe law enforcement community has adopted a policy ofcontainment. Although effort is sometimes expended to seek outprivate marihuana use, the trend is undoubtedly to invoke, themarihuana possession laws only when the behavior (possession)comes out in the open. We were told by police officials in somecities, for example, that arrests are made only when marihuanause is flaunted in public. The salient feature of the present law has become the threatof arrest for indiscretion. The high percentage of cases which,after arrest, are disposed of by dismissal or informal diversionattests to the ambivalence of police officials, prosecutors andjudges about the appropriateness of existing law. Anyoneprocessed through the entire system does run a risk ofincarceration, especially when the individual had a prior recordand the offense was sale or possession of a significant amount. Law Enforcement Opinion Prosecutorial opinion toward the existing system suggests botha containment objective and a, flexible, response. As toprosecution policy: 31% of the prosecutors state that they would not prosecuteanyone one arrested at a private, social gathering of marihuanausers who are passing a cigarette. Large numbers of prosecutors admit that they consider factorsother than strength of the evidence in deciding whether or not toprosecute a possession case; 41% cite age, 38% cite lack of priorrecord, 36% consider the amount of marihuana seized and 26% takeinto account the family situation of the accused; 31% thought oneor another of these non-legal factors was most important in hisdecision 29% of the prosecutors acknowledge that they use informalprobation in lieu of prosecution in some cases. As to the efficacy of existing law, a majority of theprosecutors agree that the marihuana laws do not deter, or deteronly minimally: Persons under 30 from initiating use (53%) Users from using regularly (56%) Users from transferring small amounts for little or noremuneration (55%) From the studies made by the Commission of enforcementpractices, we consider this to be a realistic assessment. Conversely, however, the prosecutors agree that the laws havea significant effect in deterring users from smoking marihuanaopenly (62%) and persons over 30 from initiating use (44%). We also asked the district attorneys for their views on anappropriate legal policy concerning marihuana use. Their opinionstend to fall in three groups. One group, representing about 25%of the prosecutors, favors the status quo, and does not want anyfurther reduction in penalties. A fifth of the prosecutorsconclude, on the basis of their experience, that possession ofmarihuana, and perhaps sale of the drug, should be removedentirely from the criminal justice system. The remaining prosecutors, a majority, is willing to considermitigation of the harshness of the law either by legislation orby benign exercise of discretion, but is reluctant to relinquishformal, criminal control. These prosecutors doubt the deterrentvalue of the law and are willing to be lenient in appropriatecases, but they believe some use of the legal system is necessaryto prevent all increase in marihuana use. Underlying these opinions are diverse attitudes aboutmarihuana use and the efficacy of existing law. For example,prosecutors who doubt the efficacy of existing law and reject the"escalation" and "aggressive behavior"hypotheses, are generally willing to modify the laws by theirenforcement policies and by legislative reform (Table 8). The same general pattern of practice and opinion emerges atthe judicial and dispositional level. Only 13% of the respondingjudges would jail an adult for possession of marihuana and only4% said they would incarcerate a minor. Lesser proportions ofprobation officers and clinicians would imprison adults (8% and1%) and minors (2% and %). Conversely, 11% of the Judges, 15.5%of the probation officers and 63.5% of the clinicians noted thatthey would assess no penalty for possession by adults. Forminors, the proportions are 3%, 5%, and 35% respectively. Table 8.-DISTRICT ATTORNEYS, OPINIONS Percent who Percent who Percent who believe the believe believe marihuana Percent Change favored marihuana marihuana laws do not who utilize leads to leads to deter persons informal hard drug aggressive under 30 probation use behavior from initi- ating use None 87.1 47 51.3 28.5 Reduction of possession penalties 68.8 35.1 63.2 34.3 Preclusion of incarceration. . 64.7 33 59 33.2 Decriminalization of possession of small amounts 41.5 21.9 67.2 37.4 Legalization of marihuana. .. 32.2 11.1 69 37.8 How to read table: 87.1%, of the prosecutors who favor nochange in existing law believe that marihuana leads to the use ofhard drugs; in contrast, 32.2% of the prosecutors who favorlegalization believe that marihuana leads to the use of harddrugs. With regard to appropriate legal policy, the judges exhibitthe same inclination as the prosecutors to look for alternativeswithin a formal control system which would avoid the use ofcriminal penalties. We asked essentially the same question in twoways and received similar responses (Table 9). The judges, as a group, are less enthusiastic about criminalcontrol than the prosecutors, but are equally unwilling torelinquish formal control. By contrast, the probation officersand clinicians, who have more personal contact with theseoffenders and are perhaps more intensively aware of the controlpotential of the criminal justice systern, are highly skepticalabout formal control (Tables 10, -and 11). In conclusion, as one proceeds through the criminal justicesystem, from district attorneys to court clinicians, the peopleresponsible for the functioning of that system seem to bedecreasingly enthusiastic about the appropriateness of criminalcontrol and decreasingly insistent on any technique for formalcontrol. Table 9.*-JUDGES, OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 11 Control outside 24.3 control Informal social 22 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 21 Expungement of 57.9 formal Other 11 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 25 Control within 11.5 control criminal justice system 'Because of a small percentage of non-responses, figures donot always total 100%. How to read table: When asked to identify the appropriatemeans of control for adult users, 33% of the judges opted forinformal control (1 1% would rely on personal choice and 22%,would rely on informal social control). Similarly, when askedabout the appropriate statutory scheme for possession, 24.3% ofthe judges preferred control outside the criminal justice system,a functional equivalent of "informal control." Table 10.*-PROBATION OFFICERS' OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 21 Control outside 35.5 control Informal social 32.7 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 11.8 Expungement of 54.5 formal Other 10 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 15.5 Control within 9 control criminal justice system *Because of a small number of non-responses, the figures donot always total 100%. To supplement our survey of behavior and opinion within thecriminal justice system, we also solicited the views of theAmerican Bar Association. The President of the A13A in turn urgedthe respective Committees of the Association to submit theirviews to us. The two Committees directly concerned with the drugarea, the Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Reform of the SectionoNn Individual Rights Table ll.*-CLINICIANS, OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 61.7 Control outside 74 control Informal social 21 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 1 Expungement of 22.6 formal Other 10 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 3.5 Control within 0 control criminal justice system 'Because of a small number of non-responses, the figures donot always total 100%. and Responsibilities, and the Committee on Drug Abuse of theSection on Criminal Law, were in essential agreement regardingthe appropriate course of action. Both Committees expressed doubt about the wisdom andlegitimacy of existing policy and about the, capacity of thecriminal justice system to deal with marihuana use. They bothurged the Commission to recommend the removal of criminalpenalties from possession of the drug for personal use and casualnon-profit transfers. Both Committees suggested that a regulatoryapproach to distribution of the drug be given seriousconsideration. THE NON-LEGAL INSTITUTIONS Law enforcement authorities, given available and prospectiveresources, cannot possibly enforce the existing marihuana lawsfully. The best they can do is keel) marihuana use contained andout of sight. In addition, many officials within the criminaljustice system are reluctant to enforce the marihuana laws, beingeither uncommitted to the usefulness of this particular law oropposed to the law itself. The net result is for the legal systemto leave much of the responsibility for social control to othersocial institutions such as family, schools, churches, and themedical profession. Since these other institutions themselveshave relied heavily on the legal system for control, caution andconfusion now dominate the social response to marihuana use. The diminishing severity of the law enforcement response maynot have occurred if the other institutions of society hadcontinued to regard the marihuana user as a criminal. However,many of these institutions have come to view the marihuana userprimarily in social or medical terms, and to recommend a form ofsocial control in accord with their respective self-interests ororientations. In many cases, the ,attitudes of these otherinstitutions mirror that of the criminal justice system:uncertainty about the proper role of formal legal control. The Family The most important institution for instilling social norms isthe family. Parental attitudes generally parallel public opinion,and specific responses in our National Survey suggest aninclination among parents and non-parents to deal with youthfulmarihuana users through discussion and persuasion rather thanharsh or punitive measures. When asked what action they wouldtake upon discovering that one of their teenage children wassmoking marihuana with friends, 47% of the adults responded thatthey would use persuasion and reason. Twenty-three percentfavored a punitive approach. Interestingly, 9% of the lattergroup felt so strongly about the matter that they were willing toreport their own child to the police. A considerable number, 35%indicated that they were uncertain about what to do, or failed torespond to this multiple response question. The non-punitive trend was also apparent when the adults wereasked what they would do if their teenage child was arrested fora marihuana offense. A substantial number (58%) indicated theywould attempt to extricate their child from the situation, manynot wishing their child to have a police record, while 34%expressed the sentiment that the child's arrest would help himlearn a lesson. The Schools Marihuana use continues to increase among high school andcollege students. The National Survey reveals that 30% of thehigh school juniors and seniors have used marihuana. The NationalSurvey also reveals that 44% of those currently attending collegeat the graduate or undergraduate levels have used it, while othersurveys indicate this figure is significantly higher in somemajor universities. Not surprisingly, there has been, during the last two years,ail appreciable change in the attitudes of school administrators,faculty and even of the boards of education and trustees towardmarihuana use, Administrators at the secondary and college levelsare generally more relaxed and tolerant toward marihuana, usethan they were during the mid-1960's, when support for a punitiveresponse was common. After the initial shock of widespread usedissipated, many school officials came to believe that strongdisciplinary action, including suspension and arrest, wascounterproductive. In addition, as the evidence accumulated thatmarihuana, was not as dangerous as had once been thought,parental and community pressures were sometimes brought to bearon school administrators to be less punitive and moreunderstanding of marihuana use. At the secondary level, the policies very somewhat from stateto state and even within states. Nevertheless, school boardsgenerally seem to have become less enthusiastic about suspensionand arrest as an appropriate response to marihuana use. Oneschool administrator in Philadelphia noted sarcastically that ifall users were suspended or arrested, the high schools wouldbecome empty cells, with their entire clientele turned out ontothe streets. A West Coast official emphasized that student alcohol use wasa much more serious problem than marihuana use; he even suggestedthat legalization of marihuana might reduce alcohol use among theyoung. The Commission ascertained that no suspensions formarihuana use had occurred during 1971 in the entire schoolsystem of a southern metropolitan area. Although securityofficers in that system did make 20 arrests, they were all forselling marihuana and other drugs. At the secondary level, then, increased reliance is beingplaced on persuasion rather than discipline, as a means ofdiscouraging marihuana use. Drug education programs, now beinginstituted in almost every school system, often includeinformation about alcohol and tobacco. We will explore thevarious pedagogical techniques employed in such programs and willattempt to evaluate them in our next Report. At the college level, the response is even more lenient. Inmany cases official neutrality or even protection against policeintervention substitutes for the restraint common at thesecondary level. Under formal or informal arrangements with locallaw enforcement officials, many schools bar on-campus arrests formarihuana use. Apparently they have concluded that enforcement ofthe marihuana laws causes more harm. than does use of the drug.In some cases, college authorities have substituted their ownpolicy for society's official policy. The Commission learned atone of its hearings in Chicago, for example, that a majorMidwestern university explicitly declared that students would besubject to university disciplinary action if they were found inpossession of more than one week's supply of marihuana. Control at the college level is usually considered a medicalConcern and is handled either through the university healthcenters or free clinics. The trend toward leniency is alsoapparent in the policy responses of the representative sample ofuniversity health service and free clinic physicians. whoseprofession presumably brings them into contact with thepopulation most it risk from marihuana. Among personnel of thefree clinics, 62% of the respondents favor legalization; 5% wouldcontinue the present policy, and the remainder would eitherreduce penalties (11%) or await further research (22%). Even among the "establishment-oriented" healthservice personnel, similar attitudes prevail. Nineteen percentwould continue the present policy, and 16% would legalize. Of theremaining 55% (10% did not respond), 38% would reduce, penaltiesand 17% would await further research. This pattern of views bearsa striking resemblance to that of the prosecuting attorneys, andindeed of the public at large. The large majority indicatesuneasiness with the present system and opposition tolegalization, but is uncertain about exactly what to do. The Churches The nation's churches play a major role in the process bywhich society's norms and values are transmitted to the young.Moral education, through individual and family counseling bychurch personnel, is influential in the process of socialcontrol, particularly for adolescents. Consequently, theCommission sought to learn the attitudes, responses andrecommendations of the clergy. The larger societal uncertainty about the social and moralimplications of marihuana use is also reflected in the attitudesof religious institutions. For example, Dr. Thomas E. Price,speaking for the National Council of Churches of Christ in theU.S.A. before the Commission, referred to marihuana as a"tightly drawn moral knot." This uncertainty has ledmany religious groups to minimize a punitive and repressiveresponse to marihuana use in their official statements and formalprograms. Instead, they have concentrated on educational andrehabilitative programs. Many church spokesmen have urged a reconsideration of socialand legal policy. The range of their suggestions for changereflects, once again, widespread uncertainty. Some ask for someform of "adequate" punishment or supervision so as todiscourage marihuana use. Others say "reform orelimination" of penalties for possession would beappropriate. And there are those who suggest legalization withsome government regulation. Some church spokesmen have defendedexisting policy, recommending only that the law be more strictlyand uniformly enforced. The Medical Community In contrast to the mixed opinions of other segments ofsociety, the medical profession has a rather broad consensus atthe present time. In a series of responses from various medicalsocieties, associations and committees, we found certainrecurrent themes. Every medical group emphasized the need formore research into the effects of marihuana. There was uniformemphasis on how marihuana, as a "drug," affects heart,head, blood, brain and so on, but not on how it affects societyas a behavior. The consensus was that marihuana, the drug, posessome danger for the individual, physically or psychologically.The only major disagreement is about the degree of such danger. The second recurrent theme was that marihuana shoulddefinitely not be legalized. Legalization would imply sanction,medical groups said, with a probable, increase in use as aresult. One doctor compared legalization with the failure ofProhibition: "The fact [that] Prohibition was a failuredoesn't make alcoholism a good thing and the six million or so(alcoholics) we have are no bargain. Therefore, since there is nolegitimate use for marihuana it seems rather silly to legalizeits use to initiate a second headache." Another reasoncommonly given by physicians for opposing legalization is thatsuch a step should be taken if and when it is proven thatmarihuana is not dangerous. The third common theme of medical opinion was a call for amore. lenient approach toward users, again a position reflectedin almost every quarter of society. One officer of a publichealth association told a convention: " (Our committee)deplores the strong punitive measures suggested by some becausewe feel that a jail sentence for the offense of smoking marihuanais not likely to solve the problem of eliminating marihuana use.On the contrary, a prison sentence is likely to do great damageto a young person's personality as well as to his futurecareer." Another group called for prosecutors to usediscretionary powers in handling youthful first offenders. When discussing penalties, the medical community begins totake, a look at marihuana use as a form of social behavior ratherthan simply a drug which produces certain physical andpsychological effects. One doctor wrote: "Because marihuanain present patterns of use is, by and large, a relativelyinnocuous drug and because its use has many motivations fromsimple curiosity to symbolism of hostility to the'establishment', the legal penalties in many jurisdictionsthroughout the United States are excessively punitive." Summary Social institutional spokesmen now commonly recognize thatcontrol of marihuana is only partially a law enforcement problem.Opinions cluster around the propositions that society should notbe punitive on the one hand, but should not make the drugavailable, at least for now. Beyond these points, however,uncertainty prevails. There is no common vision of an appropriatesocial control policy. Each institution is going about the business of control in itsown way. Parents emphasize mutual communication. The secondaryschools emphasize health education. The colleges recognizepersonal freedom so long as it does not jeopardize theeducational enterprise. Churches emphasize uncertainty about themoral implications of marihuana use. The medical fraternitystresses the need for further research into the healthconsequences of marihuana use. Uncertainly is the commondenominator. THE PUBLIC RESPONSE For most Americans marihuana use is not an abstractphenomenon. Fifteen percent of the adult population, the NationalSurvey revealed, has tried the drug and 44% of the non-tryingadults personally know someone who has used the drug. Fourteenpercent of the youth have tried the drug and 58% of thenon-triers personally know someone who has used the drug. Indeed,six percent of the non-trying youth indicated that half or moreof their friends used marihuana. The public is also aware of the consequences of the existingsystem and concerned about its impact. Ninety-seven percent ofthe adults know that selling marihuana is against the law. Only afew less, 94%, know that possession is against the law. In fact,one fourth of the adults know someone who has been arrested on apossession charge. Ninety-two percent of the youth know that saleis prohibited, and four out of five know that possession isagainst the law. Fifty-three percent of the 16- and 17-year-oldsactually know someone who has been arrested for possession. Acutely aware of the legal consequences of use, the public isalso cognizant of the difficulties encountered by the criminaljustice system in its attempt to enforce a widely-violated law,Adults were asked whether they mostly agreed or mostly disagreedwith a series of 12 selected propositions regarding thedesirability of maintaining or altering the present system ofmarihuana control. The two propositions which received the mostsupport relate to problems inherent in the existing laws. Eighty-three percent of the adults mostly agreed with thestatement that "because of marihuana a lot of young peoplewho are not criminals are getting police records and being put injail." And 76% agreed that "laws against marihuana arevery hard to enforce because most people use it in private." Marihuana use is more personal than most public issues, but itis also more confusing. Bombarded in recent years -withcontradictory "findings" and statistics about theeffects of marihuana, and with conflicting arguments about publicpolicy, the public tends to believe everything, whether pro orcon. Particularly important in this regard is the widespreadacceptance of beliefs which have little basis in fact. Approximately half of the adult public believes that"many crimes are committed by persons who are under theinfluence of marihuana," and that "some people havedied from using it." Seven of every 10 adults believe that"marihuana makes people want to try stronger things likeheroin." Although the probability that a person believesthese statements increases with age, a significant percentage ofall groups are represented. The underlying confusion is strongly indicated in thecontradictory attitudes toward various reasons for maintaining orchanging the law. For example, 43% of the adults thought, in thecontext of an argument for making marihuana legal, that "itshould be up to each person to decide for himself, like withalcohol or tobacco." Yet 75% of the adults agreed, in thecontext of an argument for keeping the laws the way they are,that "there are already too many ways for people to escapetheir responsibilities. We don't need another one." Youth tend to be less convinced than adults that marihuana usemay be fatal to the user, or cause him to commit crime or leadhim to use other drugs; but young people as a group also arenoticeably more uncertain about these matters. One of every fouryoung people indicated that they were unsure whether marihuanacaused death or crime, and one of every six expressed uncertaintyregarding the progression to other drugs. Similarly, young peoplewere more than twice as likely as adults to have "noopinion" about the various propositions regarding the needfor legal change. Public attitudes toward marihuana exhibit both doubt andtension. On the one hand, we note an acute awareness of the legalconsequences of marihuana use and an appreciation of the adverseimpact of processing users through the criminal justice system.On the other hand, we note some misconceptions about the dangersof marihuana and confusion about the consequences of changing ormaintaining the present system. Public responses on the basic questions of social and legalpolicy reflect the underlying ambivalence. The overwhelmingmajority of the public does not want to treat the marihuana userharshly. This attitude appeared repeatedly through the entireSurvey. When asked "For the good of the country, which ofthe following courses of action would be the best thing to doabout [marihuana use] ?" the public responded in thefollowing manner: Percentage Youth Adults* 12-17 Handle the problem mostly through the police and courts: the process of arrest, conviction, punish- ment ------------------------------------------ 37 90 Handle the problem mostly through medical clinics: the process of diagnosis, treatment, care ----------- 51 48 Don't worry about the use of marihuana, but spend time andmoney on preventing and solving other crimes No opinion --------------------------------------- 5 20 *Some adults gave more than one answer. Adults and youth were also asked to look at marihuana use fromthe perspective of the system, and to identify the appropriatepenalty for possession of marihuana. Both groups were reluctantto put users in jail, especially for a first offense.Eighty-three percent of the adults and 64% of the youth would notincarcerate a youthful first offender; 54% of the adults and 41 %of the youth would not even give the young offender a policerecord (Table 12). Table 12.-ADULTS' VIEWS ON POSSESSION PENALTIES If defendant is teenager If defendant is adult Penalty First Previous First Previous offense conviction offense conviction (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) No penalty 20 Total 6 Total 13 Total 7 Total Fine (no police record).. 34 83 11 37 28 64 6 24 Probation 29 20 23 11 Jail sentence Up to a week 8 Total 20 Total 11 Total 14 Total Up to a year 3 13 24 56 12 32 24 70 More than a year 2 12 9 32 No opinion 4 7 4 6 YOUNG PEOPLES, (age 12-17) VIEWS ON POSSESSION PENALTIES If defendant is teenager If defendant is adult Penalty First Previous First Previous offense conviction offense conviction (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) No penalty 13 Total 6 Tota I 11 Tota 1 7 Total Fine (no police record).. 28 64 9 35 21 50 7 27 Probation 23 20 18 13 Jail sentence Ur, to a week 8 Total 13 Tota 1 16 Total 12 Tota I Up to a year 6 19 21 51 11 36 18 59 More than a year 5 17 9 29 No opinion 17 14 14 14 Interestingly, the youth population as a whole was lesslenient than the adult population as a whole. Within each group,however, the older teenagers and young adults were the mosttolerant in all respects. These statistics suggest that the I public generally prefersleniency when responding to questions specifically directed tomarihuana use. But when asked about "control" or"the law" in general, the response often appears quiteharsh. For example, when asked to consider a range of fivealternative control schemes, most adults tended to resist change. Thirty-one percent of the adults thought that making marihuanalegally available through regulated channels (like alcohol) wasacceptable but 67% thought it was unacceptable. Although 23%thought the removal of criminal sanctions from possession wasacceptable, 74% thought this approach was unacceptable. On theother hand, 56% of the adults thought that the existing lawswere, acceptable; yet 41% found the present law unacceptable.Finally, 72% thought "stricter laws" would beacceptable, while only 26% thought such a change would beunacceptable. Indeed 43% thought stricter laws were the"ideal solution" and 62% thought this was the best ofthe alternatives. These responses seem to be contradictory. We are puzzled aboutwhat the respondents thought they meant when they expressed apreference for stricter laws. They probably did not mean stricter penalties for possession.Such an interpretation would be entirely inconsistent withresponses to questions aimed directly at appropriate policytoward users. Under existing law some states still treat firstoffenders as felons and most states treat multiple offenders asfelons. But, only a third of the adult respondents would put anadult multiple offender in jail for more than a year. The preference for stricter laws might be interpreted to meanheavier penalties for sale, or better enforcement of existingproscriptions against trafficking. Two-thirds of the adults didindicate that they preferred heavier penalties for sale than forpossession. But penalties for selling for profit are alreadyquite heavy in every jurisdiction. We suspect that a majority of the public, including many ofthose favoring "stricter laws," is actually disturbedabout the increase in marihuana use and would like a system whichwould work better than the existing system to discourage use. Amajority of the adult public seeks a better system of control,albeit one which is not punitive toward the user. Apparentlyuneasy about the individual and social consequences of thepresent system, the large center of public opinion is nonethelessreluctant to relinquish formal control. This insistence on maintenance of formal controls over theuser rests upon two interrelated factors: respect for law andfaith in the efficacy of legal control. First, the public doesnot believe the, legal order should wither away simply becausemany people choose to violate the laws against marihuana use.Obedience, of the, law is highly valued in our society. This factor is illustrated clearly by the widespread publicdisagreement with the following arguments for changing the law:76% of the adults disagreed with the statement that "youngpeople would have more respect for the law if marihuana were madelegal;" and four out of five adults disagreed with thestatement that "so many people are using marihuana that itshould be made legal." Second, most adults believe that legal remedies, even thoughnot punitive, are necessary to discourage use of the drug. Thisbelief is tied largely to their understanding of the effects ofthe drug and is reflected in the response to the question about"the best way" to handle the use of marihuana. As wenoted earlier, 51% of the public thought that marihuana use oughtto be handled as a medical problem. Also, the substantial majority of people who are reluctant toincarcerate possessors do prefer the imposition of fines withouta police record or probation. Both of these alternatives retainformal control over the user and indicate faith in the deterrentvalue of the law. The public responses in this respect bear astriking resemblance to those of the judges and probationofficers, who repeatedly indicated a preference for non-punitiveformal control. This interpretation of dominant opinion was drawn fromostensibly inconsistent responses to a long series of questionson appropriate social and legal policy. A substantial minority ofthe public, however, exhibited a consistent pattern of responseto all questions. About a quarter of the public is convinced thatthe criminal sanction should be withdrawn entirely from marihuanause. Another quarter of the public prefers the criminal approach,even for the user. In sum, the existing system is not supported by the consensusof public opinion that once existed. There is a consensus thatpunitive measures are generally inappropriate. There is also apredominant opinion that the legal system should not abandonformal control. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-2IA031-000655-B039-76http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncrec.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112855 text/html 120846HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:28:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:53:24 GMTContent-length: 120627 Marihuana and Social Policy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy "The difficulty in life is the choice." George Moore (1900) A constant tension exists in our society between individualliberties and the need for reasonable societal restraints. It iseasy to go too far in either direction, and this tendency isparticularly evident where drugs are concerned. We have guided our decision-making by the belief that thestate is obliged to justify restraints on individual behavior.Too often individual freedoms are submerged in the passions ofthe moment, and when that happens, the public policy may bedetermined more by rhetoric than by reason. Our effort has beento minimize the emotional and emphasize the rational in thisReport. Drugs In a Free Society A free society seeks to provide conditions in which each ofits members may develop his or her potentialities to the fullestextent. A premium is placed on individual choice in seekingself-fulfillment. This priority depends upon the capacity of freecitizens not to abuse their freedom, and upon their willingnessto act responsibly toward others and toward the society as awhole. Responsible behavior, through individual choice, is boththe guarantor and the objective of a free society. DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The use of drugs is not in itself an irresponsible act.Medical and scientific uses serve important individual and socialneeds and are often essential to our physical and mentalwell-being. Further, the use of drugs for pleasure or othernon-medical purposes is not inherently irresponsible; alcohol iswidely used as an acceptable part of social activities. We do think the use of drugs is clearly irresponsible when itimpedes the individual's integration into the economic and socialsystem. A preference for individual productivity and contributionto social progress in a general sense still undergirds theAmerican value structure, and we emphasize the policy-maker'sduty to support this preference in a public policy judgment. At the same time, in light of the emerging leisure ethic andthe search for individual meaning and fulfillment noted inChapter 1, we cannot divorce social policy from the questionsraised by the recreational use of drugs. Productivity andrecreation both have a place in the American ethical system. Theyare not inconsistent unless the individual's use of leisure timeinhibits his productive role in society. Drugs should be servants, not masters. They become masterswhen they dominate an individual's existence or impair hisfaculties. To the extent that any drug, including alcohol,carries with it risks to the well-being of the user and seriouslyundermines his effectiveness in the society, that drug becomes amatter of concern for public policy. An essential step in the process of policy-formation is adetermination of the circumstances under which use of any givendrug' poses such risks. For some drugs, the risks may be so greatthat all permissible measures should be taken to eliminate use.For other drugs, such risks may be present only under certainspecific circumstances, in which case society may defer toresponsible individual choice on the matter of recreational usebut take appropriate steps to minimize the incidence andconsequences of dysfunctional use. In our Report next year, forwhich studies are already underway, we will consider from thisperspective the whole range of drugs now used for non-medicalpurposes. A Social Control Policy for Marihuana In formulating a Marihuana policy, our strongest concern iswith irresponsible use, whether it be too often, too much,indiscriminate, or under improper circumstances. The excessive orindiscriminate use of any drug is a serious social concern; andthis is particularly true of marihuana since we still know verylittle about the effects of long term, heavy use. We have littledoubt that the substantial majority of users, under any socialcontrol policy, including the existing system, do not and wouldnot engage in irresponsible behavior. In identifying the -appropriate social control policy formarihuana, we have found it helpful to consider the followingpolicy options: I Approval of Use. II Elimination of Use. III Discouragement of Use. IV Neutrality Toward Use. APPROVAL OF USE Society should not approve or encourage the recreational useof any drug, in public or private. Any semblance of encouragementenhances the possibility of abuse and removes, from apsychological standpoint, an effective support of individualrestraint. For example, so long as this society (not only the government,but other institutions and mass advertising as well) in effectapproved of the use of tobacco, the growing medical consensusabout the dangers of excessive use did not make a significantimpression on individual judgment. With the Surgeon General'sReport on Tobacco in 1964, Smoking and Health, a very real changehas occurred in the way society now thinks about cigarettes. The institutions of society definitely add their influences tothe variety of social pressures which persuade individuals to useany kind of drugs. Rational social policy should seek to minimizesuch social pressures, whether they come from peers, from themedia, from social custom, or from the user's sense ofinadequacy. Official approval would inevitably encourage somepeople to use the drug who would not otherwise do so, and wouldalso increase the incidence of heavy or otherwise irresponsibleuse and its complications. On this basis we reject policy optionnumber one, approval of use. ELIMINATION OF USE For a half-century, official social policy has been not onlyto discourage use but to eliminate it (option number two). Withthe principal responsibility for this policy assigned to lawenforcement, its implementation reached its zenith in the late1950's and early 1960's when marihuana-related offenses werepunishable by long periods of incarceration. This policy grew outof a distorted and greatly exaggerated concept of the drug'sordinary effects upon the individual and the society. On thebasis of information then available, marihuana was not adequatelydistinguished from other problem drugs and was assumed to be asharmful as the others. The increased incidence of use, intensive scientificreevaluation, and the spread of use to the middle and uppersocioeconomic groups have brought about the informal adoption ofa modified social policy. On the basis of our opinion surveys andour empirical studies of law enforcement behavior, we areconvinced that officialdom and the public are no longer aspunitive toward marihuana use as they once were. Now there exists a more realistic estimate of the actualsocial impact of marihuana use. School and universityadministrators are seldom able to prevent the use of marihuana bytheir students and personnel and are increasingly reluctant totake disciplinary action against users. Within the criminaljustice system, there has been a marked decline in the severityof the response to offenders charged with possession ofmarihuana. In our survey of state enforcement activities, only 11% of allmarihuana arrests resulted from active investigative activity,and most of those were in sale situations. For the most part,marihuana enforcement is a haphazard process; arrests occur onthe street, in a park, in a car, or as a result of a phone call.Among those arrested, approximately 50% of the adults and 70% ofthe juveniles are not processed through the system; their casesare dismissed by the police, by the prosecutors or by the courts.Ultimately less than 6% of all those apprehended areincarcerated, and very few of these sentences are for possessionof small amounts for personal use. In the law enforcement community, the major concern is nolonger marihuana but the tendency of some users to engage inother irresponsible activity, particularly the use of moredangerous drugs. Official sentiment now seems to be a desire tocontain use of the drug as well as the drug subculture, and tominimize its spread to the rest of the youth population. Lawenforcement policy, both at the Federal and State levels,implicitly recognizes that elimination is impossible at thistime. The active attempt to suppress all marihuana use has beenreplaced by an effort to keep it within reasonable bounds. Yetbecause this policy still reflects a view that marihuana smokingis itself destructive enough to justify punitive action againstthe user, we believe it is an inappropriate social response. Marihuana's relative potential for harm to the vast majorityof individual users and its actual impact on society does notjustify a social policy designed to seek out and firmly punishthose who use it. This judgment is based on prevalent, usepatterns, on behavior exhibited by the vast majority of users andon our interpretations of existing medical and scientific data.This position also is consistent with the estimate by lawenforcement personnel that the elimination of use isunattainable. In the case of experimental or intermittent use of marihuana,there is room for individual judgment. Some members of oursociety believe the decision to use marihuana is an immoraldecision. However, even during Prohibition, when many people wereconcerned about the evils associated with excessive use ofalcohol, possession for personal use was never outlawed federallyand was made illegal in only five States. Indeed, we suspect that the moral contempt in which some ofour citizens hold the marihuana user is related to other behavioror other attitudes assumed to be associated with use of the drug.All of our data suggest that the moral views of the overwhelmingmajority of marihuana users are in general accord with those ofthe larger society. Having previously rejected the approval policy (option numberone), we now reject the eliminationist policy (option numbertwo). This policy, if taken seriously, would require a greatincrease in manpower and resources in order to eliminate the useof a drug which simply does not warrant that kind of attention. DISCOURAGEMENT OR NEUTRALITY The unresolved question is whether society should try todissuade its members from using marihuana or should deferentirely to individual judgment in the matter, remaining benignlyneutral. We must choose between policies of discouragement(number three) and neutrality (number four). This choice is adifficult one and forces us to consider the limitations of ourknowledge and the dynamics of social change. A number ofconsiderations, none of which is conclusive by itself, point atthe present time toward a discouragement policy. We will discusseach one of them separately. 1. User Preference Is Still Ambiguous Alcohol and tobacco have long been desired by large numberswithin our society and their use is deeply ingrained in theAmerican culture. Marihuana, on the other hand, has only recentlyachieved a significant foothold in the American experience, andit is still essentially used more by young people. Again, theunknown factor here is whether the sudden attraction to marihuanaderives from its psychoactive virtues or from its symbolicstatus. Throughout this Commission's deliberations there was arecurring awareness of the possibility that marihuana use may bea fad which, if not institutionalized, will recede substantiallyin time. Present data suggest that this is the case, and we donot hesitate to say that we would prefer that outcome. To theextent that conditions permit, society is well advised tominimize the number of drugs which may cause significantproblems. By focusing our attention on fewer rather than moredrugs, we may be better able to foster responsible use anddiminish the consequences of irresponsible use. The more prudent course seems to be to retain a social policyopposed to use, attempting to discourage use while at the sametime seeking to deemphasize the issue. Such a policy leaves uswith more options available when more definitive knowledge of theconsequences of heavy and prolonged marihuana use becomesavailable. 2. Continuing Scientific Uncertainty Precludes Finality In 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, society was cognizantof the effects of alcohol as a drug and the adverse consequencesof abuse. But, because so many people wished to use the drug,policy-makers chose, to run the risk of individual indiscretionand decided to abandon the abstentionist policy. There are manytoday who feel that if the social, impact of alcohol use had thenbeen more fully understood, a policy of discouragement ratherthan neutrality would have been adopted to minimize the negativeaspects of alcohol use. Misunderstanding also played an important part when thenational government adopted an eliminationist, marihuana policyin 1937. The policy-makers knew very little about the effects orsocial impact of the drug; many of their hypotheses werespeculative and, in large measure, incorrect. Nevertheless, the argument that misinformation in 1937automatically compels complete reversal of the action taken atthat time is neither reasonable nor logical. While continuingconcern about the effects of heavy, chronic use is not sufficientreason to maintain an overly harsh public policy, it is still asignificant argument for choosing official discouragement inpreference to official neutrality. 3. Society's Value System Is In a State of Transition As discussed in Chapter 1, two central influences incontemporary American life are the individual search for meaningwithin the context of an increasingly depersonalized society, andthe collective search for enduring American values. In ChapterIV, we noted that society's present ambivalent response tomarihuana use reflects these uncertainties. For the reasons discussed in the previous Chapters, a suddenabandonment of an official policy of elimination in favor of oneof neutrality toward marihuana would have a profoundreverberating impact on social attitudes far beyond the one issueof marihuana use. We believe that society must have time toconsider its image of the future. We believe that adoption of adiscouragement policy toward marihuana at this time wouldfacilitate such a reappraisal while official neutrality, underpresent circumstances, would impede it. 4. Public Opinion Presently Opposes Marihuana Use For whatever reasons, a substantial majority of the Americanpublic opposes the use of marihuana, and would prefer that theirfellow citizens abstain from using it. In the National Survey,64% of the adult public agreed with the statement that"using marihuana is morally offensive` (40% felt the sameway about alcohol). Although this majority opinion is not by any means conclusive,it cannot be ignored. We are well aware of the skeptics in withwhich marihuana user, and those sympathetic to their wishes, viewthe policy making process; and we are particularly concernedabout the indifference to or disrespect for law manifested bymany citizens and particularly the youth. However, we are also apprehensive about the impact of a majorchange in social policy on that larger segment of our populationwhich supports the implications of the existing social policy.They, too, might lose respect for a policy-making establishmentwhich appeared to bend so easily to the wishes of a"lawless" and highly vocal minority. This concern for minimizing cultural dislocation must, ofcourse, be weighed against the relative importance of contraryarguments. For example, in the case of desegregation in theSouth, and now in the North, cult-Lire shock had to be acceptedin the light of the fundamental precept at issue. In the, case.of marihuana, there is no fundamental principle supporting theuse of the drug, and society is not compelled to approve or beneutral toward it. The opinion of the majority is entitled togreater weight. Looking again to the, experience with Prohibition, when anabstentionist policy for alcohol was adopted on the nationallevel in 1918, its proponents were not blind to the vociferousopposition of a substantial minority of the people. By the late1920's and early 1930's, the ambivalence of public opinion towardalcohol use and the unwillingness of large numbers of people tocomply with the new social policy compelled reversal of thatpolicy. Even many of its former supporters acknowledged itsfutility. With marihuana, however, the prevailing policy of eliminatinguse had never been opposed to any significant degree until themid-1960's. Unlike the prohibition of alcohol, which had been thesubject of public debate off and on for 60 years before it wasadopted, present marihuana policy has not until now engaged thepublic opinion process, some 50 years after it first began to beused. Majority sentiment does not appear to be as flexible as itwas with alcohol. 5. Neutrality Is Not Philosophically Compelled Much of what was stated above bespeaks an acute awareness bythe Commission of the subtleties of the collective consciousnessof the American people, as shown in the National Survey. There isa legitimate concern about what the majority of the non-usingpopulation thinks about marihuana use and what the drugrepresents in the public mind. The question is appropriatelyasked if we are suggesting that the majority in a free societymay impose its will on an unwilling minority even though, as itis claimed, uncertainty, speculation, and a large degree ofmisinformation form the basis of the predominant opinion. If wehave nothing more substantial than this, the argument goes,society should remain neutral. To deal with this contention, one must distinguish betweenends and means. Policy-makers must choose their objectives with asensitivity toward the entire social fabric and a vision of thegood society. In such a decision, the general public attitude isa significant consideration. The preferred outcome in ademocratic society cannot be that of the policy-makers alone; itmust be that of an informed public. Accordingly, the policy-makermust consider the dynamic relationship between perception andreality in the public mind. Is the public consensus based on areal awareness of the facts? Does the public really understandwhat is at stake? Given the best evidence available, would thepublic consensus remain the same? Assuming that dominant opinion opposes marihuana use, thephilosophical issue is raised not by the goal but by how it isimplemented. At this point, the interests of the unwilling becomeimportant. For example, the family unit and the institution ofmarriage are preferred means of group-living and child-rearing inour society. As a society, we are not neutral. We officiallyencourage matrimony by giving married couples favorable taxtreatment; but we do not compel people to get married. If itshould become public policy to try to reduce the birth rate, itis unlikely that there will be laws to punish those who exceedthe preferred family size, although we may again utilizedisincentives through the tax system. Similarly, this Commissionbelieves society should continue actively to discourage peoplefrom using marihuana, and any philosophical limitation isrelevant to the means employed, not to the goal itself. FOR THESE REASONS, WE RECOMMEND TO THE PUBLIC AND ITSPOLICY-MAKERS A SOCIAL CONTROL POLICY SEEKING TO DISCOURAGEMARIHUANA USE, WHILE CONCENTRATING PRIMARILY ON THE PREVENTION OFHEAVY AND VERY HEAVY USE. We emphasize that this is a policy for today and the immediatefuture; we do not presume to suggest that this policy embodieseternal truth. Accordingly, we strongly recommend that oursuccessor policy planners, at an appropriate time in the future,review the following factors to determine whether an alteredsocial policy is in order: the state of public opinion, theextent to which members of the society continue to use the drug,the developing scientific knowledge about the effects and socialimpact of use of the drug, and the evolving social attitudetoward the place of recreation and leisure in a work-orientedsociety. In our second Report next year, we will carefully reviewour findings to see if our perceptions have changed or if societyhas changed at that time. Implementing The Discouragement Policy Choice of this social control policy does not automaticallydictate any particular legal implementation. As we noted inChapter 1, there is a disturbing tendency among participants inthe marihuana debate to assume that a given statement of thedrug's effects, its number of users or its social impact compelsa particular statutory scheme. Law does not operate in a social vacuum, and it is only one ofthe institutional mechanisms which society can utilize toimplement its policies. Consequently, the evaluation ofalternative legal approaches demands not only logic but also adelicate assessment of the mutual relationship between the lawand other institutions of social control, such as the church, thefamily and the school. THE ROLE OF LAW IN EFFECTIVE SOCIAL CONTROL Social control is most effectively guaranteed by the exerciseof individual self-discipline. Elementary social psychologyteaches us that restraint generated within is infinitely moreeffective and tenacious than restraint imposed from without. One of the participants at our "Central Influences"Seminar observed: When people grow up into a society, the principal aim is to internalize drives-that is, I assume they come up 'with certain drives which can be satisfied in many ways and you're trying to internalize, ways of satisfying those drives which will be compatible with life in a community and also satisfying to the individual. The external restraints can only complement this, they cannot possibly substitute for it. The supplemental effect of external restraints, particularlylegal restraints, must also be weighed against the nature of thecontrol sought. It was put this way at our Seminar: Think of the social welfare function as a mountain-the hill ofthe Lords really. Large parts of it are something of a plateau;that is you can be all sorts of places on it and be safe. Youdon't have to maximize. This is an economist's fallacy. You canhave all sorts of variations, you can be Socialists, Capitalists,Mormons, Adventists and get away with it-even Liberals. But thereare cliffs, and you can fall off of them. This is what we areworrying about today. We are nervous about these cliffs. The "no-no's"-as the kids call them-are the fenceson these cliffs. That is, we have set up taboos and say there's acliff there. Now -one of the problems socially is that we set up"no-no's" where there are no cliffs. There are nocliffs and people jump over these [fences] and they say, "Nocliffs! See no cliffs!" [Then, over other fences-and]chop-chop-chop-crash! See, it's just as dangerous to set upfences without any cliffs as not have fences where there arecliffs. To this functional consideration of external restraint, wemust also add the philosophical faith in the responsible exerciseof individual judgment which is the essence of a free society. Toillustrate, a preference for individual productivity underliesthis society's opposition to indiscriminate drug use, the factthat so few of the 24 million Americans who have tried marihuanause it, or have used it, irresponsibly, testifies to the extentto which they have internalized that value. The hypothesis that widespread irresponsibility would attendfreer availability of marihuana suggests not that a restrictivepolicy is in order but rather that a basic premise of our freesociety is in doubt. We note that the escalation thesis, used asan argument against marihuana rather than as a tool forunderstanding individual behavior, is really a manifestation ofskepticism about individual vulnerabilities. For example,one-half of the public agreed with the statement that "ifmarihuana were made legal, it would make drug addicts out ofordinary people." At the same time, we do feel that the threat of excessive useis most potent with the young. In fact, we think all drug useshould continue to be discouraged among the young, because ofpossible adverse effects on psychological development and becauseof the lesser ability of this part of the population todiscriminate between limited and excessive use. Social policy implementation in this regard is extraordinarilydifficult. For example, although existing social policies towardtobacco, alcohol and marihuana alike oppose their use by theyoung, those policies are far from being fully effective. Forexample: Tobacco The National Survey (1971) indicates that of young people age12-to-17, 50 % have smoked at one, time or another; 15% smoke now; and At least 8% smoke at least a half a pack a day. In a 1970 sample of smoking habits in the 12-to-18 populationconducted for the National Clearinghouse for Smoking and Health,it was found that: 18.5% of the boys and 11.9% of the girls were regular smokers; and About 8% of the boys and 5% of the girls smoked more than a half a pack a day. Alcohol The National Survey also ascertained the drinking patternduring the previous month of young people aged 12-to-17, findingthat: At least 23% had used beer during that month, at least 14% had used wine and at least 12% had used hard liquor; and 6% had used beer five or more days during the months 3% had used wine five or more days, and 3% had used hard liquor five or more days. Marihuana Of the 12-to-17 population, the Survey found that: 15% of this population had tried marihuana; At least 6 % still use it; and Less than 1% use it once a day or more The inclination of so many young people to experiment withdrugs is a reflection of a so-called successful socializationprocess on one hand, and of society's ambivalence to the use ofdrugs on the other. This entire matter will occupy much of ourattention in the coming year, but it is essential that we make afew anticipatory comments now. This nation tries very had to instill in its childrenindependence, curiosity and a healthy self-assurance. Thesequalities guarantee a dynamic, progressive society. Where drugsare concerned, however, we have relied generally onauthoritarianism and on obedience. Drug education has generallybeen characterized by overemphasis of scare tactics. Somesegments of the population have been reluctant to inform for fearof arousing curiosity in young minds. Where drugs are concerned,young people are simply supposed to nod and obey. - This society has always been and continues to be ambivalentabout the non-medical (in the strict sense) use of drugs. Andthis ambivalence does not escape our children. If we can come togrips with this issue, we might convince our youth that thecuriosity that is encouraged in other aspects of our culture isundesirable where drugs are concerned. The law is at best a highly imperfect reflection of drugpolicy. The laws proscribing sale of tobacco to minors arelargely ignored. Prohibitions of sale of alcohol to minors areenforced sporadically. As to marihuana, there are areasthroughout this nation where possession laws are not enforced atall. In other sections, such proscriptions are strictly enforced,with no apparent decrease in marihuana use. As a guiding doctrine for parents and children, the law iscertainly confusing when it imposes widely varying punishments indifferent states, and even in different courts of the same state,all for use of the same substance, marihuana. That marihuana usecan be treated as a petty offense in one state and a felony inanother is illogical and confusing to even the most sincere ofparents. The law is simply too blunt an instrument to manifest thesubtle distinctions we draw between the motivations and thecircumstances of use. At the same time, legal status carries acertain weight of its own, and other institutions must takeaccount of the law in performing their functions. In legally implementing our recommended social policy, we seekto maximize the ability of our schools, churches and families tobe open and honest in discussing all drugs, including marihuana.The law must assist, not impede. In this respect, we note withconcern the counterproductive tendency in our society to seeksimple solutions to complex problems. Since the statutory law isa simple tool, the tendency in our society to look to the law forsocial control is particularly strong. We have discussed the four basic social policy objectives ofelimination, discouragement, neutrality and approval of marihuanause and have selected discouragement of use, with emphasis onprevention of heavy and very heavy use, as our generalized aim.We have considered three legal responses, each with a wide rangeof alternatives: 1. Total Prohibition. 2. Partial Prohibition. 3. Regulation. TOTAL PROHIBITION The distinctive feature of a total prohibition scheme is thatall marihuana-related behavior is prohibited by law. Under thetotal prohibition response now in force in every state and at thefederal level, cultivation, importation, sale, gift or othertransfer, and possession are all prohibited acts. In 11 statesand the District of Columbia, simply being present knowingly in aplace where marihuana is present is also prohibited; and manystates prohibit the possession of pipes or other smokingparaphernalia. For our purposes, the key feature of the totalprohibition approach is that even possession of a small amount inthe home for personal use is prohibited by criminal law. From the very inception of marihuana control legislation, thisnation has utilized a policy of a total prohibition, far morecomprehensive than the restrictions established during theprohibition of alcohol. Until recent years, society was operating under aneliminationist policy. The exaggerated beliefs about the drug'seffects, social impact, and user population virtually dictatedthis legal approach. During this entire, period, totalprohibition was sought through the use of heavier and heavierpenalties until even first-time possession was a felony in everyjurisdiction, and second possession offenses generally received amandatory minimum sentence without parole or probation. Yet thelast few years have seen society little by little abandoning theeliminationist policy in favor of a containment policy. Under the total prohibition umbrella, this containment policyhas been implemented by a unique patchwork of legislation,informal prosecutorial policy and judicial practice. Possessionis now almost everywhere a misdemeanor. Although some term ofincarceration remains as a penalty for possessors, it isgenerally not meted out to young first offenders or to possessorsof small -amounts. Instead, most such offenders are dismissed orinformally diverted to agencies outside the criminal system bythose within the system who are trying to help them avoid thestigma of a criminal record. Offenders who are processed within the criminal justice systemgenerally receive fines and/or probation. In many jurisdictions,enforcement officials make little or no effort to enforcepossession proscriptions, concentrating instead on majortrafficking. Possessors are generally arrested only when they areindiscreet or when marihuana is found incident to questioning orapprehension resulting from some other violation. From oursurveys, state and federal, we have found that only minimaleffort is made to investigate marihuana possession cases. Such a tendency is a reflection of the adoption of acontainment policy. By acting only when marihuana appears aboveground, enforcement officials are helping to keep its useunderground. The shift away from the elimination policy has beenmatched by a similar shift in legal implementation, but thedistinctive feature of the total prohibition scheme stillremains: all marihuana-related behavior, including possession forpersonal use within the home, is prohibited by criminal law. Is such a response an appropriate technique for achieving thesocial control policy we outlined above? The key question for ourpurposes is whether total criminal prohibition is the mostsuitable or effective way to discourage use and whether itfacilitates or inhibits a concentration on the reduction andtreatment of irresponsible use. We are convinced that totalprohibition frustrates both of these objectives for the followingreasons. 1. Application of the Criminal Law to Private Possession IsPhilosophically Inappropriate With possession and use of marihuana, we are dealing with aform of behavior which occurs generally in private where a personpossesses the drug for his own use. The social impact of thisconduct is indirect, arising primarily in cases of heavy orotherwise irresponsible use and from the drugs symbolic aspects. We do not take the absolutistposition that society is philosophically forbidden fromcriminalizing any kind of "private" behavior. Thephrase "victimless crimes," like "public, healthhazard, has become a rhetorical excuse for avoiding basic socialpolicy issues. We have chosen a discouragement policy on thebasis of our evaluation of the actual and potential individualand social impact of marihuana use. Only now that we have done socan we accord appropriate weight to the nation's philosophicalpreference for individual privacy. On the basis of this evaluation we believe that the criminallaw is too harsh a tool to apply to personal possession even inthe effort to discourage use. It implies an overwhelmingindictment of the behavior which we believe is not appropriate.The actual and potential harm of use of the drug is not greatenough to justify intrusion by the criminal law into privatebehavior, a step which our society takes only 'with the greatestreluctance. 2. Application of the Criminal Law Is ConstitutionallySuspect The preference for individual privacy reflected in the debateover the philosophical limitations on the criminal law is alsomanifested in our constitutional jurisprudence. Although nocourt, to our knowledge, has held that government may notprohibit private possession of marihuana, two overlappingconstitutional traditions do have important public policyimplications in this area. The first revolves around the concept that in a free society,the legislature may act only for public purposes. The"police powers" of the states extend only to the"public health, safety and morals." In the period ofour history when the people most feared interference with theirrights by the government, it was generally accepted that thisbroad power had an inherent limitation. For example, earlyprohibitions of alcohol possession were declared unconstitutionalon the basis of reasoning such as that employed by the SupremeCourt of Kentucky in 1915 in the case of Commonwealth v.Campbell: It is not within the competency of government to invade theprivacy of the citizen's life and to regulate his conduct inmatters in which alone is concerned, or to prohibit him anyliberty the exercise which will not directly injure society. Noting that the defendant was "not charged with havingthe liquor in his possession for the purpose of selling it, oreven giving it to another," and that "ownership andpossession cannot be denied when that ownership and possession isnot in itself injurious to the public," the Kentucky courtconcluded that: The right to use liquor for one's own comfort, if they useit without injury to the public, is one of the citizen's naturaland inalienable rights.... We hold that the police power-vagueand wide and undefined as it is-has limits. . . . Even the perceived dangers of opium were not enough toconvince some members of the judiciary that the government couldprohibit possession. It is historically instructive to considerthese words, penned in 1890, by Judge Scott in Ah Lim vTerritory: I make no question but that the habit of smoking opium maybe repulsive and degrading. That its effect would be to shatterthe nerves and destroy the intellect; and that it may tend to theincrease of the pauperism and crime. But there is a vastdifference between the commission of a single act, and aconfirmed habit. There is a distinction to be recognized betweenthe use and abuse of any article or substance.... If this actmust be held valid it is hard to conceive of any legislativeaction affecting the personal conduct, or privileges of theindividual citizen, that must not be upheld.... The prohibitedact cannot affect the public in any way except through theprimary personal injury to the individual, if it occasions himany injury. It looks like a new and extreme step under ourgovernment in the field of legislation, if it really was passedfor any of the purposes upon which that character of legislationcan be sustained, if at all. As a matter of constitutional history, a second tradition, theapplication of specific provisions in the Bill of Rights, hasgenerally replaced the notion of "inherent"limitations. The ultimate effect is virtually the same, however.The Fourth Amendment's proscription of "unreasonablesearches and seizures" reflects a constitutional commitmentto the value of individual privacy. The importance of the FourthAmendment to the entire, constitutional scheme was eloquentlydescribed by Justice Brandeis in 1928 in the case of Olmstead vU.S.: The makers of our Constitution undertook to secureconditions favorable to the pursuit of happiness. They recognizedthe significance of man's spiritual nature, of his feelings andhis intellect. They knew that only a part of the pain, pleasureand satisfaction of life are to be found in material things. Theysought to protect Americans in their beliefs, their thoughts,their emotions and their sensations. They conferred, as againstthe Government, the right to be let alone-the most comprehensiveof rights and the right most valued by civilized men. Although the Fourth Amendment is itself a proceduralprotection, the value of privacy which it crystallizes is oftenread in conjunction with other important values to setsubstantive limits on legislative power. The Supreme Court, inthe case of Griswold vs. Connecticut, held in 1965 thatConnecticut could not constitutionally prohibit the use of birthcontrol devices by married persons. Although the Justices did notagree completely on the reasons for their decision, JusticeDouglas stated in the opinion of the Court: The present case, then, concerns a relationship lyingwithin the zone of privacy created by several fundamentalconstitutional guarantees. And it concerns a law which, inforbidding the use of contraceptives rather than regulating theirmanufacture or sale, seeks to achieve its goals by means ofhaving a maximum destructive impact upon that relationship. Sucha law cannot stand in light of the familiar principle, so oftenapplied by this Court, that a "governmental purpose tocontrol or prevent activities constitutionally subject to stateregulation may not be achieved by means which sweep unnecessarilybroadly and thereby invade the area of protected freedom."(citation omitted) Would we allow the police to search the sacredprecincts of marital bedrooms for telltale signs of the use ofcontraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to the notions ofprivacy surrounding the marriage relationship. Four years later, the Supreme Court, in Stanley v. Georgia,held that even though obscenity is not "speech"protected by the First Amendment, a state cannot constitutionallymake private possession of obscene material a crime. The Court'sreasoning is revealed in the following language: [The] right to receive information and ideas, regardless oftheir social worth, (citation omitted), is fundamental to ourfree society. Moreover, in the context of this case- aprosecution for mere possession of printed or filmed matter inthe privacy of a person's own home-that right takes on an addeddimension. For also fundamental is the right to be free, exceptin very limited circumstances, from unwanted governmentalintrusions into one's privacy ... While the judiciary is the governmental institution mostdirectly concerned with the protection of individual liberties,all policy-makers have a responsibility to consider ourconstitutional heritage when framing public policy. Regardless ofwhether or not the courts would overturn a prohibition ofpossession of marihuana for personal use in the home, we arenecessarily influenced by the high place traditionally occupiedby the value of privacy in our constitutional scheme. Accordingly, we believe that government must show a compellingreason to justify invasion of the home in order to preventpersonal use of marihuana. We find little in marihuana's effectsor in its social impact to support such a determination.Legislators enacting Prohibition did not find such a compellingreason 40 years ago; and we do not find the situation any morecompelling for marihuana today. 3. Total Prohibition Is Functionally Inappropriate Apart from the philosophical and constitutional constraintsoutlined above, a total prohibition scheme carries with itsignificant institutional costs. Yet it contributes very littleto the achievement of our social policy. In some ways it actuallyinhibits the success of that policy. The primary goals of a prudent marihuana social control policyinclude preventing irresponsible use of the drug, attending tothe consequences of such use, and deemphasizing use in general.Yet an absolute prohibition of possession and use inhibits theability of other institutions to contribute actively to theseobjectives. For example, the possibility of criminal prosecutiondeters users who are experiencing medical problems from seekingassistance for fear of bring attention to themselves. Inaddition, the illegality of possession and use createsdifficulties in achieving an open, honest educational program,both in the schools and in the home. In terms of the social policy objective of discouraging use ofthe drug, the legal system can assist that objective in threeways: first, by deterring people from use; second, by symbolizingsocial opposition to use; and finally, by cutting off supply ofthe drug. The present illegal status of possession has not discouragedan estimated 24 million people from trying marihuana or anestimated eight million from continuing to use it. Our survey ofthe country's state prosecuting attorneys shows that 53% of themdo not believe that the law has more than a minimal deterrenteffect in this regard. Moreover, if the present trend towardpassive enforcement of the marihuana law continues, the lawultimately will deter only indiscreet use, a result achieved aswell by a partial prohibition scheme and with a great deal morehonesty and fairness. A major attraction of the law has been its symbolic value.Yet, society can symbolize its desire to discourage marihuana usein many other, less restrictive ways. The warning labels oncigarette packages serve this purpose, illustrating that even aregulatory scheme could serve a discouragement policy. DuringProhibition, the chosen statutory implementation symbolizedsociety's opposition to the use of intoxicating beverages; yet,most jurisdictions did not think it necessary to superimpose aproscription of possession for personal use in the home. Finally, prohibiting possession for personal use has nosubstantive relation to interdicting supply. A possession penaltymay make enforcement of proscriptions against sale a littleeasier, but we believe this benefit is of minimal importance inlight of its costs. The law enforcement goal repeatedly stated at both the federaland state levels has been the elimination of supply and theinterdiction of trafficking. These avowed aims of law enforcementmake sense, since they are the most profitable means of employingits manpower and resources in this area. Indeed, the time consumed in arresting Possessors isinefficiently used when contrasted with the same amount of timeinvested in apprehending major dealers. Although a credibleeffort to eliminate supply requires prohibitions of importation,sale and possession-with intent-to-sell, the enforcement of aproscription of possession for personal use is minimallyproductive. As noted, most law enforcement officials, district attorneysand judges recognize the ineffectiveness of the possessionpenalty. as a deterrent. Its perpetuation results in the makingof what is commonly referred to as "cheap" cases thathave little or no impact on deterring sale. The marihuana supply system can be viewed as pyramid with themajor bulk of marihuana entering the system at top of the pyramidand then descending to the base which represents the userpopulation. Common sense dictates where law enforcement shoulddevote its efforts. To remove the profit from the trafficrequires arresting sellers, not users. The oft-heard argumentthat the police need possession penalties to compel users toreveal their sources is not convincing. "Turninginformants" at the base of the pyramid is of marginal valueand limited utility in reaching upwards toward the apex. Further,the National Survey showed that 60% of the users don't"buy" marihuana but get it from a friend. The volume oftraffic in the drug at these levels is at best minimal. In short, personal possession arrests and even casual sales,which account for more than 95% of the marihuana arrests at thestate local level, occur too low in the chain of distribution todiminish supply very effectively. In addition to the misallocation of enforcement resources,another consequence of prohibition against possession forpersonal use is the social cost of criminalizing large numbers ofusers. Our empirical study of enforcement of state and federalmarihuana laws indicates that almost all of those arrested arebetween the ages of 18 and 25, most have jobs or are in school,and most have had no prior contact -with the criminal justicesystem. The high social cost of stigmatizing such persons ascriminals is now generally acknowledged by the public at large aswell as by those in the criminal justice system. According to the National Survey, 53% of the public wasunwilling to give young users a criminal record and 87% objectedto putting them in jail. The nation's judges expressed anoverwhelming disinclination to sentence and convict users formarihuana possession. Of these judges only 13% thought it wasappropriate to incarcerate ail adult for possession and only 4%would jail a juvenile for marihuana possession. Thisdisinclination is reflected in the low percentage of arrestedusers who are convicted, and the even lower percentage who arejailed. Even among the nation's prosecutors, a substantial majorityfavor the present trend toward avoiding incarceration for firstoffenders. Most jurisdictions have devised informal proceduresfor disposing of cases in lieu of prosecution. Our empiricalstudy shows that 48% of the adult cases, and 70% of the juvenilecases, were dropped from the system at some point between arrestand conviction. The picture displayed is one of a largeexpenditure of police manpower to enforce a law most participantsfurther along the line are not anxious to apply. Other disturbing consequences of laws proscribing possessionfor personal use are the techniques required to enforce them.Possession of marihuana is generally a private behavior; in orderto find it, the police many times must operate on the edge ofconstitutional limitations. Arrests without probable cause,illegal searches and selective enforcement occur often enough toarouse concern about the integrity of the criminal process. Yet another consequence of marihuana possession laws is theclogging of judicial calendars. President Nixon has noted thatone of the major impediments to our nation's efforts to combatserious crimes is the fact that the judicial machinery moves soslowly. Swift -arrests, prosecution, trial and sentence wouldsignificantly improve the deterrent effect of law. Yet thejudicial system is overloaded with petty cases, with publicdrunkenness accounting for about 50% of all non-traffic offenses. In his March 1971 address to the National Conference on theJudiciary, President Nixon said: What can be done to break the logjam of justice today, toensure the right to a speedy trial-and to enhance respect forlaw? We have to find ways to clear the courts of the endlessstream of "victimless crimes" that get in the way ofserious consideration of serious crimes. There are more importantmatters for highly skilled judges and prosecutors than minortraffic offenses, loitering and drunkenness. To this list we would add marihuana possession, which accountsfor a rising percentage, of judicial caseloads. In Chicago alone,during the last half of 1970, there were more than 4,000possession arrests. A final cost of the possession laws is the disrespect whichthe laws and their enforcement engender in the young. Our youthcannot understand why society chooses to criminalize behaviorwith so little visible ill-effect or adverse social impact,particularly when so many members of the law enforcementcommunity also question the same laws. These young people havejumped the fence and found no cliff. And the disrespect for thepossession laws fosters a disrespect for all law and the systemin general. On top of all this is the distinct impression among the youththat police may use the marihuana laws to arrest people theydon't like for other reasons, whether it be their politics, theirhair style or their ethnic background. Whether or not suchselectivity actually exists, it is perceived to exist. For all these reasons, we believe that the possession offenseis of little functional benefit to the discouragement policy andcarries heavy social costs, not the least of which is disrespectand cynicism among some of the young. Accordingly, even under ourpolicy of discouraging marihuana use, the better method ispersuasion rather than prosecution. Additionally, with the saleand use of more hazardous drugs on the increase, and crimes ofviolence escalating, we do not believe that the criminal justicesystem can afford the time and the costs of implementing themarihuana possession laws. Since these laws are not mandatory interms of achieving the discouragement policy, law enforcementshould be allowed to do the job it is best able to do: handlingsupply and distribution. A criminal fine or similar penalty for possession has beensuggested as a means of alleviating some of the more glaringcosts of a total prohibitory approach yet still retaining thesymbolic disapproval of the criminal law. However, most of theobjections raised above would still pertain: the possibilities ofinvasion of personal privacy and selective enforcement of the lawwould continue; possessors would still be stigmatized ascriminals, incurring the economic and social consequences ofinvolvement with the criminal law; the symbolic status ofmarihuana smoking as an anti-establishment act would beperpetuated. On the other hand, a fine most likely would deter use no morethan does the present possibility of incarceration. It wouldcontinue to impede treatment for heavy and very heavy use andwould persist in directing law enforcement away from the policy'sessential aim which is to halt illegal traffic in the drug. For all these reasons, we reject the total prohibitionapproach and its variations. REGULATION Another general technique for implementing the recommendedsocial policy is regulation. The distinguishing feature of thistechnique is that it institutionalizes the availability of thedrug. By establishing a legitimate channel of supply -anddistribution, society can theoretically control the quality andpotency of the product. The major alternatives within thisapproach lie in the variety of restraints which can be imposed onconsumption of the drug and on the informational requirements towhich its distribution can be subject. We have given serious consideration to this set ofalternatives; however, we are unanimously of the opinion thatsuch a scheme, no matter how tightly it might restrictconsumption, is presently unacceptable. 1. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme at this Time WouldInevitably Signify Approval of Use In rejecting the total prohibition approach, we emphasized thesymbolic aspects. In essence, we do not believe prohibition ofpossession for personal use is necessary to symbolize a socialpolicy disapproving the use. Theoretically, a tightly controlledregulatory schemes with limited distribution outlets, significantrestraints on consumption prohibition of advertising andcompulsory labeling, could possibly symbolize such disapproval.Our regulatory policy toward tobacco is beginning to slowly toreflect a disapproval policy toward Cigarette smoking.Nonetheless, given the social and historical context of such amajor shift in legal policy toward marihuana, we are certain thatsuch a change would instead symbolize approval of use, or atleast a position of neutrality. The Commission is concerned that even neutrality toward use asa matter of policy could invest an otherwise transient phenomenonwith the status of an accepted behavior. If marihuana smokingwere an already ingrained part of our culture, this objectionwould be dispelled. However, we do not believe that this is thecase,. We are inclined to believe, instead, that the presentinterest in marihuana is transient and will diminish in time ofits own accord once the major symbolic aspects of use aredeemphasized, leaving among our population only a relativelysmall coterie of users. With this possibility in mind, we arehesitant to adopt either a policy of neutrality or a regulatoryimplementation of our discouragement policy. The law wouldinevitably lose its discouragement character and would becomeeven more ambiguous in its rationale and its enforcement. The effect of changing a social policy direction may be seenwith tobacco policy. In recent years, society has ostensiblyadopted a policy of discouraging cigarette smoking. This newpolicy has been implemented primarily in the information areathrough prohibition of some forms of advertising and throughcompulsory labeling. Yet, the volume, of cigarettes usedincreased last year. We believe that the failure of the newpolicy results from the fact that it supplants one that formerlyapproved use. This set of circumstances argues against any policywhich would be regarded as approval of use, including aregulatory scheme. It is always extremely difficult to transforma previously acceptable behavior into a disapproved behavior. 2. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme Might Generate aSignificant Public Health Problem We noted above that institutionalizing availability of thedrug would inevitably increase the incidence of use, even thoughthat incidence might otherwise decrease. Of greater concern isthe prospect that a larger incidence of use would result in alarger incidence of long term heavy and very heavy use of potentpreparations. There are -now approximately 500,000 heavy users of lesspotent preparations in this country, representing about 2% ofthose who ever tried the drug. Even if the prevalence of -heavyuse remained the same in relation to those who ever used, thisat-risk population would inevitably increase under a regulatoryscheme. If the emotional disturbances found in very heavy hashishusers in other countries were to occur in this country, theadverse social impact of marihuana use, now slight, wouldincrease substantially. We have acknowledged that society, nonetheless, chose to runsuch a risk in 1933, when Prohibition was repealed. But alcoholuse was already well-established in this society, and noalternative remained other than a regulatory approach. In lightof our suspicion that interest in marihuana is largely transient,it would be imprudent to run that risk for marihuana today. 3. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme Would Exacerbate SocialConflict and Frustrate a Deemphasis Policy A significant segment of the public on both sides of the issueviews marihuana and its "legalization" in a highlysymbolic way. Any attempt to adopt a regulatory approach nowwould be counterproductive in this respect. The collision ofvalues resulting from such a dramatic shift of policy wouldmaintain the debate at a highly emotional level and wouldperpetuate the tendency to perceive marihuana use as a symbol ofthe struggle between two conflicting philosophies. 4. Not Enough Is Known About Regulatory Models In This Area Advocates of legalization of marihuana are often inclined topropose a licensing scheme or an "alcohol model"without offering a specific program of regulation taking all thevariables into account. Responsible policy planning cannot be socursory. Consequently, we have given serious study to the manyissues presented by such a scheme and to the nation's experiencewith other drug licensing schemes. On the basis of our inquiry,we are convinced that such a step should not be taken unless arealistic assessment of the efficacy of existing schemes andtheir potential application to marihuana indicates it would besuccessful. Such an assessment raises a number of disturbingquestions. The regulatory approaches which this nation has used in thecases of alcohol and tobacco have failed to accomplish two oftheir most important objectives: the minimization of excessiveuse and the limitation of accessibility to the young. Despite thewarning and restraints on distribution and consumption, more than50 million Americans smoke cigarettes regularly, and more thannine million Americans are "problem" drinkers. We havepreviously cited data indicating how many of our children beginhabits which have been legally forbidden to them. Since the younguser and the chronic user of marihuana are of primary concern toour public health officials, the lack of success with alcohol andtobacco discourages an assumption that the regulation of supplywould minimize use by the younger generation. Another important purpose of a regulatory scheme is to channelthe product through a controlled system of supply anddistribution. In that way the quality and quantity of thesubstance can be regulated. The efficacy of such a scheme asapplied to marihuana is questionable. Cannabis can be grown easily almost anywhere in the UnitedStates with little or no human assistance. Even if a legitimatesource of supply were established, it is likely that many personswould choose to ignore the legitimate source and grow their own,the purity of which would not be in question. If such a practicewere illegal, the necessity for a concerted governmentaleradication program is raised, which would involve a monumentallaw enforcement effort. According to the U.S. Department ofAgriculture, there are presently an estimated five million acresof wild marihuana growing in this country and an undeterminednumber of acres under cultivation. Yet, if such a practice were not forbidden, therevenue-raising, product-control and consumption-restrictionfeatures of a regulatory scheme would be threatened. Instructiveto note is the fact that intensive regulation of alcoholicbeverage production 'has not eliminated illicit production.During 1970, in fact, 5,228 illegal stills were destroyed by theAlcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Division of the U.S. Treasury and5,279 persons were arrested. In 1971, 3,327 illegal stills weredestroyed and 5,512 persons were arrested. Another disturbing question is raised by the issue of potencyregulation. Most advocates of legalization stipulate potencylimitations as one feature of their scheme. Presumably they wouldlimit the THC content of the regulated product. This is not aneasy undertaking. Especially when cannabis is so easily grown anda black market is so easily created, we are dubious about thesuccess of a regulatory scheme distributing only a product withlow THC content. Again, attention must be paid the prospect ofincreased hashish use under a regulatory scheme; merelystipulating potency control is not sufficient. As we noted inChapter II, the heavy, long-term use of hashish is a source ofmajor concern to the Commission from both private and publichealth standpoints. These are a few of the problems confronting the policy-makerif be seeks to devise an effective regulatory system ofdistribution for what is, in fact, a universally common plant.Our doubts about the efficacy of existing regulatory schemes,together with an uncertainty about the permanence of socialinterest in marihuana and the approval inevitably implied byadoption of such a scheme, all impel us to reject the regulatoryapproach as an appropriate implementation of a discouragementpolicy at the present time. Future policy planners might well come to a differentconclusion if further study of existing schemes suggests afeasible model; if responsible use of the drug does indeed takeroot in our society; if continuing scientific and medicalresearch uncovers no long-term ill effects; if potency controlappears feasible and if the passage of time and the adoption of arational social policy sufficiently desymbolizes marihuana sothat availability is not equated in the public mind withapproval. PARTIAL PROHIBITION The total prohibition scheme was rejected primarily because nosufficiently compelling social reason, predicated on existingknowledge, justifies intrusion by the criminal justice systeminto the private lives of individuals who use marihuana. TheCommission is of the unanimous opinion that marihuana use is notsuch a grave problem that individuals who smoke marihuana, andpossess it for that purpose, should be subject to criminalprocedures. On the other hand, we have also rejected theregulatory or legalization scheme because it wouldinstitutionalize availability of a drug which has uncertainlong-term effects and which may be of transient social interest. Instead we recommend a partial prohibition scheme which wefeel has the following benefits: Symbolizing a continuing societal discouragement of use; Facilitating the deemphasis of marihuana essential toanswering dispassionately so many of the unanswered questions; Permitting a simultaneous medical, educational, religious, andparental effort to concentrate on reducing irresponsible use andremedying its consequences; Removing the criminal stigma and the threat of incarcerationfrom a widespread behavior (possession for personal use) whichdoes not warrant such treatment; Relieving the law enforcement community of the responsibilityfor enforcing a law of questionable utility, and one which theycannot fully enforce, thereby allowing concentration on drugtrafficking and crimes against persons and property; Relieving the judicial calendar of a large volume of marihuanapossession cases which delay the processing of more seriouscases; and Maximizing the flexibility of future public responses as newinformation comes to light. No major change is required in existing law to achieve all ofthese benefits. In general, we recommend only a decriminalizationof possession of marihuana for personal use on both the state andfederal levels. The major features of the recommended scheme arethat: production and distribution of the drug would remaincriminal activities as would possession with intent to distributecommercially; marihuana would be contraband subject toconfiscation in public places; and criminal sanctions would bewithdrawn from private use and possession incident to such use,but, at the state level, fines would be imposed for use inpublic.* Specifically, we recommend the following statutory schemes. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FEDERAL LAW Under the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Actof 1970, Congress provided the following scheme with respect tomarihuana, by which was meant only the natural plant and itsvarious parts, not the synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) : Cultivation, importation and exportation, and sale or distribution for profit of marihuana are all felonies punishable by imprisonment for up to five years for a first offense and by up to 10 years for a second offense (the available penalty is doubled for sale to a minor). Possession of marihuana with intent to distribute is a felony punishable by imprisonment for up to five years for the first offense and by up to 10 years for a second offense. Possession of marihuana for personal use is a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in jail and a $1,000 fine for first offense and by up to two years in jail and a $2,000 fine for second offense (expungement of criminal record is available for first offenders). Transfer of a small amount of marihuana for no remuneration is a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in jail and a $1,000 fine for first offense and by up to two years in jail and a $2,000 fine for second offense (Congress singled out marihuana in this way to allow misdemeanor treatment of casual transfers and permitted first offender treatment, as allowed for possession for personal use). The Commission recommends only the following changes infederal law: POSSESSION OF MARIHUANA FOR PERSONAL USE WOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE, BUT MARIHUANA POSSESSED IN PUBLIC WOULD REMAIN CONTRABAND SUBJECT TO SUMMARY SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE. CASUAL DISTRIBUTION OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NO REMUNERATION, OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING PROFIT WOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE. The Commission further recommends that federal law besupplemented to provide: A PLEA OF MARIHUANA INTOXICATION SHALL NOT BE A DEFENSE TO ANY CRIMINAL ACT COMMITTED UNDER ITS INFLUENCE, NOR SHALL PROOF OF SUCH INTOXICATION CONSTITUTE A NEGATION OF SPECIFIC INTENT. * Commissioners Rogers, Congressman from Florida, and Carter,Congressman from Kentucky, agree with the Commission's selectionof a discouragement policy and also agree that criminalizationand incarceration of individuals for possessing marihuana fortheir own use is neither necessary nor desirable as a means ofimplementing that policy. At the same time, both Commissioners feel that the contrabandconcept is not a sufficiently strong expression of socialdisapprobation and would recommend in addition a civil fine forpossession of any amount of marihuana in private or in public. Both Commissioners feel that the civil fine clearly symbolizessocietal disapproval and is a simple mechanism for lawenforcement authorities to carry out. If a person is found by alaw enforcement officer to be in possession of marihuana, theofficer would issue such person a summons to appear in court on afixed day. Although a warrant would not issue for Research of aprivate residence unless there were probable cause to believe acriminal offense was being committed, a police officerlegitimately present for other reasons could issue a civilsummons for violation of the "possession" proscription. Commissioners Rogers and Carter believe that the legal systemmust be utilized directly to discourage the person from usingmarihuana rather than being utilized only indirectly as In thecase of contraband. This civil fine would not be reflected in a police record, norwould it be considered a criminal act for purposes of future jobconsideration, either in the private sector or for governmentservice. Agreeing with the other Commissioners that the casualtransfers of marihuana for no profit should be treated in thesame manner as possession for one's own use, Congressmen Rogersand Carter do not agree that it should extend to transfersinvolving remuneration. They prefer the limiting language of theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 whichdoes not include the term "or insignificant remuneration notinvolving a profit." Apart from the addition of the civil fine to the contrabandrecommendation in the respects set out above, Congressmen Carterand Rogers are in complete agreement with the statutoryrecommendations set out in the Report. Commissioner Ware concurs completely with the statements madeby Congressmen Rogers and Carter but wishes to reemphasize thatthe social policy and legal scheme adopted is applicable only tomarihuana and should not be construed to embrace otherpsychoactive drugs. The policy set forth in this Report, subjectto the already noted comments of the two CongressionalCommissioners, makes sense for marihuana on the basis of what isknown about the drug and in the absence of any conclusive showingwhich would verify some of the anecdotal law enforcementtestimony heard by the Commission regarding criminal behaviorexhibited while under the influence of marihuana. Commissioner Ware feels that some penalty short ofcriminalizing the user, such as a civil fine or some type ofintensive drug education, will act as a positive deterrent towardminimizing the incidence of marihuana use especially among theyoung. Further, he is opposed to the use of any drug for theexpress purpose of getting intoxicated, and includes alcoholwithin this category. The Commissioner feels that what is neededis an internalizing of discipline among our citizenry, with thelegal system assisting this process through the use ofdisincentives. Commissioners Hughes, Senator from Iowa, and Javits, Senatorfrom New York, feel that the Commission has taken a major, highlylaudable step in recommending that the private use of marihuanabe taken out of the criminal justice system. They concur in itsthreshold judgment that overall social policy regarding this drugshould seek to discourage use, while concentrating primarily onthe prevention of irresponsible use. They disagree, however, withthree specific recommendations relating to the implementation ofthis discouragement policy. First, they would eliminate entirely the contraband provisionfrom the partial prohibitory model adopted by the Commission.They want it eliminated first because its legal implications areconfusing and the subject of disagreement even among lawyers.Whether or not possession of a given substance is criminal,possession of material designated as contraband makes thatpossession unlawful. Also, marihuana designated as contrabandwould be subject to government search and seizure, even thoughthe underlying possession is no longer criminal. Theprovision-which does not apply to marihuana held for personal usewithin the home is considered by both Commissioners to be anunnecessary "symbol" of the discouragement policy. Itwill not foster elimination of the misunderstanding and mistrustwhich is a hallmark of our current marihuana policy. Commissioner Hughes and Javits seek to eliminate it alsobecause as a practical matter it serves no useful law enforcementpurpose within the overall partial prohibitory model. Ifmarihuana held for personal use within the home is notcontraband, why should marihauna held for personal use withinone's automobile be contraband? The area of operation of thecontraband provision is extremely narrow. If one possesses morethan one ounce of marihuana in public, it may be seized withoutregard to the contraband doctrine since such possession is acriminal violation. Since the contraband provision does not apply to marihuanapossession and use in private, the only effective area covered bythe contraband provision is the area of possession in public ofless than one ounce. The Commission has chosen to remove thestigma of the criminal sanction in this kind of case. To imposeinstead a contraband provision, which it is argued is in thenature of a civil "in rem" seizure which does notoperate against the person, is to cloud the issue and to weakenthe force of the basic decriminalization. A persuasivejustification simply has not been made. Both Commissioners seek to eliminate it also because theybelieve that the voice of the Commission should be loud and clearthat the preservation of the right of privacy is of paramountimportance and cannot be casually jeopardized in the pursuit ofsome vague public or law enforcement interest which has not beendefined and justified with clarity and precision. The second area of disagreement with the Commission'srecommendations concerns the casual distribution of marihuana andthe not-for-profit sale. As understood: (1) The totally donative transfer is not subject to criminalpenalty, regardless of where it takes place. (2) The transfer of small amounts for insignificantremuneration not involving a profit is not subject to criminalpenalty (except if it is accomplished in public, in which case itis subject to criminal sanction), but (3) The transfer of"large amounts" for "significant"remuneration not involving a profit is subject to criminalpenalty. Footnote 4 on page 158 of the Report, the Commission refers toa Report of The Senate Judiciary Committee on the ComprehensiveDrug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. In substance, itimplies that within the meaning of the Act, transfers of -morethan one or two marihuana cigarettes in return for 50 cents orone dollar to cover cost are not intended to be covered as casualtransfers, but rather are to be treated as unlawful sales. Commissioners Hughes and Javits feel that the Commission hasfailed to set forth a clear standard which will adequately informthe public of their obligations under the law. The recommendationand its discussion in the Report are confusing and fail toprovide the individual with sufficient guidance to allow him toact without having to dodge in and out of illegality. It alsoundermines a basic, stated objective of the Commission i.e., toconcentrate the weight of the criminal sanction upon significantsupply and distribution activities, rather than upon casualconsumption. Moreover, proscribing even the most casual not-for-profittransfers when they occur in public is, in their opinion, wrong.Such transfers are necessarily incident to private possession anduse. To hold that they should be subject to criminal sanction islogically inconsistent with the Commission's rationale andrecommendation on decriminalization of such private activities. Instead, both Commissioners recommend that all not-for-profitsales be excluded from the criminal sanction. It Is fundamentalthat there be a clear separation between the serious, commercial,profit-making-seller, or "pusher" as he is known, andthe individual who merely splits the cost of a reasonable supplyof the drug with his friends or acquaintances. Thirdly, exception is taken to the retention of the criminalsanction on public possession of more than one ounce. Theindividual who buys an ounce and a half would be a criminal whenhe buys on the corner, when he puts it in his pocket, when hegets in his car and drives home, when he is on his doorstep, butnot when he crosses the threshold of his home. Commission policyshould direct the attention of the law enforcement community tothe person who sells the drug for profit, and not to the personwho uses the drug privately. If an individual has more than a few ounces in his possession,and there is probable cause to believe that he intends to sell itfor profit, that activity is already covered under theCommission's recommendation that possession with intent to sellis illegal. Therefore, there is no need to further proscribesimple public possession. All the component parts of the recommended policy of theCommission should be consistent with its objective ofnon-interference with casual transfers and possession and usewhich is essentially and fundamentally private and personal. The contraband device, the not-for-profit sale, and publicpossession of some reasonable amount which should be presumed tobe necessarily incident to private use should all be removed fromthe ambit of legal sanction. To do so would be to strike down"symbols" of a public policy which had never beenadequately justified in the first instance. Such steps would inno way jeopardize the firm determination of the Commission thatthe use of marihuana ought to be discouraged. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR STATE LAW Under existing state marihuana laws, cultivation distributionand possession with intent to distribute are generally feloniesand in most states possession for personal use is a misdemeanor.The Commission strongly recommends uniformity of state laws and,in this regard, endorses the basic premise of the UniformControlled Substances Act drafted by the National Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws. The following are ourrecommendations for a uniform statutory scheme for marihuana, bywhich we mean, as under existing federal law, only the naturalcannabis plant and its various parts, not the synthetictetrahydrocannabinol (THC) Existing Law CULTIVATION, SALE OR DISTRIBUTION FOR PROFIT AND POSSESSIONWITH INTENT TO SELL WOULD REMAIN FELONIES (ALTHOUGH WE DORECOMMEND UNIFORM PENALTIES). Private Activities POSSESSION IN PRIVATE OF MARIHUANA FOR PERSONAL USE WOULD NOLONGER BE AN OFFENSE. DISTRIBUTION IN PRIVATE OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NOREMUNERATION OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING A PROFITWOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE. Public Activities POSSESSION IN PUBLIC OF ONE OUNCE OR UNDER OF MARIHUANA WOULDNOT BE AN OFFENSE, BUT THE MARIHUANA WOULD BE CONTRABAND SUBJECTTO SUMMARY SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE. POSSESSION IN PUBLIC OF MORE THAN ONE OUNCE OF MARIHUANA WOULDBE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF $100. DISTRIBUTION IN PUBLIC OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NOREMUNERATION OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING A PROFITWOULD BE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF $100. PUBLIC USE OF MARIHUANA WOULD BE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLEBY A FINE OF $100. DISORDERLY CONDUCT ASSOCIATED WITH PUBLIC USE OF ORINTOXICATION BY MARIHUANA WOULD BE A MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY UPTO 60 DAYS IN JAIL, A FINE OF $100, OR BOTH. OPERATING A VEHICLE OR DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT WHILE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA WOULD BE A MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY UP TOONE YEAR IN JAIL, A FINE OF UP TO $1,000, OR BOTH, AND SUSPENSIONOF A PERMIT TO OPERATE SUCH A VEHICLE OR INSTRUMENT FOR UP TO 180DAYS. A PLEA OF MARIHUANA INTOXICATION SHALL NOT BE A DEFENSE TO ANYCRIMINAL ACT COMMITTED UNDER ITS INFLUENCE NOR SHALL PROOF OFSUCH INTOXICATION CONSTITUTE A NEGATION OF SPECIFIC INTENT. A PERSON WOULD BE ABSOLUTELY LIABLE IN CIVIL COURT FOR ANYDAMAGE TO PERSON OR PROPERTY WHICH HE CAUSED WHILE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF THE DRUG. DISCUSSION OF FEDERAL RECOMMENDATIONS The recommended federal approach is really a restatement ofexisting federal policy. From official testimony and recordevaluation, we know that the federal law enforcement authorities,principally the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsand the Bureau of Customs, do not concentrate their efforts onpersonal possession cases. The avowed purpose of both Bureaus isto eliminate major traffickers and sources of supply. For themost part, the federal agencies have left possession enforcementto the states. Underlying this approach is a need -to maximizethe use of enforcement resources for major priorities and allowthe states, in exercising their "police powers," toassume the responsibility for local activities, includingpossession for personal use. By withdrawing the criminal sanction from possession forpersonal use we are, in effect, codifying official policy. Inaddition, such a scheme follows the model chosen for alcohol inthe Volstead Act, and also revives the approach taken by Congressin the Drug Abuse Control Amendments (DACA) of 1965. We are inagreement with the original thrust of DACA, when Congress broughtpreviously uncontrolled drugs, LSD, barbiturates andamphetamines, under control but did not assess criminal penaltiesfor possession for personal use. Instead, Congress placed on the prosecution the burden ofproof that the possession was for purposes of sale. Regardless ofwhether or not Congress was wise in imposing a penalty in 1968for possession for personal use, a subject we will consider inour next Report, we think the original DACA concept isenlightened where marihuana is concerned. At the same time, present federal law classifies marihuana ascontraband, and this feature should be maintained. The contrabandconcept serves the discouragement policy in two ways: it assiststhe removal of supply from the market and it symbolizes acontinuing societal opposition to use. Accordingly, if a personis found in possession of marihuana in public and the governmentis unable to prove any intent to sell, it may nevertheless seizethe marihuana and confiscate it is contraband. The contraband provision would apply only to possession inpublic and would not extend to possession for personal use in thehome. During Prohibition, the Federal Government and most of thestates employed a similar statutory limitation. For example, theVolstead Act provided that a private dwelling could not besearched "unless it is being used for the unlawful sale ofintoxicating liquor. . . ." I The impact of this contrabandconcept is that marihuana possessed or found in public can besummarily seized by law enforcement officials and forfeited tothe state for subsequent destruction .2 The criminal justicesystem is not involved in the process. The individual receives norecord of any kind; he simply loses the economic value of themarihuana.3 With regard to the casual distribution of small amounts ofMarihuana for no remuneration or insignificant remuneration notinvolving a profit we are following the approach taken in theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 whichin essence treats such casual transfers as the functionalequivalent of possession. In doing so, Congress recognized thatmarihuana is generally shared among friends and that not allpeople who distribute marihuana are "Pushers."* ' 39. Unlawful P0ssession of liquor or property designed formanufacture thereof ; search warrants. It shall be unlawful tohave or possess any liquor or property designed for themanufacture of liquor intended for use in violating this chapteror which has been so used, and no property rights shall exist inany such liquor or property. A search warrant may issue asprovided in [sections 611 to 631 and 633 of Title 181 and suchliquor, the containers thereof, and such property so seized shallbe subject to such disposition as the court may make thereof. ifit is found that such liquor or property was so unlawfully heldor possessed, or had been so unlawfully used, the liquor, and allproperty designed for the unlawful manufacture of liquor, shallbe destroyed, unless the court shall otherwise order. No searchwarrant shall issue to search any private dwelling occupied assuch unless it is being used for unlawful sale of intoxicatingliquor, or unless it is in part used for some business purposesuch as a store, shop, saloon, restaurant, hotel, or boarding'house. 'Me term "private dwelling" shall be construedto include the room or rooms used and occupied not transientlybut solely as a residence in an apartment house, hotel orboarding house. The property seized on any such warrant shall notlie taken from the officer seizing the same on any writ ofreplevin or other like process. (Oct. 28, 1919, e. 85, Title 11, 25, 41 Stat. 315) 'The federal and state provisions presently in force regardingthe seizure and forfeiture of an automobile transportingmarihuana would no longer be applicable. They would still remainin force for other controlled drugs classified as contraband. 3 See the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter, Ware, Hughesand Javits expressed in the footnote on pages 151-156. The accuracy of Congress' appraisal is underscored by theNational Survey. When people who had used marihuana were askedhow they first obtained the drug, 61% of the adults and 76% ofthe youth responded that it had been given to them. Only 4% ofthe adults and 8% of the youth said that they had bought it. Whenasked who their source had been, 67% of the adults and 85% of theyouth responded that it had been a friend, acquaintance or familymember. The close association between the concepts of casual transferand personal possession is also underscored by the fact that 56%of the prosecutors in our survey thought that the present law didnot deter casual transfer at all or deterred it only minimally. With regard to importation and exportation, we recommend nochange in existing law and make the following observations.First, the United States must maintain its international standingand, as a member of the community of nations, this country shoulddo everything in its power to restrict the exportation ofmarihuana to other countries and to penalize such internationaltraffic. As to importation of marihuana, the most effective way todiscourage use is to cut off supply at the top of the pyramid.Recognizing that most of the marihuana consumed in the UnitedStates comes from abroad, we feel that the Bureau of Customs atthe borders should have all necessary authority to halt andinterdict supplies intended for consumption in this country.There has been a long-standing practice of excepting ports andborders from procedural rules applying within the United States.One example is that Customs officials are allowed to searchwithout the showing of probable cause, even though such a showingis mandatory for searches conducted within the United States. Wecan see a legitimate reason for continuing this policy. *In considering this relationship, the Senate, in the Reportof the Committee on the Judiciary of the United States Senateregarding S. 3246 (a precursor bill to the new Federal law)stated: The language "distributes a small amount of marihuana forno remuneration or insignificant remuneration not involving aprofit" as contained in section 501 (c) (4) is intended tocover the type of situation where a college student makes aquasi-donative transfer of one or two marihuana cigarettes andreceives 50 cents or a dollar in exchange to cover the cost ofthe marihuana. Transfers of larger quantities in exchange for larger amountsof money, or transfers for profit, are not intended to be coveredby this section, but rather are to be covered by section 501 (c)(2) which deals 'with unlawful distribution. This languagesketches a prototype situation which the Committee had in mind;however, the wording of the Federal Act and of ourrecommendations is not intended to establish inflexible rules.The objective in both provisions is to distinguish betweencommercial sellers and casual distributors. Ultimately the courtswill have the responsibility of drawing this distinctionaccording to the evidence in individual cases. The recommendedprovision intentionally establishes a loose standard not tied tospecific amounts of marihuana or money. See also the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter, Ware,Hughes and Javits expressed in the footnote on pages 151-156. DISCUSSION OF STATE RECOMMENDATIONS The states have primary responsibility for enforcing theexisting proscriptions against possession for personal use. Theirpresent efforts are designed mainly to keep marihuana usecontained, and in private. Such an enforcement policy isconsistent with our social policy approach, and is an appropriateexercise of the states' obligations to maintain public order. Sowhile we see no need for criminal sanctions against possessionfor personal use or against casual transfers, we recommend anumber of provisions for confining marihuana use to the home. The first point is that even marihuana possessed for personaluse is subject to summary seizure and forfeiture if it is foundin public. This concept is now applicable under federal law whichwe commend also to the states. In our view, the contrabandfeature symbolizes the discouragement policy and will exert a,major force in keeping use private. Another means of symbolizing the discouragement policy whichhas been suggested is the imposition of a civil fine on thosepossessing marihuana outside the home for personal use.* Undersuch an approach, a fine would be levied and processed outsidethe criminal justice system. Essentially, possession of marihuanawould be the equivalent of a traffic offense in thosejurisdictions where such an offense is not criminal. Such a scheme would accomplish little more than that achievedunder a partial prohibition scheme. Warrants would presumably notbe issued for searches of private residences, and possessionoffenses would be detected only by accident or if the offenderuses the drug in public. The more direct way to confront suchbehavior is a penalty against public use. A further problem with the civil fine approach lies in thearea, of non-payment of the fine. With traffic tickets, or withcivil fines levied against industrial polluters, society cancompel compliance by withdrawing its permission to engage inregulated activity. For example, it can revoke the motorists'license to drive or the polluters' license to do business withinthe state. In short, the state has remedies beyond the criminallaw to achieve its policy goal. The same would not be true forthe marihuana user and enforceability of the statute wouldultimately require court action. *See the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter and Wareexpressed in the footnote on pages 151-153. As we have suggested, a central feature, of our statutoryapproach at the state, level would be a vigorously enforcedprohibition of public use. No intoxicant should be used inpublic, both because it may offend others and because the user isrisking irresponsible behavior if he should be under itsinfluence in public. Moreover, where marihuana is concerned,continuing societal disapproval requires that the behavior occuronly in private if at all. Public use, under the proposed scheme,would therefore be punishable by a fine of $100. We also recognize the need for some prophylactic measure foranticipating distribution, even though there may be no intent tosell for profit. To this end, and in order to deter public use,possession and transfer, we have drawn a line at one ounce ofmarihuana. Possession in public of more than this amount would bepunishable by a fine of $100. For these same reasons, we believe the states should prohibitall transfers outside the home, whether or not for remuneration.A transfer for profit would be a felony, as under present law. Acasual transfer of a small amount would be punishable by a fineof $100. Taken together, the contraband feature, the proscriptions ofpublic use and public possession of more than an ounce (even iffor personal use) and the prohibition of public transfers willreflect the discouragement policy underlying the entire, scheme. The remaining set of recommendations alms at irresponsiblebehavior under the influence of marihuana. Whatever the preciselegal scheme employed, these provisions should be included. First, the "drunk and disorderly" statutes presentlyin force in the states are useful tools for maintaining publicorder. We would suggest similar statutes in the case ofmarihuana, punishing offenders by up to 60 days in jail, a fineof $100, or both. Law enforcement authorities must have a meansto halt antisocial behavior exhibited incidental to marihuanause. The second aspect of irresponsible behavior is the operationof automobiles, other vehicles, or any potentially dangerousinstrument while under the influence of marihuana. Such behavioris gross negligence in itself, risking harm to othersunnecessarily. In addition to penalizing a person who"drives under the influence" as a serious misdemeanant,we would impose absolute civil liability on anyone who harms theperson or property of another while under the influence ofmarihuana. Finally, no one should be able to limit his criminalaccountability by alleging that he was under the influence ofmarihuana at the time of the crime. Under both federal and statelaw, the defendant should not be able to negate the mentalelement of "specific intent," which some offensescarry, by pleading that he was under the influence of marihuanaand was therefore unable to have formed such an intent. Unlikemany users of heroin, the user of marihuana is not physicallydependent on the drug. The use of the drug is usually a matter ofchoice. Although we believe on the basis of available evidencethat there is no causal connection between marihauna use andcrime, we would under no circumstances allow a person to escapethe consequences of his actions by hiding behind the cloak ofmarihuana use. DISCUSSION OF POTENTIAL OBJECTIONS Having discussed our recommended scheme at the federal andstate levels, we think it useful to answer some objections weanticipate will be raised. Possible objections are: 1. Partial prohibition is not a sufficient reflection of thediscouragement policy. 2. Partial prohibition is logically inconsistent. 3. A possession penalty is necessary for effective enforcementof sale proscriptions. 4. Partial prohibition won't "work" for marihuanaany more than it did for alcohol. 5. A possession offense is essential as a device for detectingproblem users. 6. Retention of a possession offense is required by ourinternational obligations. 7. A firm distinction should be drawn between less potent andmore potent preparations. 1. The Partial Prohibition Approach Is a SufficientReflection of the Discouragement Policy To those who would argue that a criminal sanction against useis a necessary implementation of an abstentionist policy, we needonly respond that this country has not generally operated on thatassumption. We would be astounded if any person who lived duringthe 1920's was not aware of a definite governmental policyopposed to the use of alcohol. Yet, only five states prohibitedpossession for personal use during Prohibition. The failure ofthe 18th Amendment, the Volstead Act and 43 state prohibitionacts to criminalize private possession certainly did not signifyofficial approval of or neutrality toward alcohol use. As we pointed out in Chapter 1, our nation has not generallyseen fit to criminalize private drug-related behavior; only inthe narcotics area was possession made a crime and marihuana wasbrought within the narcotics framework because of unfoundedassumptions about its ill effects. We think it is time to correctthat mistaken departure from tradition with respect to marihuana.As during Prohibition, the drug will remain contraband, and itsdistribution will be prohibited. Even as late as 1965, an abstentionist drug policy was notthought to require prohibition for personal use. At that time,Congress enacted the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, bringing LSD,amphetamines and barbiturates under federal control. Nationalpolicy was clearly opposed to use of the hallucinogens and thenon-prescription use of amphetamines and barbiturates, yetCongress did not impose a penalty for possession. Whether or notCongress' subsequent decision in 1968, to impose such a penaltywas appropriate is an issue we will cover in our next Reportafter analyzing the individual drugs controlled. The importantpoint now is that such a penalty is not a necessary feature of adiscouragement policy for marihuana, regardless of its, proprietyfor other drugs. The Partial Prohibition Approach Is Not Logically Inconsistent It will. be, argued that a law which permits a person toacquire and use marihuana but does not permit anyone to sell itto him for profit is logically unsound. We do not agree. If wehad recommended a social policy of approval or neutrality towarduse, partial prohibition would indeed have been illogical.However, under a discouragement policy, such a, scheme isperfectly consistent. Under partial prohibition, use is discouraged in three mainways. First, law enforcement authorities will make a concertedeffort to reduce the supply of the drug. If a person wishes touse marihuana, he will have to seek out a person to sell it tohim; and if his seller is in the business of distributingmarihuana for profit, the seller is violating the law. Second, the user will have to confine his disapproved behaviorto the home. If lie uses the drug in public, he has committed anoffense; if lie possesses it in public, it may be summarilyseized as contraband. Third, continuing efforts will be made by educators, publichealth officials, and official government spokesmen to discourageuse. Realizing that educational efforts are not alwayssuccessful, we would hope for a sound program. In any event, thelaw should be an ancillary rather than a focal consideration. There is nothing theoretically Inconsistent about a schemewhich merely withdraws the criminal sanction from a behaviorwhich is not immoral but which is disapproved. The individual isbeing allowed to make his own choice. Hopefully, he will choosenot to use marihuana. If he chooses to do so, however, he willhave to do so discreetly and in private. Apart from its ultimatepossession by the user, however, all marihuana-related activityis prohibited. The drug is contraband from its initial growth,through its harvest and distribution. It ceases to be contrabandonly when possessed and used in the home. 3. Prohibition of All Possession Is Not Essential toProhibition of Sale The other side of the "inconsistency" objection isthe argument by law enforcement officials that they cannotadequately enforce proscriptions against sale without apossession penalty. We disagree. We have already explained thatenforcement of a possession offense to some extent impedes theeffort to reduce supply. Possession cases are generally regardedin the law enforcement community and by judges and prosecutors as"cheap" cases. Few seriously contend that prosecutionof possessors reduces supply. Some persons argue in response that the law should remain onthe books as a tool not against the possessor but against theseller. They say that a possession offense is helpful in threeways. First, a prosecution can be used as a bargaining tool toencourage the possessor to reveal his source; this is called"turning an informant." Second, the police may knowthat a person is a seller, but may not be able to prove eithersale or intent to sell, so they can at least charge suchsuspected sellers with simple possession. Third, a corollary of the second argument is that thepossession offense provides a useful tool in the "pleabargaining" process. That is, a seller may plead guilty tothe lesser offense of possession, now generally a misdemeanor,instead of running the risk of trial and conviction of the moreserious offense of sale, generally a felony. The prosecution mayaccept such a "bargain' if it is uncertain of the strengthof the case, to avoid delay in sentencing, to reduce judicialbacklog or in return for information from the defendant. From an institutional standpoint, we do not find thesearguments persuasive. First, if a possession offense is on thebooks, possession is a criminal activity. We oppose criminalizingconduct when its purpose and intent is directed not toward thatconduct but toward another behavior. In answer to the informant argument, the marihuana user (andthis may not be true of other drugs) is simply too low in thedistributional chain to help very much. As indicated earlier, theNational Survey shows most users receive their marihuana fromtheir friends or acquaintances either as a gift or at cost.Rarely is the time spent on him or on his "source" afruitful allocation of the law enforcement official's time. Also,it is institutionally improper to hold the criminal sanction overa person to force him to talk, when we otherwise would beunwilling to use that sanction. As to the "lack of proof" and "pleabargaining" arguments, we believe they challenge afundamental tenet of our criminal justice system. That is, underour law, a person is not guilty just because the police think heis guilty; his offense must be proven beyond a reasonable doubtto a judge or jury. If a possession offense were not on thebooks, the police would have to gather enough evidence to convictthe seller of sale or of possession with intent to sell, and theprosecution would have to convince the judge beyond a reasonabledoubt. The defendant, suspected seller or not, is entitled to dueprocess of law. The "lack of proof" argument is nothing more than aplea for an "easy out" when the police do not haveenough evidence. This simply represents an admission that lawenforcement officials want a possession offense which they canapply selectively, to people whom they think, but cannot prove,are sellers. Such a notion is inconsistent with the basic premiseof our system of equal treatment under the law. If"simple" possession is not an offense for some, it isnot an offense for all. A "known seller" is entitled tothe same rights as anyone else: criminal conduct must be provedbeyond a reasonable doubt. We do not favor coddling criminals. Wedo insist, as did the framers of the Constitution, that suspectedcriminal behavior be proved. 4. That Partial Prohibition Did Not "Work" ForAlcohol Doesn't Mean It Won't For Marihuana Prohibition failed to achieve its avowed purpose ofeliminating the use of intoxicating liquors from American life.Risking an oversimplification, we think two reasons wereessentially responsible for this failure: the unwillingness of asubstantial minority, and probably a majority, of the Americanpublic to discard a habit deeply ingrained in their lives; andthe inability of the law enforcement community to eliminate thebootlegging traffic which catered to this continuing demand. As we have repeatedly noted, one of the reasons for adoptionof a partial prohibition approach is uncertainty about the extentto which marihuana use is ingrained in American culture. Indeed,adoption of partial prohibition is the best way to find out forsure. If the social interest turns out to be only transient, thispolicy will prove particularly appropriate. Similarly, an increase in marihuana use may be prevented by aconcerted effort to eliminate major trafficking, the scope ofwhich is presently only a small fraction of Prohibitionbootlegging. We do not pretend that supply of a plant so easilygrown can be eliminated. However, an intensive effort toeliminate commercial criminal enterprise should have some impacton the extent of use. 5. The Possession Offense Is Not Required as a DetectionDevice In addition to their deterrent and symbolic functions, thedrug possession laws serve a third function not shared by mostother criminal laws. Like laws against public drunkenness, theyfacilitate societal detection of drug-dependent persons. Ideally,such persons, although apprehended by law enforcementauthorities, may be detained for purposes of treatment andrehabilitation. Whatever the merits of such an argument for the opiates andalcohol, such an argument does not apply to marihuana. Only avery small percentage of marihuana users are drug-dependent orare in need of treatment. Their dependence is generally uponmultiple drug use, not on marihuana. In any event, the existenceof such a small population does not justify retention of thepossession offense as a detection device. 6. International Obligations Do Not Require Maintenance ofa Possession Penalty Some have raised the possibility that removal of simplepossession criminal penalties would contravene this country'sobligations under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961),to which it became a signatory in March, 1967. We do not believethe provisions of that Convention compel the criminalization ofpossession for personal use. Nowhere in the Convention are its Parties expressly requiredto impose criminal sanctions on possession for personal use.Article 4 requires Parties to "take such legislative andadministrative measures as may be necessary . . . . to limitexclusively to medical and scientific purposes the production,manufacture, export, import, distribution of, trade in, use andpossession of drugs." Penal sanctions are not necessarilyincluded in this formulation. Article 36, which deals specifically with penal provisions,requires each party to adopt "such measures as willensure" that the listed activities, including possession,"shall be punishable offenses." Some have argued thatthis provision requires prohibition of personal use. However, from a comprehensive study of the history of theConvention, the Commission has concluded that the word"possession" in Article 36 refers not to possession forpersonal use, but to possession as a link in illicit trafficking.This interpretation is bolstered also by the failure to include"use" in Article 36 even though it has been included inArticle 4. Finally, we must consider Article 33, which provides that"the Parties shall not permit the possession of drugs exceptunder legal authority." This Article also does not requirethe imposition of any sanctions on possession for personal use.Experts consulted by the Commission have indicated that thisArticle may, nevertheless, require that the Parties to limitpossession and use to medical and scientific purposes. Toaffirmatively allow drugs to remain in the possession of personsfor non-medical use would in this view contravene Articles 4 and33 to read together. From this perspective our internationalobligations may require the classification of marihuana, ascontraband. For this reason, together with a desire to symbolizeour discouragement policy in a clear way, we have included thecontraband feature in our legal implementation scheme. In conclusion, our reading of the Convention is that a Partymay legitimately decide to deal with non-medical use andpossession of marihuana through an educational program andsimilar approaches designed to discourage use. 7. No Potency Distinction is Necessary at the Present Time Following the approach taken in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970, we have drawn a line betweenthe natural cannabis plant and the synthetictetrahydrocannabinols. "Marihuana" is defined as anyand all parts of the natural plant. That we choose this approachfor purposes of statutory implementation does not mean that weare unaware of the difference between the less potent and morepotent preparations of the natural plant. As noted in Chapters 11 and III, the highest risk of cannabisuse to the individual and society arises from the very long-term,very heavy use of potent preparations commonly called hashish. Nosuch pattern of use is known to exist in the United States today. The predominant pattern of use in the United States isexperimental or intermittent use of less potent preparations ofthe drug. Even when hashish is used, the predominant patternremains the same. In addition, whatever the potency of the drugused, individuals tend to smoke only the amount necessary toachieve the desired drug effect. Given the prevailing patterns of use, the Commission does notbelieve it is essential to distinguish by statute between lesspotent and more potent forms of the natural plant. Reinforcingthis judgment are the procedural and practical problems attendingan effort to do so. If the criminal liability of ail individual user is dependenton the THC content of the substance, neither lie nor thearresting officer will know whether he has committed a crimeuntil an accurate scientific determination is made. Even if suchaccurate determinations were feasible on a large scale, which isnot now the case, such after-the-fact liability is foreign to ourcriminal laws. Under present circumstances, then, a statutory line based onpotency is neither necessary nor feasible. We emphasize also thatany legal distinction is an artificial reflection of theCommission's major concern: the heavy use of the drug over a longterm. The most emphatic element of official policy should be todiscourage such use, especially of the more potent preparations.Unfortunately precise legislative formulations regarding theamount of the drug presumed to be for personal use do not assistthis effort at all. Whether it is lawful to possess one ounce ofhashish or a proportionate amount based on potency (for example,one-fourth ounce), an individual prone to use the drug heavilywill do so. Society's resources should be committed to the taskof reducing supply of the drug and persuading our citizens not touse it. Expenditure of police time and financial resources in anattempt to ascertain the THC content of every seized substancewould make little, if any, contribution to this effort. A Final Comment In this Chapter, we have carefully considered the spectrum ofsocial and legal policy alternatives. On the basis of ourfindings, discussed in previous Chapters, we have concluded thatsociety should seek to discourage use, while concentrating itsattention on the prevention and treatment of heavy and very heavyuse. The Commission feels that the criminalization of possessionof marihuana for personal is socially self-defeating as a meansof achieving this objective. We have attempted to balanceindividual freedom on one hand and the obligation of the state toconsider the wider social good on the other. We believe ourrecommended scheme will permit society to exercise its controland influence in ways most useful and efficient, meanwhilereserving to the individual American his sense of privacy, hissense of individuality, and, within the context of ailinteracting and interdependent society, his options to select hisown life style, values, goals and opportunities. The Commission sincerely hopes that the tone of cautiousrestraint sounded in this Report will be perpetuated in thedebate which will follow it. For those who feel we have notproceeded far enough, we are reminded of Thomas Jefferson'sadvice to George Washington that "Delay is preferable toerror." For those who argue we have gone too far, we noteRoscoe Pound's statement, "The law must be stable, but itmust not stand still." We have carefully analyzed the interrelationship betweenmarihuana the drug, marihuana use as a behavior, and marihuana asa social problem. Recognizing the extensive degree ofmisinformation about marihuana as a drug, we have tried todemythologize it. Viewing the use of marihuana in its widersocial context, we have tried to desymbolize it. Considering the range of social concerns in contemporaryAmerica, marihuana does not, in our considered judgment, rankvery high. We would deemphasize marihuana as a problem. The existing social and legal policy is out of proportion tothe individual and social harm engendered by the use of the drug.To replace it, we have attempted to design a suitable socialpolicy, which we believe is fair, cautious and attuned to thesocial realities of our time. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-3IA031-000655-B039-106http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncrec1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112907 text/html 5993HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:28:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:26 GMTContent-length: 5776 Drugs And Social Responsibility Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY "The difficulty in life is the choice." George Moore (1900) A constant tension exists in our society between individualliberties and the need for reasonable societal restraints. It iseasy to go too far in either direction, and this tendency isparticularly evident where drugs are concerned. We have guided our decision-making by the belief that thestate is obliged to justify restraints on individual behavior.Too often individual freedoms are submerged in the passions ofthe moment, and when that happens, the public policy may bedetermined more by rhetoric than by reason. Our effort has beento minimize the emotional and emphasize the rational in thisReport. Drugs In a Free Society A free society seeks to provide conditions in which each ofits members may develop his or her potentialities to the fullestextent. A premium is placed on individual choice in seekingself-fulfillment. This priority depends upon the capacity of freecitizens not to abuse their freedom, and upon their willingnessto act responsibly toward others and toward the society as awhole. Responsible behavior, through individual choice, is boththe guarantor and the objective of a free society. DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The use of drugs is not in itself an irresponsible act.Medical and scientific uses serve important individual and socialneeds and are often essential to our physical and mentalwell-being. Further, the use of drugs for pleasure or othernon-medical purposes is not inherently irresponsible; alcohol iswidely used as an acceptable part of social activities. We do think the use of drugs is clearly irresponsible when itimpedes the individual's integration into the economic and socialsystem. A preference for individual productivity and contributionto social progress in a general sense still undergirds theAmerican value structure, and we emphasize the policy-maker'sduty to support this preference in a public policy judgment. At the same time, in light of the emerging leisure ethic andthe search for individual meaning and fulfillment noted inChapter 1, we cannot divorce social policy from the questionsraised by the recreational use of drugs. Productivity andrecreation both have a place in the American ethical system. Theyare not inconsistent unless the individual's use of leisure timeinhibits his productive role in society. Drugs should be servants, not masters. They become masterswhen they dominate an individual's existence or impair hisfaculties. To the extent that any drug, including alcohol,carries with it risks to the well-being of the user and seriouslyundermines his effectiveness in the society, that drug becomes amatter of concern for public policy. An essential step in the process of policy-formation is adetermination of the circumstances under which use of any givendrug' poses such risks. For some drugs, the risks may be so greatthat all permissible measures should be taken to eliminate use.For other drugs, such risks may be present only under certainspecific circumstances, in which case society may defer toresponsible individual choice on the matter of recreational usebut take appropriate steps to minimize the incidence andconsequences of dysfunctional use. In our Report next year, forwhich studies are already underway, we will consider from thisperspective the whole range of drugs now used for non-medicalpurposes. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-4IA031-000655-B039-124http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncrec2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112915 text/html 18684HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:29:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:53 GMTContent-length: 18466 A Social Control Policy for Marihuana Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy A Social Control Policy for Marihuana A Social Control Policy for Marihuana In formulating a Marihuana policy, our strongest concern iswith irresponsible use, whether it be too often, too much,indiscriminate, or under improper circumstances. The excessive orindiscriminate use of any drug is a serious social concern; andthis is particularly true of marihuana since we still know verylittle about the effects of long term, heavy use. We have littledoubt that the substantial majority of users, under any socialcontrol policy, including the existing system, do not and wouldnot engage in irresponsible behavior. In identifying the -appropriate social control policy formarihuana, we have found it helpful to consider the followingpolicy options: I Approval of Use. II Elimination of Use. III Discouragement of Use. IV Neutrality Toward Use. APPROVAL OF USE Society should not approve or encourage the recreational useof any drug, in public or private. Any semblance of encouragementenhances the possibility of abuse and removes, from apsychological standpoint, an effective support of individualrestraint. For example, so long as this society (not only thegovernment, but other institutions and mass advertising as well)in effect approved of the use of tobacco, the growing medicalconsensus about the dangers of excessive use did not make asignificant impression on individual judgment. With the SurgeonGeneral's Report on Tobacco in 1964, Smoking and Health, a veryreal change has occurred in the way society now thinks aboutcigarettes. The institutions of society definitely add their influencesto the variety of social pressures which persuade individuals touse any kind of drugs. Rational social policy should seek tominimize such social pressures, whether they come from peers,from the media, from social custom, or from the user's sense ofinadequacy. Official approval would inevitably encourage somepeople to use the drug who would not otherwise do so, and wouldalso increase the incidence of heavy or otherwise irresponsibleuse and its complications. On this basis we reject policy optionnumber one, approval of use. ELIMINATION OF USE For a half-century, official social policy has been not onlyto discourage use but to eliminate it (option number two). Withthe principal responsibility for this policy assigned to lawenforcement, its implementation reached its zenith in the late1950's and early 1960's when marihuana-related offenses werepunishable by long periods of incarceration. This policy grew outof a distorted and greatly exaggerated concept of the drug'sordinary effects upon the individual and the society. On thebasis of information then available, marihuana was not adequatelydistinguished from other problem drugs and was assumed to be asharmful as the others. The increased incidence of use, intensive scientificreevaluation, and the spread of use to the middle and uppersocioeconomic groups have brought about the informal adoption ofa modified social policy. On the basis of our opinion surveys andour empirical studies of law enforcement behavior, we areconvinced that officialdom and the public are no longer aspunitive toward marihuana use as they once were. Now there exists a more realistic estimate of the actualsocial impact of marihuana use. School and universityadministrators are seldom able to prevent the use of marihuana bytheir students and personnel and are increasingly reluctant totake disciplinary action against users. Within the criminaljustice system, there has been a marked decline in the severityof the response to offenders charged with possession ofmarihuana. In our survey of state enforcement activities, only 11% ofall marihuana arrests resulted from active investigativeactivity, and most of those were in sale situations. For the mostpart, marihuana enforcement is a haphazard process; arrests occuron the street, in a park, in a car, or as a result of a phonecall. Among those arrested, approximately 50% of the adults and70% of the juveniles are not processed through the system; theircases are dismissed by the police, by the prosecutors or by thecourts. Ultimately less than 6% of all those apprehended areincarcerated, and very few of these sentences are for possessionof small amounts for personal use. In the law enforcement community, the major concern is nolonger marihuana but the tendency of some users to engage inother irresponsible activity, particularly the use of moredangerous drugs. Official sentiment now seems to be a desire tocontain use of the drug as well as the drug subculture, and tominimize its spread to the rest of the youth population. Lawenforcement policy, both at the Federal and State levels,implicitly recognizes that elimination is impossible at thistime. The active attempt to suppress all marihuana use has beenreplaced by an effort to keep it within reasonable bounds. Yetbecause this policy still reflects a view that marihuana smokingis itself destructive enough to justify punitive action againstthe user, we believe it is an inappropriate social response. Marihuana's relative potential for harm to the vast majorityof individual users and its actual impact on society does notjustify a social policy designed to seek out and firmly punishthose who use it. This judgment is based on prevalent, usepatterns, on behavior exhibited by the vast majority of users andon our interpretations of existing medical and scientific data.This position also is consistent with the estimate by lawenforcement personnel that the elimination of use isunattainable. In the case of experimental or intermittent use of marihuana,there is room for individual judgment. Some members of oursociety believe the decision to use marihuana is an immoraldecision. However, even during Prohibition, when many people wereconcerned about the evils associated with excessive use ofalcohol, possession for personal use was never outlawed federallyand was made illegal in only five States. Indeed, we suspect that the moral contempt in which some ofour citizens hold the marihuana user is related to other behavioror other attitudes assumed to be associated with use of the drug.All of our data suggest that the moral views of the overwhelmingmajority of marihuana users are in general accord with those ofthe larger society. Having previously rejected the approval policy (option numberone), we now reject the eliminationist policy (option numbertwo). This policy, if taken seriously, would require a greatincrease in manpower and resources in order to eliminate the useof a drug which simply does not warrant that kind of attention. DISCOURAGEMENT OR NEUTRALITY The unresolved question is whether society should try todissuade its members from using marihuana or should deferentirely to individual judgment in the matter, remaining benignlyneutral. We must choose between policies of discouragement(number three) and neutrality (number four). This choice is adifficult one and forces us to consider the limitations of ourknowledge and the dynamics of social change. A number ofconsiderations, none of which is conclusive by itself, point atthe present time toward a discouragement policy. We will discusseach one of them separately. 1. User Preference Is Still Ambiguous Alcohol and tobacco have long been desired by large numberswithin our society and their use is deeply ingrained in theAmerican culture. Marihuana, on the other hand, has only recentlyachieved a significant foothold in the American experience, andit is still essentially used more by young people. Again, theunknown factor here is whether the sudden attraction to marihuanaderives from its psychoactive virtues or from its symbolicstatus. Throughout this Commission's deliberations there was arecurring awareness of the possibility that marihuana use may bea fad which, if not institutionalized, will recede substantiallyin time. Present data suggest that this is the case, and we donot hesitate to say that we would prefer that outcome. To theextent that conditions permit, society is well advised tominimize the number of drugs which may cause significantproblems. By focusing our attention on fewer rather than moredrugs, we may be better able to foster responsible use anddiminish the consequences of irresponsible use. The more prudent course seems to be to retain a social policyopposed to use, attempting to discourage use while at the sametime seeking to deemphasize the issue. Such a policy leaves uswith more options available when more definitive knowledge of theconsequences of heavy and prolonged marihuana use becomesavailable. 2. Continuing Scientific Uncertainty Precludes Finality In 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, society was cognizantof the effects of alcohol as a drug and the adverse consequencesof abuse. But, because so many people wished to use the drug,policy-makers chose, to run the risk of individual indiscretionand decided to abandon the abstentionist policy. There are manytoday who feel that if the social, impact of alcohol use had thenbeen more fully understood, a policy of discouragement ratherthan neutrality would have been adopted to minimize the negativeaspects of alcohol use. Misunderstanding also played an important part when thenational government adopted an eliminationist, marihuana policyin 1937. The policy-makers knew very little about the effects orsocial impact of the drug; many of their hypotheses werespeculative and, in large measure, incorrect. Nevertheless, the argument that misinformation in 1937automatically compels complete reversal of the action taken atthat time is neither reasonable nor logical. While continuingconcern about the effects of heavy, chronic use is not sufficientreason to maintain an overly harsh public policy, it is still asignificant argument for choosing official discouragement inpreference to official neutrality. 3. Society's Value System Is In a State of Transition As discussed in Chapter 1, two central influences incontemporary American life are the individual search for meaningwithin the context of an increasingly depersonalized society, andthe collective search for enduring American values. In ChapterIV, we noted that society's present ambivalent response tomarihuana use reflects these uncertainties. For the reasons discussed in the previous Chapters, a suddenabandonment of an official policy of elimination in favor of oneof neutrality toward marihuana would have a profoundreverberating impact on social attitudes far beyond the one issueof marihuana use. We believe that society must have time toconsider its image of the future. We believe that adoption of adiscouragement policy toward marihuana at this time wouldfacilitate such a reappraisal while official neutrality, underpresent circumstances, would impede it. 4. Public Opinion Presently Opposes Marihuana Use For whatever reasons, a substantial majority of the Americanpublic opposes the use of marihuana, and would prefer that theirfellow citizens abstain from using it. In the National Survey,64% of the adult public agreed with the statement that"using marihuana is morally offensive` (40% felt the sameway about alcohol). Although this majority opinion is not by any meansconclusive, it cannot be ignored. We are well aware of theskeptics in with which marihuana user, and those sympathetic totheir wishes, view the policy making process; and we areparticularly concerned about the indifference to or disrespectfor law manifested by many citizens and particularly the youth. However, we are also apprehensive about the impact of a majorchange in social policy on that larger segment of our populationwhich supports the implications of the existing social policy.They, too, might lose respect for a policy-making establishmentwhich appeared to bend so easily to the wishes of a"lawless" and highly vocal minority. This concern for minimizing cultural dislocation must, ofcourse, be weighed against the relative importance of contraryarguments. For example, in the case of desegregation in theSouth, and now in the North, cult-Lire shock had to be acceptedin the light of the fundamental precept at issue. In the, case.of marihuana, there is no fundamental principle supporting theuse of the drug, and society is not compelled to approve or beneutral toward it. The opinion of the majority is entitled togreater weight. Looking again to the, experience with Prohibition, when anabstentionist policy for alcohol was adopted on the nationallevel in 1918, its proponents were not blind to the vociferousopposition of a substantial minority of the people. By the late1920's and early 1930's, the ambivalence of public opinion towardalcohol use and the unwillingness of large numbers of people tocomply with the new social policy compelled reversal of thatpolicy. Even many of its former supporters acknowledged itsfutility. With marihuana, however, the prevailing policy of eliminatinguse had never been opposed to any significant degree until themid-1960's. Unlike the prohibition of alcohol, which had been thesubject of public debate off and on for 60 years before it wasadopted, present marihuana policy has not until now engaged thepublic opinion process, some 50 years after it first began to beused. Majority sentiment does not appear to be as flexible as itwas with alcohol. 5. Neutrality Is Not Philosophically Compelled Much of what was stated above bespeaks an acute awareness bythe Commission of the subtleties of the collective consciousnessof the American people, as shown in the National Survey. There isa legitimate concern about what the majority of the non-usingpopulation thinks about marihuana use and what the drugrepresents in the public mind. The question is appropriatelyasked if we are suggesting that the majority in a free societymay impose its will on an unwilling minority even though, as itis claimed, uncertainty, speculation, and a large degree ofmisinformation form the basis of the predominant opinion. If wehave nothing more substantial than this, the argument goes,society should remain neutral. To deal with this contention, one must distinguish betweenends and means. Policy-makers must choose their objectives with asensitivity toward the entire social fabric and a vision of thegood society. In such a decision, the general public attitude isa significant consideration. The preferred outcome in ademocratic society cannot be that of the policy-makers alone; itmust be that of an informed public. Accordingly, the policy-makermust consider the dynamic relationship between perception andreality in the public mind. Is the public consensus based on areal awareness of the facts? Does the public really understandwhat is at stake? Given the best evidence available, would thepublic consensus remain the same? Assuming that dominant opinion opposes marihuana use, thephilosophical issue is raised not by the goal but by how it isimplemented. At this point, the interests of the unwilling becomeimportant. For example, the family unit and the institution ofmarriage are preferred means of group-living and child-rearing inour society. As a society, we are not neutral. We officiallyencourage matrimony by giving married couples favorable taxtreatment; but we do not compel people to get married. If itshould become public policy to try to reduce the birth rate, itis unlikely that there will be laws to punish those who exceedthe preferred family size, although we may again utilizedisincentives through the tax system. Similarly, this Commissionbelieves society should continue actively to discourage peoplefrom using marihuana, and any philosophical limitation isrelevant to the means employed, not to the goal itself. FOR THESE REASONS, WE RECOMMEND TO THE PUBLIC AND ITSPOLICY-MAKERS A SOCIAL CONTROL POLICY SEEKING TO DISCOURAGEMARIHUANA USE, WHILE CONCENTRATING PRIMARILY ON THE PREVENTION OFHEAVY AND VERY HEAVY USE. We emphasize that this is a policy for today and theimmediate future; we do not presume to suggest that this policyembodies eternal truth. Accordingly, we strongly recommend thatour successor policy planners, at an appropriate time in thefuture,, review the following factors to determine whether analtered social policy is in order: the state of public opinion,the extent to which members of the society continue to use thedrug, the developing scientific knowledge about the effects andsocial impact of use of the drug, and the evolving socialattitude toward the place of recreation and leisure in awork-oriented society. In our second Report next year, we willcarefully review our findings to see if our perceptions havechanged or if society has changed at that time. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-5IA031-000655-B039-157http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncaddend.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112932 text/html 21264HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:29:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:47 GMTContent-length: 21046 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding - Addendum Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 addendum The previous Chapter recommended a social policy orientedtoward the discouragement of marihuana use and presented a set ofproposals for the legal implementation of that policy. Inaddition to these legal recommendations for federal, and stateaction, the Commission believes certain other recommendationsshould be presented for action. Ancillary Recommendations These recommendations are presented in three categories: (1)legal and law enforcement, (2) medical, and (3) other. Some ofthese recommendations apply to other drugs as well and will bediscussed further in our second Report. However, we consider ituseful to make recommendations now so that policy planners can beinformed of the implications of what has been studied to date. Foremost among the Commission's conclusions is a need forconsistency between federal and state laws affecting marihuanadistribution and use, and uniformity of marihuana laws among thestates. The administration of all marihuana laws must be mutallyreenforcing so that total governmental response to marihuana isboth equitable and understandable. Legal and Law Enforcement Recommendations 1. Federal RECOMMENDATION: FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES, ESPECIALLYTHE BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS AND THE BUREAU OFCUSTOMS, SHOULD IMPROVE THEIR STATISTICAL REPORTING SYSTEMS SOTHAT POLICIES MAY BE PLANNED AND RESOURCES ALLOCATED ON THE BASISOF ACCURATE AND COMPREHENSIVE INFORMATION. In an effort to obtain information relating to enforcement ofthe marihuana laws including arrest, prosecution, sentencing andconviction data, the Commission found that sufficient informationwas available about prosecution and court action, but not aboutthe activities of the law enforcement agencies. We wereconfronted by and large with inadequate statistical informationand little or no in-depth evaluation. The statistical reporting procedures of the Bureau ofNarcotics and Dangerous Drugs and the Bureau of Customs are notuniform, making it extremely difficult to assess theeffectiveness of the two principal drug enforcement agencies ofthe Federal Government. The Bureau of Narcotics and DangerousDrugs keeps centralized files but the Bureau of Customs maintainsits files on a regional basis. In both Bureaus, statisticalinformation is kept only in its raw form; that is, number ofarrests, number of seizures and so on. Very little analysisexists of the procedures leading to arrest, of thecharacteristics of persons arrested, and of the law enforcementstrategies involved in the arrest. For law enforcement personnelto understand more fully how they are carrying out theirfunctions so that internal assessments of particular policies canbe made, sophisticated statistics must be maintained. Both the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs and theBureau of Customs are aware of these problems. Both wereextremely helpful to the Commission and its research staff inseeking useful information from the mass of raw statistics.However, the information from the available statistics isincomplete and of limited utility for policy planning purposes. In support of this priority recommendation, Congress is urgedto provide additional and adequate funding for this area, at thesame time requiring both agencies to utilize a common reportingsystem so that information can be more easily shared betweenthem. In addition, it is recommended that the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, in its Uniform Crime Reports, requests the stateagencies to identify marihuana cases separately from narcoticcases and report them as a separate component. RECOMMENDATION: THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUSDRUGS SH0ULD INCREASE ITS TRAINING PROGRAMS OF STATE AND LOCALPOLICE WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON THE TRAINING IN THE DETECTION OFTRAFFICKING CASES. The Commission's interviews with state and local police,officials revealed a consistent desire to upgrade the quality oftheir investigations. Since the Federal Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs, through its National Training Institute, hasbeen performing this task well, it is recommended that the fundsbe granted by the Congress to extend the range of the educationalprogram offered and increase the number of persons trained. RECOMMENDATION: INCREASED BORDER SURVEILLANCE, A TIGHTENING OFBORDER PROCEDURES, AND A REALISTIC ERADICAT10N PROGRAM TODIMINISH THE SUPPLY OF DRUGS COMING INTO THE COUNTRY, COUPLEDWITH A MORE EFFECTIVE PROGRAM FOR DIMINISHING THE DOMESTICPRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MARIHUANA, ARE REQUIRED. The Commission, as part of its mandate, studied drugtrafficking patterns along the borders of the United States. Ananalysis of border marihuana seizures was also made. The resultsof both studies indicated that proportionately larger seizureswere made along the borders at locations where, there were nomanned checkpoints. The Commission therefore recommends that morevigorous effort be made by federal agencies to interdictsmugglers along the entire border while continuing their effortsat the formal checkpoints. In discussions with representatives of other countries, acommon observation made by foreign officials has been thiscountry's somewhat indifferent attitude about the eradication ofour home-grown marihuana, an attitude that is not appreciated byother countries wider pressure from the United States to destroytheir crops. Since this Administration has wisely made illicittrafficking in all drugs a foreign policy priority, we recommendthat priority be supported by an equally assiduous effort toeradicate marihuana within our borders. We recommend further that preclearance procedures beeliminated so that Customs personnel may more effectively controlsmuggling of marihuana and other drugs. Preclearance is aprocedure whereby passengers and their baggage destined for theUnited States are inspected by U.S. Customs, Immigration andAgriculture officials prior to departure from a foreign location.This practice is in effect in Bermuda, Montreal, Nassau, Toronto,Vancouver, Winnipeg and the Virgin Islands. Other locations arepetitioning for the same privilege. An inherent weakness in the preclearance procedure is thatCustoms personnel stationed outside the United States have noauthority for search, seizure and arrest. This fact is well-knownto the professional smuggler who uses it to his advantage. Sincewe have been informed that preclearance creates a gap in Customs'interdiction process, reason dictates that the procedure beeliminated in the interest of tighter control. H. State RECOMMENDATION: ALL STATES SHOULD ADOPT THE UNIFORM CONTROLLEDSUBSTANCES ACT TO ACHIEVE UNIFORMITY WITH REGARD TO MARIHUANA ANDOTHER DRUG LAWS, WITH THE EXCEPTION THAT THE LEGAL RESPONSE TOPOSSESSION FOR ONE'S OWN USE BE UNIFORMLY ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCEWITH OUR RECOMMENDATION IN CHAPTER V OF THIS REPORT. As noted earlier, one of the greatest needs in the entire drugarea is uniformity of state laws with regard to structure andpenalties. While this recommendation applies to all drugs and notjust marihuana, we feel it essential to make this recommendationnow to help deemphasize the marihuana problem. Significantdifferences in penalties among the states constitute a validsource of irritation and conflict among various segments of ourpopulation. In an age of high mobility, it is unconscionable thatpenalties should vary so greatly in response, to the samebehavior. RECOMMENDATION: EACH STATE SHOULD ESTABLISH A CENTRALIZEDCOMPULSORY REPORTING AND RECORD-KEEPTNG AUTHORITY SO THATADEQUATE AND ACCURATE STATISTICS OF ARRESTS, SENTENCES ANDCONVICTIONS ON A STATEWIDE BASIS ARE AVAILABLE. Several states have systems for maintaining records of drugarrests on a statewide basis. Accurate reporting and compilationof these cases permit the state to assess accurately the impactof law enforcement on drug offenders. The Law EnforcementAssistance Administration of the Department of Justice shouldassist the states to establish compulsory statistical reportingcenters so that individual state needs are met and a clearerpicture of the national trends can be, ascertained. Efficientstate record-keeping will have an additional benefit ofincreasing the reliability of the Uniform Crime Reports compiledby the Federal Bureau of Investigation. RECOMMENDATION: THOSE STATES REQUIRING PHYSICIANS TO REPORTDRUG USERS SEEKING MEDICAL ASSISTANCE SHOULD CHANGE SUCHREQUIREMENTS TO INSURE THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE DRUG USER'SIDENTITY, SO THAT PERSONS NEEDING MEDICAL HELP WILL FEEL FREE TOSEEK IT. Seventeen states* currently require physicians to report to agovernment agency information on those persons treated by themwho are dependent on, or are habitual users of drugs. No commonpattern emerges among these states. *California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Massachusetts,Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New Mexico. New York,North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Virginia, Washington. After reviewing these statutes, the Commission believes thatthe disadvantages of maintaining such reporting systems outweighthe benefits to society or the individual. Fear of disclosure tothe police discourages many persons front seeking needed medicalhelp. Furthermore, the requirement makes the physician aninformant and an agent of law enforcement. While a need exists for reliable statistics regarding thenumber and nature of those persons being treated, the Commissiondoes not feel that identification of the individual user isnecessary. We again emphasize that society should encouragepersons in need of medical attention to seek out authorizedpractitioners without having to fear legal repercussions for suchaction. III. International RECOMMENDATION: IF THE UNITED STATES SHOULD BECOME A SIGNATORYOF THE PROPOSED PSYCHOTROPIC CONVENTION, WE RECOMMEND THATCANNABIS BE REMOVED FROM THE EXISTING SINGLE CONVENTION ANDCONSIDERATION BE GIVEN TO LISTING IT IN THE PSYCHOTROPICCONVENTION AMONG DRUGS WHICH HAVE SIMILAR EFFECTS. Under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, of whichthe United States became a signatory in 1967, cannabis, with theexception of its leaves and stems, is included with narcoticdrugs and cocaine. While that categorization had somejustification in 1961 when knowledge about marihuana was more,limited, this justification no longer exists. More importantly,tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive ingredient incannabis, is not included in the Single Convention and isproposed for inclusion in the Psychotropic Convention. The Commission sees little sense in having the potentpsychoactive ingredient in cannabis covered in one Convention andthe natural supplying data from its major foreign studies ofchronic cannabis users in Jamaica and Greece. For medicalresearch purposes, an analysis of data derived from populationsin other countries with 10, 20 or 30 years of experience withheavy marihuana use will provide useful information aboutprobable consequences if the, incidence of marihuana use in theUnited States were to continue and increase, and if more peopleengaged in heavy, long term use. IV. Therapeutic Uses RECOMMENDATION: INCREASED SUPPORT OF STUDIES WHICH EVALUATETHE EFFICACY OF MARIHIUANA TN THE TREATMENT OF PHYSICALIMPAIRMENTS AND DISEASE IS RECOMMENDED. Historical references have been noted throughout theliterature referring to the use of cannabis products astherapeutically useful agents. Of particular significance forcurrent research with controlled quality, quantity andtherapeutic settings, would be investigations into the treatmentof glaucoma, migraine, alcoholism and terminal cancer. TheNIMII-FDA Psychotomimetic Advisory Committee's authorization ofstudies designed to explore the therapeutic uses of marihuana iscommended. V. Community-Based Treatment RECOMMENDATION: COMMUNITY-BASED TREATMENT FACILITIES SHOULD BEPROMOTED IN CARlNG FOR PROBLEM DRUG USERS UTILIZING EXISTINGHEALTH CENTERS WHEN POSSIBLE AND APPROPRIATE. In studying marihuana, the Commission has obtained informationabout a number of treatment centers and services. The wide rangeof agencies and the variety of goals and techniques present aconfusing array of services available to drug users, varyingwidely in their effectiveness. Uniform criteria for evaluatingthe "success" of these programs is urgently needed. The medical members of the Commission believe that some of thetechniques being used may pose as much potential harm as good.Many young people who are experiencing profound difficultiesresulting from the use of drugs may suppose they are beingtreated and helped, when in reality they are not. In some cases,the short-term benefit may be disruptive to the long-term welfareof the individual. In the rush to provide treatment facilities,many programs have been given impressive credentials withoutmeeting minimal medical standards. It is essential that treatmentfacilities have, as their primary orientation, the well-being ofthe individual under treatment. VI. Training Programs RECOMMENDATION: PUBLIC HEALTH COURSES ON THE SOCIAL ASPECTS OFDRUG USE SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THE CURRICULA OF THE SCHOOLS OFTHE HEALTH PROFESSIONS. The Commission recommends that schools of the healthprofessions include in their curricula courses on the social,public health and therapeutic aspects of drug use as appropriateto the educational purpose of the individual school. The NationalSurvey indicated that the public views the family physician as animportant source of information about drugs. Next to schoolpersonnel, physicians were mentioned most often in thisconnection. Persons involved in the health professions must beprovided with information about nonmedical as well as the medicalaspects of drug use. Other Recommendations 1. Reclassification of Cannabis RECOMMENDATION: THE COMMISSION RECOGNIZES THAT SEVERAL STATELEGISLATURES HAVE IMPROPERLY CLASSIFIED MARIHUANA AS A NARCOTIC,AND RECOMMENDS THAT THEY NOW REDEFINE MARIHUANA ACCORDING TO THESTANDARDS OF THE RECENTLY ADOPTED UNIFORM CONTROLLED SUBSTANCESLAW. Scientific evidence has clearly demonstrated that marihuana isnot a narcotic drug, and the law should properly reflect thisfact. Congress so recognized in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970, as did The Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws in the Uniform ControlledSubstances Law. In those states where the Uniform Controlled Substances Lawhas not yet been adopted, twelve of which continue to classifymarihuana as a "narcotic", the Commission recommendsthat the legislatures distinguish marihuana from the opiates andlist it in a separate category. The consequence of inappropriatedefinition is that the public continues to associate marihuanawith the narcotics, such as heroin. The confusion resulting fromthis improper classification helps to perpetuate prejudices andmisinformation about marihuana. II. Information RECOMMENDATION: A SINGLE FEDERAL AGENCY SOURCE SHOULDDISSEMINATE INFORMATION AND MATERIALS RELATING TO MARIHUANA ANDOTHER DRUGS. THE NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE FOR DRUG ABUSEINFORMATION SHOULD BE CHARGED WITH THIS RESPONSIBILITY. A great proliferation of drug information materials hasoccurred in recent years. These, materials are currentlydistributed by a number of federal agencies. Some of thesematerials conflict with each other. The result is a confusion anduncertainty on the part of the, public about the accuracy of allthese statements. The public should have one federal source fromwhich to obtain drug information. The National Clearinghouse forDrug Abuse Information appears best suited to perform this task. III. Education RECOMMENDATION: THE SPECIAL ACTION OFFICE FOR DRUG ABUSEPREVENTION IN THE WHITE HOUSE SHOULD BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THECOORDINATION, DEVELOPMENT AND CONTENT REVIEW OF ALLFEDERALLY-SUPPORTED DRUG EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS ANT) SHOULD ISSUEA REPORT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE, EVALUATING EXISTING DRUG EDUCATIONMATERIALS. The Commission has studied many programs of drug educationthroughout the country. Some are irrelevant, others are poorlydesigned, still others are misleading, and a good many of themare, of questionable value. A few are excellent. The FederalGovernment must provide assistance to the states and schooldistricts in this matter, and should provide the leadership indeveloping sample programs in cooperation with educationalsystems. An evaluation of existing programs by The Special ActionOffice for Drug Abuse Prevention of the White House could be veryhelpful in improving the standards of drug education. IV. Voluntary Sector Participation RECOMMENDATION: THE COMMISSION NOTES THE SIGNIFICANT ROLEPLAYED BY THE VOLUNTARY SEC TOR OF THE AMERICAN COMMUNITY ININFLUENCING THE SOCIAL, RELIGIOUS AND MORAL ATTITUDES OF OURNATION'S CITIZENS AND RECOMMENDS THAT THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR BEENCOURAGED TO TAKE AN ACTIVE ROLE IN SUPPORT OF OUR RECOMMENDEDPOLICY OF DISCOURAGING THE USE OF MARIHUANA. Already very active in drug education and preventionactivities, the social agencies, service clubs, church groups,and other non-governmental bodies have, been extremely helpful inattending to the difficult problems of drug abuse. The local andpersonal nature of such organizations gives them an advantageover state and federal governments in the development ofattitudes by our citizens. The policy which we here recommend, indeed any policy whichmight be recommended, will inevitably encounter widespread andearnest objections. The fullest efforts of all citizens of goodwill be required to attend to the, massive problem of drug abusein a calm, just, responsible and effective manner. The help ofthe voluntary agencies in working toward this end is earnestlyinvited and urgently needed. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-6IA031-000655-B039-188http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1let.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112959 text/html 3760HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:29:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:33 GMTContent-length: 3543 National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse - Letter Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse 801 19th Street N.W. Washington, D.C. 20006 March 22, 1972 To The President and Congress of the United States: As Chairman of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse, I am pleased to submit to you our first year Report inconformance with the mandate contained in Section 601 of PublicLaw 91-513, The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and ControlAct of 1970. This Report "Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding" is an all-inclusive effort to present thefacts as they are known today, to demythologize the controversysurrounding marihuana, and to place in proper perspective one ofthe most emotional and explosive issues of our time. We on theCommission sincerely hope it will play a significant role inbringing uniformity and rationality to our marihuana laws, bothFederal and State, and that it will create a healthy climate forfurther discussion, for further research and for a continuingadvance in the development of a public social policy beneficialto all our citizens. Whatever the facts are we have reported them. Wherever thefacts have logically led us, we have followed and used them inreaching our recommendations. We hope this Report will be afoundation upon which credibility in this area can be restoredand upon which a rational policy can be predicated. By Direction of the Commission Raymond P. Shafer The President The President of the Senate The Speaker of the House Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-7IA031-000655-B039-213http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncstaff.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113015 text/html 5120HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:30:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:06 GMTContent-length: 4903 National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse -- Staff Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Members and Staff COMMISSION MEMBERS The Honorable Raymond Philip Shafer, Chairman Dana L. Farnsworth , M.D., Vice Chairman Henry Brill, M.D. The Honorable Tim Lee Carter, U.S. Representative, Kentucky Mrs. Joan Ganz Cooney Charles 0. Galvin, S.J.D. John A. Howard , Ph. D. The Honorable Harold E. Hughes, U.S. Senator, Iowa The Honorable Jacob K. Javits, U.S. Senator, New York The Honorable Paul G. Rogers, U.S. Representative, Florida Maurice H. Seevers, M.D., Ph. D. J. Thomas Ungerleider, M.D. Mitchell Ware, J.D. COMMISSION STAFF Executive Director Michael R. Sonnenreich Deputy Director Louis P. Bozzetti, M.D. Suzanne Baumgartner Glenn Gilman John Helm Paulette Hodges Roberta Hollander Anthony J. Roccograndi Ralph M. Susman Michel D. Silva Richard J. Bonnie Emery F. Bacon Lenore R. Kupperstein Jack D. Blaine, M.D. Delores E. Mack, Ph. D. Maryann L. Urban Sol J. Silverman Andrea Maharam Corcoran Peter J. Jessen Evelyn Miller Cynthia Rose Carol Simons Sally M. Boyd Mary K. Ryan Ethel McIntosh Basil M. Johnson Support Staff Cynthia Freeman Judith Herbert Christine Jones Maryann M. Kowalczyk Theresa Lewis Youth Consultants Kathryn E. Aasen John D. Arterberry Bren L. Buckley Robert Donfeld Ann Frame Eric A. Goldstein Terry J. Houle Milton J. Nichols Student Researchers Samuel H. Bayless Theodore M. Becker Karen Bonnie Richard D'Amico Linda Dubuclet John T. Golden James Kimble William King Sharon Payne Mary Povich Cornelia Reister Carlton Thompson Deloris West Michael S. Pauley Andrew D. Pike Ellen B. Rouse Terri J. Siegel Richard L. Taylor Sarah C. Tefft Patricia A. Wallace Dianne L. Williams Daniel Lipman Gerald F. Murray Joel S. Ostrow Stephen H. Pugh Michael W. Russell William Sharek Kenneth S. Starkey Michael Stein Michael J. Valentine Notice: Former staff members: Maureen E. Biner, Valerie Boyle,Hugh E. Flaherty, Roy E. Kinsey, Sherrill gasser and John Williams. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-8IA031-000655-B039-233http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1p.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113022 text/html 6556HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:30:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:30 GMTContent-length: 6339 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding -- Preface Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding The Technical Papers of the First Report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse March, 1972 Preface Congress created the Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse toseparate fact from fiction, reality from myth, and to achieve abalanced judgment on the marihuana issue. The first report of theCommission is an attempt to clarify the essential issues andconcerns of our society regarding marihuana and to extrapolateour findings and conclusions into a reasonable societal response. In an effort to present these complex issues with a maximum ofclarity, comprehension, and readability, the Commission Reportdoes not include references. This Appendix, however, fullydocuments the methodological and substantive, issues presented inthe Report. In addition to the technical data, the Appendix alsocontains the historical and philosophical matrix of the Report. The papers of the Appendix are divided into six major parts.Part One deals with the biosocial aspects which relate tomarihuana's effect on individuals as well as to the largersociety. It includes an historical survey of two types of marihuanause, medicinal and intoxicant, which constitutes a review ofmarihuana use in many parts of the world. An analysis of theaccepted sociocultural parameters helps to put the Americanmarihuana, user into perspective. Part One also presents detailed and current reviews of thebotanical, psychopharmacologic, physiologic, and behavioraleffects of marihuana on man. Part Two, the social aspects of marihuana use, discussespatterns of the individual user as well as the relationship ofmarihuana use to violent and non-violent crime. One of the most controversial issues in the study of marihuanais its relationship to other drugs. The second chapter of PartTwo deals specifically with this issue and explores, in depth andwith careful consideration, the hypothesis that marihuana useleads to other drugs, especially heroin. Part Three is concerned with the legal aspects of themarihuana controversy. In order to place marihuana, apsychoactive drug, in proper perspective, a history of thecontrol of marihuana, alcohol and tobacco is presented. This section of the Appendix also reviews the currentmarihuana laws at the international, federal and state levelsincluding statutes that require physicians to report drugaddiction. The section concludes with a description oftrafficking and distribution patterns of the drug. Part Four, the response of the criminal justice system,analyzes law enforcement behavior with respect to marihuana use.The relationship between the opinions held by officials in thecriminal justice system and their behavior toward marihuanaoffenders is also discussed. Part Five presents the findings of the Commission-sponsoredNational Survey of public attitudes and behavior towardmarihuana, other drug use and related social issues. Part Six discusses the marihuana issue with respect tosociolegal policy practices and decisions. Included in thesection is a discussion of the constitutional dimensions whichform the basis for alternative models for the control ofmarihuana. A nationwide study of marihuana education presentspolicies and programs on a state-by-state basis and includesdescriptions of ongoing marihuana education programs. The Appendix concludes with a presentation of future researchrecommendations as suggested guidelines for various agencies,institutions and individuals engaged in research on marihuana. Each of the papers contained herein represents the compositeeffort of the Commission members and staff, consultants,contractors and youth consultants. Of necessity, space limitations precluded the publication infull of many excellent papers; many works are presented either inabridged form or integrated into the Commission's ownpresentation. A list of all papers submitted to the Commission is presentedat the conclusion of the Appendix. Should any reader wish toobtain a copy of a particular work, the request should be sentdirectly to the author and not to the Commission. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-9IA031-000655-B039-259http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113032 text/html 41557HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:30:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:52 GMTContent-length: 41339 History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant From: Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding, theReport of the US National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,1972 The term "marihuana" is a word with indistinctorigins. Some believe it is derived from the Mexican words for"Mary Jane"; others hold that "marihuana"comes from. the Portuguese word marigu-ano which means"intoxicant" (Geller and Boas, 1969: 14). This chapteroutlines the many and varied uses of marihuana through history,and deals with its use in medicine and its use as an intoxicant. The experience of the 1960's might lead one to surmise thatmarihuana use spreads explosively. The chronicle of its 3,000year history, however, shows that this "explosion" hasbeen characteristic only of the contemporary scene. The plant hasbeen grown for fiber and as a source of medicine for severalthousand years, but until 500 A.D. its use as a mind-alteringdrug was almost solely confined in India. The drug and its usesreached the Middle and Near East during the next severalcenturies, and then moved across North Africa, appeared in LatinAmerica and the Caribbean, and finally entered the United Statesin the early decades of this century (Snyder, 1970: 129). Meanwhile it had been introduced into European medicineshortly after the invasion of Egypt by Napoleon and had a minorvogue as an intoxicant for a time in France. Regardless of which parts of the world are discussed, many of thesame problems and concerns about cannabis are common to all,including the United States. Understanding its various usesduring many centuries in diverse countries and continents canperhaps lead to a better understanding of marihuana in general. History of the Medical Use The history of cannabis products and their use has been long,colorful and varied. "To the agriculturist, cannabis is afiber crop; to the physician, it is an enigma; to the user, aeuphoriant; to the police, a menace; to the trafficker, a sourceof profitable danger; to the convict or parolee and his family, asource of sorrow" (Mikuriya, 1969: 34). The fact is thatcannabis has been held simultaneously in high and low esteem atvarious times throughout recorded history, particularly in ourown times. The volume of information available on the medical applicationof cannabis is considerable. Occasionally certain references havebeen condensed or deleted, but this should not detract from thecompleteness of the report. This historical survey of the medical uses of marihuana isintroduced by abroad overview of its use, including brief noteson current and projected research, and then considers specifichistorical settings and circumstances in ancient China, moving onto Egypt, India, Greece, Africa, and the Western World. Cannabis sativa has been used therapeutically from theearliest records, nearly 5,000 years ago, to the present day(Mikuriya, 1969: 34) and its products have been widely noted fortheir effects, both physiological and psychological, throughoutthe world. Although the Chinese and Indian cultures knew aboutthe properties of this drug from very early times, thisinformation did not become general in the Near and Middle Eastuntil after the fifth century A.D., when travelers, traders andadventurers began to carry knowledge of the drug westward toPersia and Arabia. Historians claim that cannabis was first employed in thesecountries as an antiseptic and analgesic. Other medical uses werelater developed and spread throughout the Middle East, Africa,and Eastern Europe. Several years after the return of Napoleon's army from Egypt,cannabis became widely accepted by Western medical practitioners.Previously, it had had limited use for such purposes as thetreatment of burns. The scientific members of Napoleon's forceswere interested in the drug's pain relieving and sedativeeffects. It was used during, and to a greater extent, followinghis rule in France, especially after 1840 when the work of suchphysicians as O'Shaughnessy, Aubert-Roche, and Moreau de Toursdrew wide attention to this drug. With the rise of the literary movement of the 1840-1860 periodin France (Gautier, Baudelaire, Dumas, etc.), cannabis becamesomewhat popular as an intoxicant of the intellectual classes. In the United States, medical interest in cannabis use wasevidenced in 1860 by the convening of a Committee on CannabisIndica of the Ohio State Medical Society, which reported on itstherapeutic applications (McMeens, 1860: 1). Between the period1840-1890, Walton states that more than 100 articles werepublished recommending cannabis for one disorder or another. Concern about cannabis as an intoxicant led the government ofIndia to establish the India Hemp Commission of 1893-94 toexamine the entire question of cannabis use in India. Paralleling the question over cannabis use in the latter halfof the 19th century was the growing medical use of othermedications superior to cannabis in their effects and more easilycontrolled as to dose. Consequently, medical use of cannabisdeclined and cannabis began to lose support of the medicalprofession. During the years between 1856-1937, cannabis lost its image asa medicine and was left with a disreputable image as anintoxicant. Strong public reaction coupled with a campaign in thepublic press led to a federal anti-marihuana law in 1937. (Thedrug was illegal in many states before 1937.) The issue ofmedical use remained active, however, and Dr. William C.Woodward, Legislative Counsel to the AMA, an opponent of cannabisuse and the only physician to be a witness at the Taxation ofMarihuana hearings, stated: There are exceptions in treatment in which cannabis cannotapparently be successfully subsituted for. The work of Pascalseems to show that Indian Hemp has remarkable properties inrevealing the subconscious; hence, it can be used forpsychological, psychoanalytic and psychotherapeutic research(Hearings, House of Representatives, 1937: 91). Although cannabis drugs are generally regarded as obsolete andrarely used in "western" medicine today, cannabis is"still used extensively in the Ayruvedic, Unani and Tibbisystems of medicine of the Indian-Pakastani subcontinent"("The Cannabis Problem, 1962: 27). The Pharmacopoeias ofIndia mention cannabis use in the recent past. Two preparationsof cannabis, a liquid extract and a tincture, are listed in the1954 and 1966 Pharmacopoeias of India which contain descriptionsof cannabis and its extract and how it is made (Chopra &Chopra, 1957: 9). A more recent source makes reference to the fact that "incontemporary India and Pakistan, there continues to be widespreadindigenous medical, 'quasi-medical,' and illicit use of bothopium and cannabis" (Chopra & Chopra, 1957: 12-13).Bouquet notes that hemp resin is occasionally used in the nativemedicines of the countries where it is collected. He pointsespecially to India where, "the medical systems . . . makemuch use of cannabis as a sedative, hypnotic, analgesic,anti-spasmodic and anti-hemorrhoidal" (Bulletin onNarcotics, 1962:27). According to the Canadian Commission of Inquiry into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs: There is no currently accepted medical use of cannabis inNorth America outside of an experimental context. Althoughcannabis has been reported to produce an array of possibly usefulmedical effects, these have either not been adequatelyinvestigated, or can be replaced by using other more readilyavailable and convenient drugs. The natural product's variabilityin potency and instability over time are among the factors whichhave led to its disfavor in Western 20th century medicine....cannabis has often been employed in the past, and is currentlyused illicitly in North America, to reduce the secondary symptomsand suffering caused by the flue and the common cold. These . . .alleged therapeutic properties of cannabis have not beenadequately studied in a scientific context, and their generalmedical potential remains a matter of conjecture (1970: 74). Similar statements regarding cannabis are to be found inMarijuana, edited by Erich Goode, and in the textbookPharmacological Basis of Therapeutics by Goodman and Gilman(1970: 300). Concerning therapeutic uses, the latter states: Although cannabis was once used for a wide variety of clinicaldisorders and has even been demonstrated to have antibacterialactivity, there are at present no well substantiated indicationsfor its use. It is no longer an official drug. Preparations arerarely available (cannabis preparation and synthetic THC areobtainable only for research purposes), and prescriptions areregulated by special tax laws. Hollister (1971: 27) lists a few difficulties of thetherapeutic use of cannabis: The onset of the action of oral doses of THC is often rather slow, contrary to that of conventional sedative-hypnotics. Doses high enough to produce a marked hypnotic effect are almost always accompanied by some degree of psychotomimetic-like perceptual disorders, which many patients might find disagreeable. The fine titration of dose required to provide sedative effects is likely to be difficult. The drug does not have novel effects compared with other sedative-hypnotics. The Department of Health, Education, and We] fare report toCongress in 1971, Marihuana and Health, repeats the statement ofthe Canadian Interim Report of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Useof Drugs, and states: "There is no currently acceptedmedical use of cannabis in the United States outside of anexperimental context" (DHEW: 1971: 27). Allen Geller andMaxwell Boas (1969: 4) think that cannabis' "unsavoryreputation has largely stymied further research." Despite the many statements discounting cannabis' therapeuticusefulness, some authorities maintain that its medical valuemight be reborn through further research and/or use. DavidSolomon, in his foreword to The Marihuana Papers (1968: xxi)argues that: Marihuana should be accorded the medical status it once had in this country as a legitimate prescription item. After 1937, with the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act and subsequent federal and state legislation, it became virtually impossible for physicians to obtain or prescribe marihuana preparations for their patients. Thus, the medical profession was denied access to a versatile pharmaceutical tool with a history of therapeutic utility going back thousands of years. In a 1970 article, "Pot Facing Stringent ScientificExamination ," reference is made to Dr. Par who states thatthere are three areas in which "chemical and animalexperiments are under way:" (1) Analgesia-mood elevation plus analgesic power may makeuseful drug. (2) Blood pressure reduction-hypertension may be helped by newdrugs which lower the blood pressure by what seems to be actionon the central nervous system. (3) Psychotherapeutic-new compounds are antidepressants andantianxiety drugs (Culliton: 1970). Mikuriya cites it studies concerning cannabis funded by theNational Institute of Mental Health in 1961. The studies were"either specialized animal experiments, part of anobservational sociologic study of a number of drugs, orexplorations of chemical detection methods" (Mikuriya, 1969:38). Feinglass has pointed to four general categories into whichthe clinical studies of marihuana could be divided (1968:206-208). They are: Anticonvulsant effects-treatment of tetanus, convulsions of rabies, epilepsy, and infant convulsions. Psychotherapeutic actions - appetite-stimulation, treatment of depression, and as a sedative and hypnotic in reducing anxiety; treatment of addiction. Antibiotic properties. Pain-affecting power. Grinspoon suggests: Very little research attention has been given to the possibility that marihuana might protect some people from psychosis. Among users of the drug, the proportion of people with neuroses or personality disorders is usually higher than in the general population; one might therefore expect the incidence of psychoses also to be higher in this group. The fact that it is not suggests that for some mentally disturbed people, the escape provided by the drug may serve to prevent a psychotic breakdown (1969: 24). Mikuriya lists many possible therapeutic uses of THC andsimilar products in his paper "Marihuana in Medicine: Past,Present and Future." He includes: Analgesic-hypnotic, appetite stimulant, antiepileptic,antispasmodic, prophylactic and treatment of the neuralgias,including migraine and tic douloureaux,antidepressant-tranquillizer, anti-asthmatic, oxytocic,anti-tussive, topical anesthetic, withdrawal agent for opiate andalcohol addiction, child birth analgesic, and antibiotic (1968:39). China The oldest known therapeutic description Of cannabis was bythe Emperor Shen-Nung in the 28th century B.C. in China, wherethe plant had long been grown for fiber. He prescribed cannabisfor beri-beri, constipation, "female weakness," gout,malaria, rheumatism and absentmindedness (Bloomquist, 1968: 19). Egypt In Egypt, in the 20th century B.C., cannabis was used to treatsore eyes. Additional medical usage was not reported until muchlater. India Prior to the 10th century B.C., bhang, a cannabis preparation,was used as an anesthetic and antiphlegmatic in India. In thesecond century A.D., a Chinese physician, Hoa-Tho, prescribed itas an analgesic in surgical procedures (Mikuriya, 1969: 34). From the 10th century B.C. up to 1945 (and even to the presenttime), cannabis has been used in India to treat a wide variety ofhuman maladies. The drug is highly regarded by some medicalpractitioners in that country. The religious use of cannabis in India is thought to havepreceded its medical use (Blum and Associates, II, 1969: 73;Snyder, 1970: 125). The religious use of cannabis is to help"the user to free his mind from worldly distractions and toconcentrate on the Supreme Being" (Barber, 1970: 80). Cannabis is used in Hindu and Sikh temples and at Mohammedanshrines. Besides using the drug as an aid to meditation, it isalso used to overcome hunger and thirst by the religiousmendicants. In Nepal, it is distributed on certain feast days atthe temples of all Shiva followers (Blum & Associates, 1969,11: 63). The Hindus spoke of the drug as the "heavenlyguide," "the soother of grief." Considered holy,it was described as a sacred grass during the Vedic period (Fort,1969: 15). A reference to cannabis in Hindu scriptures is thefollowing: To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in bhang... Bhang is the joy giver, the sky filer, the heavenly guide,the poor man's heaven, the soother of grief ... No god or man isas good as the religious drinker of Mang. The students of thescriptures of Benares are given bhang before they sit to study.At Benares, Ujjain and other holy places, yogis take deepdraughts of Mang that they may center their thoughts on theEternal . . . By the help of Mang ascetics pass days without foodor drink. The supporting power of Mang has brought many a Hindufamily safe through the miseries of famine (Snyder, 1970: 125). Greece In ancient Greece, cannabis was used as a remedy for earache,edema, and inflammation (Robinson, 1946: 382-383). Africa Cannabis was used in Africa to restore appetite and to relievepain of hemorrhoids, its antiseptic uses were also known tocertain African native tribes (O'Shaughnessy, 1842: 431). Variousother uses, in a number of countries, included the treatment oftetanus, hydrophobia, delirium tremens, infantile convulsions,neuralgia and other nervous disorders, cholera, menorrhagia,rheumatism, hay fever, asthma, skin diseases, and protractedlabor during childbirth. The 19th Century Documents of the 19th century report on the use of cannabis tocontrol diarrhea in cholera and to stimulate appetite. In hisreports of the late 1830's and early 1840's, O'Shaughnessy (1842:431) stated that tetanus could be arrested and cured when treatedwith extra large doses of cannabis. John Bell, M.D., Boston, reported enthusiastically in 1857,about the effects of cannabis in the control of mental andemotional disorders as opposed to the use of "moraldiscipline" to restrain the mentally ill. Similarly, in1858, Moureau. de Tours reported several case histories of manicand depressive disorders treated with hashish (Walton, 1938: 3). The Ohio State Medical Society's Committee on Cannabis Indica,convened in 1860, reported that their respondents claimedcannabis successfully treated neuralgic pain, dysmenorhea,uterine hemorrhage, hysteria, delirium tremens, mania, palsy,whooping cough, infantile convulsions, asthma, gonorrhea, nervousrheumatism, chronic bronchitis, muscular spasms, tetanus,epilepsy and appetite stimulation (McMeens, 1860: 1). The India Hemp Commission (1894: 174) likewise was informed ofsimilar medicinal uses for cannabis. Specific reports includedthe use of cannabis as an analgesic, a restorer of energy, ahemostat, an ecbolic, and an antidiaretic. Cannabis was alsomentioned as an aid in treating hay fever, cholera, dysentery,gonorrhea, diabetes, impotence, urinary incontinence, swelling ofthe testicles, granulation of open sores, and chronic ulcers.Other beneficial effects attributed to cannabis were preventionof insomnia, relief of anxiety, protection against cholera,alleviation of hunger and as an aid to concentration ofattention. MEDICAL USES IN THE 20TH CENTURY Despite the fact that marihuana was made illegal in the UnitedStates in 1937, research has continued on the medical uses ofmarihuana. The findings include various possible medicalapplications of cannabis and its chemical derivatives. One of the most recent and interesting findings (Frank, 1972)concerns the effect of cannabis in reducing intraocular pressure.It was found that as the dose of marihuana increased, thepressure within the eye decreased by up to 30%. This occurred innormal persons as well as in those with glaucoma, a disease ofthe eye in which increased intraocular pressure may causeblindness. Much more research is necessary in connection withthis experimental clinical finding before final judgment can bepassed on such a possible therapeutic value. During the past 20 years in western medicine, marihuana hasbeen assigned antibiotic activity; as a result, several studiesrelating to this possibility have been undertaken. H. B. M.Murphy (1963: 20) reported investigations in Eastern Europe. Hestated that "it is alleged to be active against grampositive organisms at 1/100,000 dilution, but to be largelyinactivated by plasma, so that prospects for its use appear tobe, confined to E. N. T. (ear, nose and throat) and skininfections." Dr. J. Kabelikovi (1952: 500-503) and his coworkers carriedout tests on rats, which were similar to tests carried out withpenicillin in vitro. The alcohol extract of cannabis wasbacterially effective against many gram-positive and onegram-negative microorganisms. It was also found that a paste formof external application was successful. According to Kabelikovi,"from a study of 2,000 herbs by Czechoslovakian scientistsit was found that cannabis indica (the Indian Hemp) was the mostpromising in the realm of antibiotics." In a 1959 publication of Pharmacie, Krejci stated: "Fromthe flowering tips and leaves of hemp, cannabis sativa var indicabred in Middle Europe, were extracted a phenol and an acidfraction. From the acid fraction, two acids were obtained, ofwhich one preserved its antibiotic properties" (p. 349). Inanother Czechoslovakian publication, Krejci (1961: 1351-1353)referred to two additional samples with antibiotic activity. Sample I in Fig. 1 has been sufficiently identified ascannabidiolic acid and sample 9 as cannabidiol. Both fractionsshow antibiotic activity. The results of tests lead us toconclude that the antibacterial action of cannabis sativa is notidentical to the hashish effect found, for example, intetrahydrocannabinol. However, it was established that cannabissativa is effective as an antibiotic for local infections. Kabelik, Krejci, and Santavy (1960: 13) include in"Cannabis as a Medicant" the various microorganismsagainst which cannabis is effective. Proof could be furnished that the cannabis extracts produce avery satisfactory antibacterial effect upon the followingmicrobes: staphylococcus pyogenes aureus, steptococcus alphahaemolyticus, streptococcus beta haemolyticus, enterococcus,diplococcus pneumonia, B. anthracis, and corynebacteriumdiptheriae i.e., all of them gram-positive microorganisms.Noteworthy is the effect upon staphylococcus aureaus strains,which are resistant to penicillin and to other antibiotics. These authors also mentioned that E. coli (gramnegativebacteria) were tested and found to be resistant to the cannabisextract. One of the conclusions was "the possibility ofutilizing the antibiotics locally without any danger of producingresistant strains to other antibiotics administered at the sametime throughout treatment" (Kabelik, et al., 1960: 13). Veliky and Genest in "Suspension Culture of CannabisSativa," (1970) reported that "the ethanol extract ofcultured cells exhibited antibiotic activity against Bacillusmegatherium, staphlococcus aureaus and escherichia coli" (p.493). Other reports said that "a pronounced antibiotic effecthas been observed in South America, where fresh leaves, afterbeing ground, are used as a poultice for furuncles, and in folkmedicine in Europe for treatment of erysipelas" (Kabelik, etal., 1960: 8). This section on the -antibiotic uses of cannabis concludeswith a summary of several reports from various countries. InPharmacopee Arabe: "The ground-up seeds are mixed with breadfor people with tuberculosis" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967:145). In Czechoslovakia: "A preparation from seed pulp was .. . introduced by Sirek to act as a roborant diet in treatment oftuberculosis" (Kabelik, 1960: 8). "In Southern Rhodesiathe plant is used as an African remedy for malaria, anthrax,sepsis, black water fever, dysentery, blood-poisoning, tropicalquinine-malarial haemoglobinuria, and a wart medicine"(Watt, 1961: 13). In Argentina: Cannabis is considered a real panacea for tetanus, colic,gastralgia, swelling of the liver, gonorrhoea, sterility,impotency, abortion, tuberculosis of the lungs and asthma ...even the root-bark has been collected in spring, and employed asa febrifuge, tonic, for treatment of dysentery and gastralgia,either pulverized or in form of decoctions. The root when groundand applied to burns is said to relieve pain. Oil from the seedshas been frequently used even in treatment of cancer . . .(Kabelik, 1960: 8). In 1949, Davis and Ramsey reported a study of the effect ofTHC on epileptic children. "The demonstration ofanticonvulsant activity of the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)congeners by laboratory tests (Loewe and Goodman, FederationProc., 6: 3521 1947) prompted clinical trial in fiveinstitutionalized epileptic children" (David and Ramsey,1949: 284-285). Of these five children, all had severesymptomatic grand mal epilepsy with mental retardation; threealso had cerebral palsy; and three had focal seizure activity.The EEG tracings were reported to be grossly abnormal in all fivechildren. The results after treatment with homologues of THC,were reported as follows: Three children-responded at least as well as to previoustherapy. Fourth child-almost completely seizure free. Fifthchild-entirely seizure free. As a result of their study, David and Ramsey (1949: 284-285)felt that "the cannabinols herein reported deserve furthertrial in non-institutionalized epileptics." Dr. Vansim of Edgewood Arsenal has written in a recentlypublished book "Psychotomimetic Drugs," that thesynthetic preparations of cannabis are of interest. There arethree areas where they may be of definite use in medicine (Efron,1969: 333-334). One concerns the use of a cannabis analogue whichDr. Walter S. Loewe reported very effective in preventing grandmal seizures if given in small doses. The second use refers to cannabis as an antidepressant. Straub(Walton, 1938: 3), Adams (1942: 726-727), and Stockings (1947,920-922) point to the possible use of cannabis and cannabisanalogues in relieving dysphoria in depressed patients. Otherauthors (Parker and Wrigley, 1950: 278-279) had lesser successbut recommended further research in this field. A report from London in 1968 suggests that cannabis treats thesymptoms and not the cause by focusing the user's attention onhis anxieties and pains without helping him to resolve them(Report by the Advisory Committee, 1968: 11). The third use is described by Douthwaite, who used hashish in1947 "for reducing of anxiety and tension in patients withduodenal ulcer" (Pond, 1948: 279). A report in a 1965 issue of Medical News ("CardiacGlycocides," p. 6) suggests cannabis as treatment for aspecific form of malignancy. Cannabis is recognized as an appetite stimulant, whichsuggests that the drug might be useful in the treatment ofpathological loss of appetite known as anorexia nervosa(Grinspoon, 1969: 21). Similar symptoms exist in terminal cancerpatients who, when treated with cannabis over a short period oftime, demonstrated stimulation of appetite, euphoria, increasedsense of well-being, mild analgesia and an indifference to painwhich reduced the need for opiates (DHEW, 1971: 11). Cannabis has been recently proposed as an adjunct in thetreatment of alcoholics and drug addicts. Roger Adams (1942:726-727) and Todd Mikuriya (1970a: 187-191) noted that thesubstitution of smoked cannabis for alcohol may haverehabilitative value for certain alcoholics. Regarding the use of cannabis analogue in the treatment ofdrug, alcohol and depressive state withdrawal, Thompson andProctor (1953: 520523) report the following: Depressive States: 20 cases of neurotic depression-4 improved (20%) 6 cases of psychotic depression-none improved (00%) Post-Alcoholic Cases: 70 cases--59 reported clinical alleviation of symptoms (84%) Drug Cases: 6 cases of barbiturate addiction-4 reported amelioration ofsymptoms (66%) 4 cases of dilaudid addiction-3 reported alleviation (75%) 2 cases of pantopan and one paregoric addiction-all reportedsmooth withdrawal (100%) 12 cases of Demerol addiction-10 withdrawals in one week (83%) 6 cases of morphine addiction-2 withdrawals without unpleasantsymptoms (33%) The doctors concluded that "Pyrahexyl (a syntheticcannabis-like drug) and related compounds are beneficial in thetreatment of withdrawal symptoms from the use of alcohol to amarked degree, and in the treatment of withdrawal symptoms fromthe use of opiates to a less marked, but still significantdegree" (Thompson & Proctor, 1953:520-523). Drs. Allentuck and Bowman (1942) undertook a study of the useof marihuana in the morphine abstinence syndrome. They stated: A series of cases were selected from among drug addictsundergoing treatment. . . . Comparative results were charteredfor the gradual withdrawal, total withdrawal, and marihuanaderivative substitution, as methods of treatment. . . . 49subjects were studied. The results in general, although stillinconclusive, suggest that the marihuana substitution methodameliorated or eliminated (the symptoms) sooner, the patient wasin a better frame of mind, his spirits elevated, his physicalcondition was more rapidly rehabilitated, and he expressed a wishto resume his occupation sooner (p. 250). In his study of the medical application of cannabis for MayorLaGuardia's committee, Dr. Samuel Allentuck reported"favorable results in treating withdrawal of opiate addictswith tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful purified product ofthe hemp plants" (Mikuriya, 1969: 38). Roger Adams' detailed studies, as reported by Dr. C. K.Himmelsbach in his 1944 article "Treatment of the MorphineAbstinence Syndrome with a Synthetic Cannabis-Like Compound"(1944:26), indicated that "withdrawal manifestations wereconsidered to be mild. The reported therapeutic value ofmarihuana was attributed to improved appetite, greater sleep,euphoria, and a reduction of the intensity or elimination ofabstinence phenomena." Himmelsbach, however, had lessersuccess when he studied the effect of a "pyrahexyl"compound on the morphine abstinence syndrome, as noted by hisconclusions that: (1) Pyrahexyl compound appears to possess considerablecannabis-like effect when administered orally, but little or nonewhen given intramuscularly. (2) When given by mouth In definitely effective amountspyrahexyl compound had no appreciable ameliorative effect on theopiate abstinence syndrome (P. 29). The New York City Mayor LaGuardia's Committee on Marihuana(1944: 147-148) reported two possible therapeutic applications ofmarihuana: The first is the typical euphoria-producing action which mightbe applicable in the treatment of various types of mentaldepression; the second is the rather unique property whichresults in the stimulation of appetite. In the light of thisevidence and in view of the fact that there is a lack of anysubstantial Indication of dependence on the drug, It was reasonedthat marihuana might be useful in alleviating the withdrawalsymptoms in drug addicts. However, the studies here describedwere not sufficiently complete to establish the value of suchtreatment . . . . A study was then undertaken at Riker's Island (N.Y.)Penitentiary involving 56 morphine or heroin addicted inmates.Two groups were equally matched according to age, physicalcondition, length and intensity of habit, etc. One group receivedno treatment or Magendie's solution, and the other received 15mg. of THC and/or placebo. "The impression was gained that those who receivedtetrahydrocannabinol had less severe withdrawal symptoms thanthose who received no treatment or who were treated withMagendie's solution" the report stated. However, the reportfurther said that this alleged therapeutic use of marihuanashould be "investigated under completely controlledconditions" before meaningful conclusions can be developed(New York City Mayor, AU: 147-148). Some reports indicate that cannabis helps relieve labor pains.Such uses are reported among native tribes in South Africa andSouthern Rhodesia: "The Suto tribe fumigates the parturientwoman to relieve pain;"the Sotho women of Basutoland"are reported as smoking cannabis to stupefy themselvesduring childbirth," and have also been known to"administer the ground-up achene with bread or mealiepap toa child during weaning" (Watt, 1962:13). The use of cannabis in the treatment of leprosy has beendescribed in a 1939 dictionary of Malayan medicine: "Seedsof Hydnocarpus anthelmintim ... form the basis of the Tai FoonChee treatment of leprosy. After crushing and sieving, they aremixed with cannabis indica in the proportion of two parts of theseeds to one of Indian hemp" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967:146). Likewise, Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk quote Pappe that"the early colonist employed a decoction in the treatment ofchronic cutaneous eruptions, possibly in leprosy (Andrews andVinkenoog, 1967: 146). Kabelik, Krejci, and Santavy have reported favorable results"in stornatitis aphtosa, gingivitis, and in paradentoseswith a mouthwash of the following composition: Tinct. Cannabis20.0, Tinct. Chamomillae, Tinct. jernmarum populi (or another tanfor example, Tinct. Gallarum) aa 10.0 to be applied in the formof sprays or linaments to the inside of the mouth" (Kabeliket al., 1960: 13). In reference to the use of cannabis, Chopra and Chopra (1957:12-13) listed some preparations used in the practice ofindigenous medicine in India in 1957. They summarize theirarticle "The Use of the Cannabis Drugs in India" (1957:12-13) by saying: . . . with regard to the use of cannabis in Indian indigenousmedicine at the present time, it may be said that It was andstill is fairly extensively used in both the Ayurvedle (Hindu)and Tibbi (Mohammedan) systems of medicine as an anodyne,hypnotic, analgesic and antispasmodic, and as a remedy forexternal application to piles. It is also used in the treatmentof dysmennorhoea, rheumatism, chronic diarrhoea of the spruetype, gonorrhoea, malaria and mental diseases on the advice ofitinerant practitioners of Indigenous medicine as well as quackswho roam about the country. For medicinal purposes the drug isadministered by mouth and hardly ever by smoking. The use of cannabis drugs in indigenous medicine has greatlydeclined during recent years for two reasons-firstly, because ofthe rapid deterioration of the potency of cannabis drugs instorage, the specimens available on the market being often Inertand quite useless; secondly, because a number of potent andeffective drugs of the type used In western medicine are nowavailable on the market and are used quite extensively by thepractitioners of indigenous medicine in place of cannabis, forthe anodyne, sedative and hypnotic effects. In the rural areas ofIndia, however, the practitioners of indigenous medicine stilluse cannabis quite extensively In their practice. The same article lists a variety of uses in which cannabis isemployed therapeutically in veterinary medicine. Dr. R. N. Chopra (1940: 361) reports the following medicinalhousehold uses of Indian Hemp: The hemp drugs are popularly used as household remedies in theamelioration of many minor ailments. A mild beverage made frombhang leaves is believed to sharpen appetite and to helpdigestion. Indian hemp Is commonly used as a smoke and as a drinkfor its supposed prophylactic value against marihuana inmalarious tracts. Bhang beverages form one of the popularhousehold remedies for gonorrhoea and dysuria. On account oftheir mild diuretic and sedative properties these drinks probablygive a certain amount of symptomatic relief. Likewise, the use ofbhang for dysmenorrhea, asthma, and other spasmodic conditions isnot uncommon. A poultice made from fresh leaves is a commonhousehold remedy for painful affections of the eyes,conjunctivitis, swollen joints, orchitis, and other acuteinflammatory conditions. Tuberculosis, anthrax, tetanus, and menstrual cramps are amongthe miscellaneous medical uses of cannabis reported. Reports fromMexico indicate the use of marihuana smoking "to relax andto endure heat and fatigue" (Mikuriya, 1969: 37). Kabelik et al. (1960: 13) also discuss other varied uses ofcannabis. In human therapy the best results have been obtained with thefollowing medicaments combined with substances derived fromcannabis: dusting powder together with boric acid (otitis),ointment (staphylococcus infected wounds, staphylodermia and soon), ear drops (otitis chron.), alcohol solutions with glycerine(treatment of rhagades on the nipples of nursing women-preventionof staphylococcic mastitis,) aqueous emulsions (sinusitis),dentin powder with the IRC (Isolated Resin from Cannabis)(caries). The preparations mentioned above have been alreadytested clinically, and will eventually be made available forproduction. . . . the experiments made in clinical practice,particularly in stomatology, otorhinolaryngology, gynecology,dermatology, phisiology, with some pharmaceutical preparationscontaining antibacterial substances from cannabis have beenreported. Attention has been drawn to the advantageousutilization of the active substances from cannabis in veterinarymedicine, and particularly in preventive medicine foranthropozoonoses. Murphy (1963: 20) refers to an article by Lang,"Treatment of Acute Appendicitis with a Mixture of MaJen," which says "the drug has apparently been used inChina for the treatment of appendicitis." The Xosa tribe inSouth Africa "employs it for treatment of inflammation ofthe feet" (Kabelik et al., 1960: 7), while the Mfengu andHottentot use the plant as a snake-bite remedy (Watt, 1962: 13). Other therapeutic uses attributed to marihuana are for thetreatment of migraine headaches, as an analgesic, and as ahypnotic. Hollister (1971: 28) stated that "other uses whichhave been proposed for marihuana include the treatment ofepilepsy, as prophylaxis for attacks of migraine or facialneuralgia, or as a sexual stimulant." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-10IA031-000655-B039-287http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113050 text/html 25027HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:30:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:41 GMTContent-length: 24809 Marijuana -- History of the Intoxicant Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana And Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding History of the Intoxicant Use The preceding history of the medical use of marihuana hasprovided an outline of how marihuana has been alleged to carediseases and relieve pain. This section discusses the non-medicaluse of cannabis. The survey includes a discussion of marihuanause in India, the rest of Asia, Africa, Europe, and the UnitedStates; and a concluding analysis of the intoxicant use incontemporary times. Assessing marihuana's use as an intoxicant is difficultbecause for many people around the world, its importance as anintoxicant has been secondary to its use as a folk medicine or aceremonial adjunct (Grinspoon, 1971: 173-174). Caffeine andnicotine apart, cannabis is second in worldwide popularity onlyto alcohol. India Marihuana was probably first used as an intoxicant in Indiaaround 1000 B.C., and soon became an integral part of Hinduculture (Snyder, 1970: 125). In China, where the marihuana planthad been used to make cloth and certain medicines for centuries,it was not recorded as an intoxicant. Explanations are unclear asto why marihuana was used as an intoxicant in India but not inChina. Marihuana was also used as an intoxicant in other parts of theworld prior to 500 A.D. but was not as well documented as the useof opium. The drug "nepenthe" in Homer's Odyssey isbelieved by a number of scholars to have been a brew in which themost active ingredient was hemp (Brotteaux, 1967: 10). Galenwrote in the second century that it was customary to promotehilarity and happiness at banquets by giving the guests hemp(Reininger, 1967: 14-15). Cannabis is used in three different preparations in India(Snyder, 1970: 27). The first is called bhang, comparable inpotency to marihuana in the United States. It is made from theleaves and stems of uncultivated plants and blended into apleasant tasting liquid concoction. The second is ganja, morepotent than bhang, made from the tops of cultivated plants. Thethird and most potent preparation, charas, is similar to hashishor "hash" and is obtained by scraping the resin fromthe leaves of the cultivated plants. Hard blocks are pressed fromthis material which are converted for smoking. High-caste Hindus are not permitted to use alcohol. But theyare allowed bhang at religious ceremonials, and also employ it asan intoxicant at marriage ceremonies and family festivals. Bhangis used by laborers in India in much the same way as beer is usedin the United States (Barber, 1970: 80). The lower classes of India use either a few pulls at a ganjapipe or sip a glass of bhang at the end of the day to relievefatigue (Grinspoon, 1971: 173), to obtain a sense of well-being,to stimulate appetite, and to enable them to bear more cheerfullythe "strain and monotony of . . . daily routines"(Geller and Boas, 1969: 5). These types of users and objectivesare frequently the reverse of those in the United States wheremarihuana users consider themselves an exclusive and advanced"in-group" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967: iii). A majorintoxicant use in India is for religious purposes. Asia and the Middle East Cannabis spread from India to other parts of Asia, to theMiddle East and then to Africa and South America, although somebelieve it may have originated independently in the latter twocontinents (Fort, 1969: 15). Cultural values may have played apart in determining its use. Opium and cannabis were equallyavailable in pre-Communist China; but cannabis had no vogue as anintoxicant (Barber, 1970: 80). The Chinese spoke of the plant asthe "Liberator of Sin." In India, it was called. the"Giver of Life" (Fort, 1970: 15). One author proposedthat temperament may have also played a role in thisdetermination, suggesting that perhaps the placid, practicalChinese did not appreciate the euphoria produced by cannabis(Snyder, 1070: 125). Additional evidence of mid-Asian use comes from cuneiformtablet interpretations that ascribe use in Persia circa 700-600B.C. and of the time of Ashurbanipal's Assyrian reign, 669-626B.C. (Blum. and Associates, 1969, 1: 62). The drug's popularity as an intoxicant spread to the MiddleEast and thoroughly permeated Islamic culture within a fewcenturies (Geller and Boas, 1969: 5). Because alcohol wasprohibited to the followers of Mohammed, cannabis was accepted asa substitute. The Myth of the Assassins Two Muslim myths, one from the 10th century A.D. and the otherfrom the 13th century A.D., have been the sources of some of thecontemporary attitudes about the drug. The first myth deals withhashish as a magical eastern drug brought by the Arabs into Spainin the 10th century. These invaders confined its use primarily tothemselves, taking it back to Africa when they left Spain.Although it did not become a European habit, some beliefs aboutthe drug were left behind. The existence of this "magical eastern drug" wasprobably known to Marco Polo, the Venetian traveler of the 13thcentury A.D. before he left on his journey to the East. MarcoPolo returned to Europe with his own tale of cannabis which, inthe potent form of hashish, was said to be used as an intoxicantby Hasan-I-Sabbah to send his ruthless followers on missions ofmurder. The word "assassin" was said to be derived fromthe word "hashish," or from Hasan (Geller and Boas,1969: 6). Marco Polo had written about how this "Old Man ofthe Mountain" sent his men out on their missions with allthe color and pageantry that Europeans associated with the East.As Marco Polo described: In the territory of the Assassins there were deliciouswalled gardens in which one can find everything that can satisfythe needs of the body and the caprices of the most exactingsensuality. Great banks of gorgeous flowers and bushes coveredwith fruit stand amongst crystal rivers of living water....Trellises of roses and fragrant vines cover with their foliagepavilions of jade and porcelain furnished with Persian carpetsand Grecian embroideries. Delicious drinks in vessels of gold or crystal are servedby young boys or girls, whose dark unfathomable eyes cause themto resemble the Houris, divinities of that Paradise which theProphet promised to believers. The sound of harps mingles withthe cooing of doves, the murmur of soft voices blends with thesighing of the reeds. All is joy, pleasure, voluptuousness andenchantment. The Grand Master of the Assassins, whenever he discovers ayoung man resolute enough to belong to his murderous legions . .. invites the youth to his table and intoxicates him with theplant "hashish." Having been secretly transported tothe pleasure gardens the young man imagines that he has enteredthe Paradise of Mahomet. The girls, lovely as Houris, contributeto the illusion. After he has enjoyed to satiety all the joyspromised by the-Prophet to his elect, he falls back to thepresence of the Grand Master. Here he is informed that he canenjoy perpetually the delights he has just tasted If he will takepart in the war of the Infidel as commanded by the Prophet (Gellerand Boas, 1969: 6). Another translation (Kitti, 1967: 24) begins the tale thisway: Now no man was allowed to enter the Garden save those whom heintended to be his ASHISHIN. In reality, this was a religious situation and scholars havelong since exposed Marco Polo's tale as being a myth, at best animaginative embellishment of tales he had heard. Africa Use of cannabis in most parts of Africa developed slowly, mostof it during the past 100 years (Blum and Associates, 1969, I:73). A report from Africa in 1891 (Reininger, 1966: 141-142),dealt with a tribe that used hemp as an intoxicant in their newlyformed religion and in preparation for battle. A similar use isdescribed in the Congo, when Simba warriors in 1964 were said touse a cannabis-alcohol mixture in preparation for battle, torouse themselves for the battle and to magically guaranteeimmunity from harm. In Morocco, marihuana, called kif, has been used as anintoxicant by adult males for centuries; that custom continuestoday even though the drug is illegal (Mikuriya, 1970: 122-123). Although moderate use appears to be tolerated in the areas ofIndia, North Africa and the Middle East, excessive use isgenerally viewed as indicative of serious personality problems(Geller and Boas, 1969: 7). Europe One of the more suggestive parallels between 19th centuryFrance and the United States today is the fact that the Frenchinterest in cannabis at that time was aroused by the returningFrench soldiers and scientists of Napoleon's army in Egypt, asource of the drug. A similar interest occurred in the UnitedStates after the Korean conflict, and has intensified sinceVietnam (Geller and Boas, 1969: 7). During the 19th century, European interest in the drug wasaided by two scientific reports, the first by W. B. O'Shaughnessyin 1839, and the second report by Queen Victoria's physician,Russell Reynolds. Both men recommended its medical use for avariety of ailments and as a mild euphoriant (Grinspoon, 1971:56). Cannabis received highly laudatory testimonials from themedical profession of that day and was readily available withoutprescription (Snyder, 1970: 121). Interest in cannabis was further kindled by popular writerswho used and spoke of hashish enthusiastically, including CharlesBaudelaire, Arthur Rimbaud, and Pierre Gautier. Gautier andBaudelaire, in fact, were members of the Club des Hachischins, inwhich a number of writers and intellectuals gathered andexperimented with hashish (Geller and Boas, 1969: 13). Although the public delighted to read of the French writers'drug experiences, the public did not care to engage in the samekind of activity; to them the experiences were frightening andrepugnant. "As a result, the smoking of hashish remained thesub-rosa province of a few European artists until the recenttrans-Atlantic phenomenon of the American drug culture"(Geller and Boas, 1969: 8). United States The, events surrounding the introduction of cannabis use tothe New World are entirely unclear. Some historians say theSpaniards brought the plant with them in the 16th century, othersay marihuana smoking came in with the slave trade or with theAsian Indian migration of the late 18th century. The hemp plant was cultivated in the United States forcenturies, apparently without general knowledge of itsintoxicating properties (Grinspoon, 1971: 10). Cannabis was anoften used medicine in the United States in the 19th century. Itwas easily available without a prescription and was also widelyprescribed by physicians (Snyder, 1970: 26). Hemp was used by thepioneers to cover their wagons. The plant was a major crop inKentucky, Virginia, Wisconsin and Indiana, and was one of themore important southern agricultural products, after cotton.. Itis still used to make rope, twine and textiles, while the seed isused as bird food (Geller and Boas, 1969: 16). Marihuana use as an intoxicant in the United States beganslowly in the early part of this century. Puerto Rican soldiers,and then Americans who were stationed in the Panama Canal Zone,are reported to have been using it by 1916. American soldiersfighting Pancho Villa circa 1916 also learned to use it. Thisfollows the first reported use in Mexico in the 1880's (Blum andAssociates, 1969, 1: 69-70). Intoxicant use in the United Statesis also traced to the large influx of Mexican laborers in the1910's and 1920's (Geller and Boas, 1969: 14). The 1933 Report of the "Military Surgeon" stated,regarding marihuana use among the soldiers in the Canal Zone,that: Marihuana as grown and used on the Isthmus of Panama is amild stimulant and intoxicant. It is not a "habitforming" drug in the sense that the derivatives of opium,cocaine, and such drugs, are as there are no symptoms ofdeprivation following its withdrawal. Delinquencies due to marihuana smoking which result intrial by military court are negligible in number when comparedwith delinquencies resulting from the use of alcohol drinks,which is also classed as a stimulant and intoxicant (Gellerand Boas, 1969: 147). The report went on to say that marihuana presented no threatto military discipline, and "that no recommendations toprevent the sale or use of marihuana are deemed advisable." Cannabis has been rejected in various societies on asceticgrounds. In such puritanical societies such as the Wahabil ofArabis and the Senussis of Libya, no smoking of any kind wastolerated, nor was coffee. In North Africa, social rank dictateduse: the aristocratic Moors scorned both hemp and tobaccosmoking, preferring instead, as compatible with high status,opium eating (Blum and Associates, 1969, 1: 73). One statement highlighting this kind of value conflict comesfrom a Nigerian journalist (Davies, 1966: 299-300) attempting toexplain the 15-year prison sentences of foreign tourists forgrowing and smoking marihuana: There is a growing trend in the more economically advancedcountries to indulge at leisure in the exploration of thepersonality. At a certain stage of development, there is lessneed to produce and more time to spend consuming. This ishealthy. If used properly, marihuana could be helpful at thisstage of development. However, countries which are only beginningto develop a more complex economic structure must channel alltheir energies into creating a new system. This means that theymust sacrifice more of their pleasure. People who smoke hemp seemon the whole to be less aggressive than people who drink alcohol.Hemp smoking may have a positive value for certain socialfunctions.... One of the first acts of the Military Government was toissue a decree making it punishable by death to grow marihuana,and by up to twenty years of prison for merely being inpossession of it . . . meantime, we Nigerian have to stop gettinghigh for a while and develop our country. In the United States, the decade of the 1960's has seen aspectacular and unprecedented spread of the use of marihuana,chiefly among the youth. An estimated 24 million persons haveused marihuana and approximately 3.4 million are current users.The numbers involved and the fact that use spans all age groupsand social classes in American life has produced marked publicreaction and a need for more information on the drug. References Adams, P.: "Marihuana," Bulletin of the New YorkAcademy of Medicine (1942). Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M.: "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99(2) (September 1942). Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog, S. (eds.) : The Book of Grass: AnAnthology on Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Barber, T. X.: LSD, Marihuana, Yoga, and Hypnosis, Chicago:Aldine Publishing Company (1970). Bloomquist, E. R.: Marijuana, Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press(1968). Blum, R. H. and Associates: Drugs I: Society and Drugs: Socialand Cultural Observations, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc.(1969). Blum, R. H. and Associates: Drugs II: Students and Drugs:College and High School Observations, San Francisco: Jossey-BassInc. (1969). "The Cannabis Problem: A Note On The Problem and TheHistory of International Action," Bulletin onNarcotics,14(4) (1962). "Cardiac Glycocides Found Cytotoxic," Medical News(London) March 26 (1965). Chopra, 1. C. and Chopra, R. N.: "The Use of the CannabisDrugs in India," Bulletin on Narcotics, 9(l) (1957). Chopra, R. N.: "Use of Hemp Drugs in India," TheIndian Medical Gazette, (June 1940). Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs:Interim Report, Ottawa (1970). David, J. P. and Ramsey, H. H.: "Antiepileptic Action ofMarihuana-active Substances," Federation Procedures, 8(1949). Davies, A.: "Nigeria Whispers," Andrews, G. andVinkenoog, S. (ed&) : The Book of Grass: An Anthology onIndian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Department of Health, Education and Welfare: Marihuana andHealth, A Report to the Congress from the Secretary, Departmentof Health, Education and Welfare (March 1971). Efron, D. H. (ed.) : Psychotomimetic Drugs, New York: RavenPress (1969). Feinglass, S. J.: "Marijuana: Standardization,Characterization and Potential Therapeutic Uses," Journal ofSecondary Education, 43 (May 1968). Fort, J.: The Pleasure Seekers: The Drug Crisis, Youth andSociety, New York: Grove Press, Inc. (1969). Frank, Ira, University of California, Los Angeles, School ofMedicine, Personal Communication, September 1971. Geller, A. and Boas, M.: The Drug Beat, New York: Cowles BookCompany, Inc. (1969). Goode, E.: Marijuana, Chicago: Atherton Press (1969).Grinspoon, L.: "Marihuana," Scientific American, 221(6)(December 1969). Grinspoon, L.: Marihuana Reconsidered, Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press (1971). Hearings before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House ofRepresentatives, Taxation of Marihuana, 75th Congress, 1stSession on H.R. 6385 (1937). Himmelsbach, C. J.: "Treatment of the Morphine AbstinenceSyndrome with a Synthetic Cannabis-Like Compound," SouthernMedical Journal, 37 (January 1944). Hollister, L. E.:"Marihuana in Man: Three Years Later." Science, 172(April 2, 1971). Indian Hemp Drugs Commission: Marijuana, Report of the IndianHemp Drugs Commission, Government Central Printing Office, Simla(1894). Kabelik, J.: "Hemp (Cannabis sativa)-AntibioticDrug," Pharmazie, 121 (1957). Kabelik, J., Krejci, Z., and Santavy, F.: "Cannabis as aMedicant," Bulletin on Narcotics, 12(3) (July-September1960). Kabelikovi, J.: "Antibacterial Action of CannabisIndica," Lekarske Listy, 15 (7) (1952). Kitti, Phillip K.: "The Assassins," Andrews, G. andVinkenoog, S. (eds.) : The Book of Grass: An Anthology of IndianHemp, New York: Grove Press, Inc. (1967). Krejci, Z.: "Onthe Problem of Substances with Antibacterial and Hashish Actionin Hemp (Cannabis Sativa L.)," Casopis8 Lekaru Ceskych(1961). Krejci, Z., Horak, M., and Santavy, F.: "Hemp (Cannabissativa)-Antibiotic Drug, 3rd Report," Pharmazie, 14 (1959). Loewe, S. and Goodman, L. S.: "Anticonvulsant Action ofMarihuana-Active Substances," Federation Procedures, 6(1947). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Cannabis Substitution. An AdjunctiveTherapeutic Toot in the Treatment of Alcoholism," MedicalTimes, 98 (4) (April 1970). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Marihuana in Morocco," Aaronson,B. & Osmond, H. (eds.) : Psychedelics, The Uses andImplications of Hallucinogenic Drugs, Garden City: Doubleday& Company, Inc. (1970). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Marihuana In Medicine: Past, Presentand Future," California Medicine, 110 (January 1969).Murphy, H. B. M.: "The Cannabis Habit: A Review of RecentPsychiatric Literature," Bulletin on Narcotics, 15(l)(1.963). McMeens, R. R.: "Report of the Committee on CannabisIndica," Transactions of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of theOhio State Medical Society, Columbus, Ohio: Follett, Foster andCo. (1860). New York City Mayor LaGuardia's Committee on Marihuana, TheMarihuana Problem in the City of New York: Sociological, Medical,Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, Lancaster,Pennsylvania: The Jaques Cattell Press (1944). O'Shaughnessy, W. B.: "On the Preparations of the IndianHemp, or Gunjah," Trans. Med. and Psy. SOC., Bengal (1838-40and 1842). Parker, C. S. and Wrigley, F. "Synthetic CannabisPreparations in Psychiatry: (I) Synhexyl," Journal of MentalSciences, 96 (1950). Reininger, W.: "Historical Notes," Solomon, D. (ed.)The Marihuana Papers, New York: The New American Library, SignetBooks (1966). Reininger, W.: "Remnants From Historic Times,"Andrews G. and Vinkenoog, S., (eds.) The Book of Grass: AnAnthology on Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Robinson, V.: "Concerning Cannabis Indica "I CibaSymposia, 8 (Augus-September, 1946). Snyder, S.: Uses of Marijuana, New York: Oxford UniversityPress (1970). Snyder, S.: "What We Have Forgotten About Pot-APharmacologist's History," New York Times Magazine, (NewYork, New York) (December 13, 1970). Solomon, D. (ed.) : The Marihuana Papers, New York: NewAmerican Library (1968). Stockings, G. T.: "A New Euphoriant for Depressive MentalStates," British Medical Journal, 1 (10,47). Thompson, L. J. and Proctor, R. C.: "The Use of Pyrahexylin the Treatment of Alcoholic and Drug WithdrawalConditions," North Carolina Medical Journal, 14 (October,1953). Veliky, I. A. and Genest, K.: "Suspension Culture ofCannabis Sativa," Lloydia, 33(4) (December, 1970). Walton, R. P.: Marihuana: America's New Drug Problem,Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott (1938). Watt, J. M.: "Dagga in South Africa," Bulletin onNarcotics, 13(3) (1961). Watt, J. M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M. G.: The Medicinal andPoisonous Plants of Southern and Eastern Africa, 2nd edition,Edinburgh and London: E. and S. Livingstone, Ltd. (1962). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-11IA031-000655-B039-311http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113107 text/html 15678HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:30:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:22 GMTContent-length: 15460 II. Biological Effects of Marihuana II. Biological Effects of Marihuana Botanical and Chemical Considerations Cannabis sativa is one of man's oldest and most widely useddrugs. The substance has been used in various ways as long asmedical history has been recorded and is currently used as amultipurpose drug throughout the world (Adams, 1942; Adams,1941-1942; Grinspoon, 1969; Indian Hemp, 1969; Walton, 1938). During the past few years, a resurgence of the use ofmarihuana by western society, its increased importance as asocial issue and the development of more precise compounds andanalytic techniques have sparked dormant scientific interest inthe substance. However, this effort has added little to what wasalready known about the clinical syndrome produced by cannabis(Hollister, 1971) and described by investigators during the last100 years (Hollister, 1971; Beaudelaire, 1861; Moreau, 1845;Lewin, 1964; Indian Hemp, 1969; Mayor's Committee, 1944). Strongly held, diametrically opposed opinions exist aboutwhether the ultimate effects of cannabis use are harmful,harmless, or beneficial to human functioning (Pillard, 1970). Despite these conflicting opinions, from a scientificperspective, the literature on marihuana is as clear, if notclearer, than for many other botanical substances consumed byman. Most of the older reports suffer from multiple scientificdefects such as biased sampling, lack of adequate controls,unsophisticated techniques, and use of unstandardized marihuanaof unknown potency. Nevertheless, much is known about the use ofcannabis by man. Marihuana has a unique position in the multitudeof pharmaceuticals in that human experimentation has been greaterthan laboratory animal experimentation. The crucial experiments about social effects from chronic usewill be settled by close observation of those who use the drug.The issues of potential therapeutic utility; mechanisms of mentalfunction alteration; and the relationship to mental illness willrequire more extensive laboratory experimentation (Hollister,1971). Botanical and Chemical Considerations In the past several years considerable progress has been madein adding to the understanding of marihuana as a complex drugcontaining botanical substance. Much important information hasbeen obtained from intensive investigation of marihuana ofworldwide origin cultivated under Government contract by theUniversity of Mississippi (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Marihuana is a preparation derived from the hemp plant,Cannabis sativa. This plant is an annual which either iscultivated or grows freely as a weed around the world, includingmost of the United States. When cultivated in temperate climates,plantings are made in May to June. The seeds germinate in lessthan a week. in moist soil. After thinning, the plants grow asrapidly as two feet a week during the peak growing season. Theycan reach a height of up to 18 feet at maturity, approximatelythree to five months after planting. Growth is greatly inhibitedby inadequate light, water or soil nutrients. Marihuana is produced by cutting the stem beneath the lowestbranches, air drying, and stripping seeds, bracts, flowers,leaves and small stems from these plants. Stems and seeds arevariably removed using a mesh screen producing manicuredmarihuana. Hashish is produced by scraping the thick resinousmaterial secreted by the flowers (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Many morphological variations in branching and leaf structureare observed among plants produced by different seed types. Thecharacteristic leaf is palmately-compound and contains an oddnumber of coarsely serrated leaflets. Plants of a given seed typegenerally grow at similar rates and resemble each other. Thus,botanists believe, Cannabis sativa represents a single specieswhich has not stabilized and has many variations (Doorenbos etal., 1971). Cannabis Sativa is a dioecious species with separate male andfemale plants, both producing flowers. Some monoecious variantsare reported. Pollination appears to be accomplished by aircurrents. Bees are attracted by male flowers but not by femaleflowers. Sex cannot be established until flowering begins and thestructure of the male and female flower is distinct. Male plantsbegin shedding leaves shortly after flowering, shied their pollenand die. Female plants lose their older leaves as the seedmatures. After shedding their seed, they die. Contrary to popularbelief, there is no significant difference in drug contentbetween male and female plants at equivalent states of maturity(Fetterman et al., 1970; Ohlsson et al., 1971). Male plantsmature earlier than the females, shed their pollen and die whilethe female plant is continuing to mature. The drug content of the plant parts is variable. Generally,the, drug content decreases in the following order: bracts,flowers, leaves. Practically no cannabinoids are found in thestems, roots and seeds. Obviously, fluctuations in pharmacologicactivity of a sample of Marihuana, depend on the mixture of theseplant parts which is determined by the manicuring process(Fetterman et al., 1970). Different variants of the plant contain different amounts ofpsychoactive drug. Variants of cannabis Sativa cover a spectrumof drug contents. Generally, they can be classified as eitherdrug or fiber genotype. Drug type is high in THC and low incannabidiol and the fiber type is the converse. This type isdetermined genetically and transmitted by the seed. Thus, seeds from different geographical areas produce plantswith a wide range of drug content. For example, when grown undersimilar conditions, plants grown from seeds from Mexico maycontain 15 times more psychoactive drug than those grown fromseeds from Iowa. Of course, individual plants of the same variantoften contain greatly different drug content (Fetterman, et al.,1970). Environmental factors are not as important as heredity indetermining type, but they influence to some degree the drugcontent. However, environmental factors, including type of soil,water, growing space, temperature and light do play an importantrole in determining the size and vitality of the plant (Doorenboset al., 1971; Ohlsson et al., 1971; Phillips et al., 1970). This notorious variability of cannabis preparations causesmany disadvantages for detailed and reproducible biological work.Consequently, much effort has been expended to provide a firmchemical basis in order to provide pure and well-definedsubstances for research. The major naturally occurring active component of cannabis,1-delta 9-trans tetrahydrocannabinol, was not isolated in a pureform and its structure illucidated until 1964 (Gaoni andMechoulam, 1964; Mechoulam and Gaoni, 1967; Mechoulam et al.,1970). In addition, the A' isomer, which is usually present insmall quantities in the natural product representing less than10% of the combined THC content, has a similar spectrum ofactivity (Hively et al., 1966). These two chemicals, available byindustrial synthesis (Fahrenholtz et al., 1967; Petrzilka andSikemeier, 1967) or by extraction from the natural plant, canapparently reproduce fully the effects of the crude drug inanimals and man. More than 20 natural cannabinoids have beenidentified in the plant (Figure 1) (Mechoulam, 1970; Shani andMechoulam, 1970; Doorenbos et al., 1971). All but Delta 11 and Delta 9 THC are inactivepsychopharmacologically and do not seem to exert potentiating orother effects. However, new compounds, cannabinoids andnon-cannabinoids, are being isolated from the plant and requirefurther investigation. Several studies may indicate that somematerial present in natural marihuana may act synergisticallywith THC and potentiate its psychological effect Leniber (1972)Paton and Pertwee (1971) suggest cannabidiol may play this role. The chemical nomenclature of tetra-hydrocannabinols is in astate of confusion due to the existence of two numbering systems.The dibenzopyran or formal system treats the compound assubstituted dibenzopyrans ( Delta 9 THC) while the monoterpenoidsystem considers them as substituted terpenes (Al THC). Theformal system will be used hereafter (Figure 2). Many of the natural cannabinoids are present in the plant asacids. These acids are believed to be psychopharmacologicallyinactive. However, they are converted rapidly when heated, andslowly when stored into their respective active neutralcomponents (Figure 3) (Waller, 1971). This conversion(decarboxylation) does not apparently occur when the acids areabsorbed after oral consumption (Mechoulam, 1970). The proposed biogenesis (Figure 4) of All THC appears toproceed through cannabidiol (CBD). Cannabis variates of the fibertype apparently do not perform this conversion. Thus, cannabidiolis the cannabinoid present in the largest percentage in thenon-drug variety (Phillips et al., 1970). Marihuana appears tolose its potency over time due to conversion of THC to cannabinol(CBN) (Mechoulam, 1970) and this also apparently occurs morequickly for hashish implying the presence of a stabilizingsubstance in the whole plant (Figure 5). Recently, the n-propyl homologue, of Delta 9 THC has beenisolated from crude marihuana. It has about 20% of the activityof Delta THC in mice, and probably makes only a smallcontribution to the total marihuana effect (Gill, 1971). Merkus(1971) and Vree et al. (1971) have recently identified propyl andmethyl cannabinol homologues in hashish in extremely smallquantities. In addition, numerous other non-cannabinoids have beenidentified in the natural material. Most of these have little orno psychoactivity (Gill et al., 1970; Bercht et al., 1971).Recently, waxes. starches, oils, terpenes and simple nitrogenouscompounds including muscarine, choline and trigonelline as wellas volatile low-molecular weight piperdines have been isolated. Additionally, four more complex nitrogenous containingcompounds of the generally-accepted alkaloid type have beenreported in marihuana leaves in minute concentrations (average0.002%). These produced decreased activity but no acute toxicityin mice (Klein et al., 1971). Another laboratory has isolated two steroids and triterpenesfrom. marihuana as well as tyramine amide derivatives from theroots (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Analysis of the smoke obtained from marihuana has beeninvestigated. As in the case of any combustible plant, a gas andparticulate phase is produced. Both these phases are delivered tothe lung. Both the gas and particulate phase consist of compoundspresent in approximately the same percentages as other burnedcellulose containing materials except for the cannabinoidfraction. This includes carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, andhydrogen cyanide gases. (Truitt et al. , 1970) The remainder, the smoke condensate, consists of a complexmixture of relatively non-volatile compounds. Included in thismixture are the cannabinoids (16%), carbohydrates and alcohols(8%), fatty and aromatic acids (11%), polybasic acids (7%),aliphatic amines (1%), aromatic phenols (27%), aliphatic phenols(6%), tannin (6%), unidentified compounds (18%) (Truitt et al.,1970). Another group of investigators (Magus and Harris, 1971)compared the tar collected from combustion of marihuanacigarettes with the tar yielded from tobacco cigarettes. Theyreported that the total tar yield from marihuana was slightlyless than half that produced by an equal weight of tobacco. Thetar contained similar constituents based on typical changesproduced on skin of mice. In addition, there a multitude of synthetic compounds relatedto the naturally occurring Delta 9 THC derivatives and much morepotent (Figure 6). A large number of bomologues have beenprepared all with similar activity but differing widely in theirpotency. In general, the activity of these compounds increasesdramatically over that of A' THC by lengthening the 3 alkyl sidechain to 6 and 7 carbons, with additional branching in the alphaand beta positions. The dimethylheptyl analogue (EA1476 or DMHP)is the most active having 50 times the activity of A' THC. The1-methyloctyl substitution (MOP, EA1465) is the next most potent,compound. The 1,2-dimethylortyl substitution resulted in a 251fold decreased activity from DMHP. (Domino et al., 1972; Sim andTucker, 1963) Numerous variations of the basic structures in thecyclohexene moeity of the molecule, as well as the replacement of-both methyl groups-by-hydrogen resulted in partial and evencomplete, loss of activity (Domino et al., 1972; Sim and Tucker,1963). Mechoulam. (1971) has summarized the investigations relatedto the structure activity relationships of the cannabinoids asfollows: (1) The pyran ring with a hydroxyl group at 1 position and analkyl group at the 3 position is an essential requirement forpsychotomimetic activity, eg., cannabidiol is inactive. (2) The aromatic hydroxyl group has to be f reo or esterifiedfor activity. (3) The presence of a carboxyl, acetyl or carbomethoxyl groupin position 2 or 4 renders the compound inactive. Substitutionwith an alkyl ,group at position 2 retains activity. (4) Dextrorotary (+) delta-9-THC is inactive whereas itsoptical isomer levorotary (-) delta9-THC is active. (5) Maximal activity is seen if the double bond is in thedelta-9 or delta-8 position. The delta,-6a, 10a-THC is relativelyinactive. 9 (6) The activity of the delta-6a, 10a-THC can beincreased by replacement of the pentyl side chain with a hexylside chain to form synhexyl which is an active compound.Branching of the side chain may lead to considerable increase inpotency. The substitution of a dimethyllheptyl side chain for thepentyl side chain in the delta-6a, 10a analogue of THC to formDMHP or EA1476 results in a marked increase in pharmacologicactivity. (7) Substituents at the 9 and 10 position have to be in theplane of the ring (that is equatorial) in order that highactivity be retained. More detailed information on materials, chemistry, bioassays,analytical methods, and methodology for detecting THC or itsmetabolites in biological fluids may be obtained from TheMetabolism of the Tetrahydrocannabinols (Lemberger, 1972) and TheSecretary of Health, Education and Welfare, 1972 Report onMarihuana and Health. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-12IA031-000655-B039-335http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113118 text/html 53265HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:31:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:16 GMTContent-length: 53047 Marijuana -- Factors Influencing PsychopharmacologicalEffect Factors Influencing Psychopharmacological Effect A renewed interest in marihuana studies has been prompted bythe recent clarification of the complexities of its chemistry,new techniques to quantity the amounts of active drug in naturalmaterials, and the availability of purifiedtetrahydrocannabinols. These advances allow more precisescientific research on psychiopharmacological effect. DOSE-RESPONSE RELATIONSHIP A major advance has been a quantification of dose of THC inrelation to clinically observable phenomena. This has beenextensively studied over a wide dose range for marihuana (Rodinand Domino, 1970; Melges et al., 1970; Tinklenberg et al., 197O;Weil et al., 1968; Meyer et al., 1971; Clark and Nakashima, 1968;Clark et al., 1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Mayor's Committee,1944; Manno et al., 1970) and Delta 9 tetrahydrocannabinol(Isbell et al., 1967; Waskow et al., 1970; Hollister et al.,1968; Perez-Reyes and Lipton, 1971; Lemberger et -al., 1971;Dornbush and Freedman, 1971). Investigations by Isbell et al. (1967), Kiplinger et al.(1971) and Renault et al. (1971) have clearly demonstrated thatwhen reliable quantities of smoked marihuana or THC are deliveredto the subject, a reproducible linear dose-dependent effectoccurs on indices of physiologic, psychomotor, and mentalperformance as well as on mood and subjective experiences over adose range of 12.50 to 200 micrograms of Delta 9 THC per kilogramof body weight. In a 154 pound man this is comparable to consuming 0.88 to17.5 milligrams of Delta 9 THC or 88 to 150 milligrams ofmarihuana containing one percent Delta 9 THC. It is generallyassumed that good quality marihuana available in the UnitedStates contains 1% Delta 9 THC and an average marihuana cigaretteconsists of 500 milligrams of marihuana; thus, 5 milligrams ofDelta 9 THC (Hollister, 1971). As with most drugs, the larger the dose taken, the greaterthe psychopharmacologic effect. Isbell et al. (1967) noted thatclinical syndromes vary from a mild euphoric feeling ofrelaxation at low doses (25 micrograms per kilogram) to anintensive hallucinogenic-like experience at high doses (250micrograms per kilogram). DOSE-TIME RELATIONSHIP Similar time-action curves have been demonstrated for smokedDelta 9 THC and equivalent quantities of smoked marihuana(Hollister et al.,1968; Isbell et al., 1967 Renault et ai., 1971Kiplinger et al., 1971). Symptoms began almost immediately aftersmoking (2-3 minutes). At lower doses, the peak effect is seen at10 to 20 minutes and the duration of effect is 90 minutes to twohours. At higher doses, symptoms persist for three to four hours. Therefore, as with most drugs, the larger the dose taken, thelonger the action. The subjective symptoms experienced by thesubject appear to parallel in time the subjective effects andsome physiological indices such as pulse rate (Isbell et al.,1967; Hollister, 1968 - Renault and Schuster, 1971; Kiplinger etal., 1971; Galanter et al., 1972; Lemberger et al., 1971). Otherssuch as reddening of the eyes have a delayed peak response andlonger duration (Kiplinger et al., 1971). ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION A second factor which influences the effect experienced bythe user is the manner in which the substance is consumed. Thatis, whether it is smoked, swallowed or injected. Isbell et al. (1967) demonstrated that smoked material is twoand a half to three times as effective as orally consumedmarihuana in the form of a 95% ethanolic solution in producingequivalent physiologic and subjective effects. In addition, the oral time-action curve is extended withonset of symptoms one-half to one hour after administration. Apeak effect is reached in two to three hours and the effectpersists for three to five hours at low doses and six to eighthours at larger doses (Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell, et -al.,1967; Lemberger et al., 1971; Perez-Reyes, and Lipton, 1971). In general, the effects produced by ingested THC or ingestedmarihuana extract are comparable to those produced by nearlyone-third the amount of smoked and inhaled THC or marihuana(Hollister, 1971). Recent work has been reported which clarifies these findings.Lemberger et a]. (1971) studied absorption into the bloodutilizing radioactive labeled THC by three routes ofadministration: smoked, ingested in 95% ethanolic solution incherry syrup, and intravenously injected. The first appearance ofthe drug into the, blood was immediate intravenously; almostimmediate, by inhalation; and delayed for 15 to 30 minutes wheningested. Perez-Reyes and Lipton (1971) using labeled AO THCdemonstrated that rate of absorption by the gastrointestinaltract, and the duration of action is greatly influenced by thevehicle used to ingest the drug. Speed and completeness ofabsorption varied when the THC was dissolved in 100% ethanol orsesame oil or emulsified with a bile salt (sodium glycocholate),and administered to a subject who had fasted 12 hours. With thebile salt vehicle, the physiologic and subjective effects werenoted between 15 to 30 minutes after ingestion and lasted two tothree hours. In contrast, the effects, with ethanol or sesameoil, appeared after one ,hour and lasted four to six hours. Hollister and Gillespie (1970) hypothesized that this delayedgastrointestinal absorption of THC might be accounted for by thenonpolar vehicle required to dissolve TUC or marihuana extracts. Furthermore, Perez-Reyes and Lipton (1971) found that thepeak levels and duration of radioactivity in the plasmaparalleled the physiologic and subjective effects, although theplasma levels remained high for a longer period of time than theeffect. Subjects receiving the drug emulsified in sodiumglycocholate or dissolved in sesame oil had three times higherplasma levels of radioactivity with much less excreted in thefeces than those receiving the drug dissolved in ethanol. These results indicate that the THC was poorly absorbed fromthe gastrointestinal tract when given in all alcoholic solution.The sesame oil solution and the glycocholic acid preparationallowed more complete absorption and the latter preparation wasmuch faster. It is of interest that the degree of subjective highafter ingestion of 37 milligrams Delta 9 THC also parallels theplasma radioactivity. Thus, the subjects reported their experience, as intense andunpleasant both with the bile salt and the sesame oil, and asmoderate and entirely pleasant with ethanol. (Perez-Reyes andLipton, 1971) This correlates well with earlier findings ofHollister et a]. (1968). QUANTIFICATION OF DOSE DELIVERED The problem in quantifying the THC dose delivered bydifferent routes of administration has been clarified by severalstudies using radioactive compounds. However, until a method fordetermining the THC blood concentration is developed, onlyestimates oil amount delivered are possible. Radioautographic studies clearly demonstrate that intravenousinjection gives the, most complete and consistent delivery(Lemberger et a]., 1971; Me Isaac et M., 1971; Ho et a]., 1971;Kennedy and Waddell, 1971; Idanpaan-Heikkila, 1971). Theseinvestigators have demonstrated that THC is poorly absorbed fromthe injection site after intraperitoneal or subcutaneousinjection. As discussed earlier, the completeness of absorption ocurringafter oral administration of THC appears to depend upon thevehicle. Judged by radioactivity levels, almost completeabsorption of the THC occurs with an oil or bile acid vehicle,but absorption is incomplete with an alcohol vehicle.(Perez-Reyes et al., 1971) Recent animal studies performed for NIMH indicated that theoral dose necessary to produce comparable gross behavioralchanges in lab animals is about three times higher than theintravenous dose (Marihuana and Health. 1971: 171). Ferraro(1971) demonstrated the comparability of effective oral doses ofTHC in chimpanzees and humans. Furthermore, preliminary workperformed in the laboratories of M. Isaac (1971) and Harris(1971) and Mechoulam (1971) appear to indicate that theintravenously administered dose of Delta 9 THC necessary toproduce detectable behavioral changes in monkeys (20 to 50microgram/ kg) on conditioned learning tasks is comparable tothat in man. (Kiplinger et a]., 1971; Lemberger et al., 1971). The dose of THC absorbed from natural marihuana extractsingested orally is uncertain. THC is present as an acid invariable quantities in natural marihuana. THC acid has notpresently been proven to be active. Claussen and Korte (1968)reported that the THC carboxylic acid is converted to free THCduring the smoking process. Whether these, acids are activethemselves; are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract orconverted there into THC; or are decarboxylated in the, body isunknown presently. Because inhalation is the most widely used route ofadministration of marihuana, several laboratories haveinvestigated the effect of combustion and smoking oil marihuana.Because techniques and conditions varied between laboratories,precise quantification of the delivery to the smoker's lungs isuncertain. Manno, et al. (1970) calculated that about 50% of the THCcontained in a marihuana cigarette would be delivered to thesmoker's lungs for absorption if the entire cigarette were smokedin 10 minutes and each inhalation was retained for 30 secondswith no sidestream loss. Truitt (1971) and co-workers (Foltz etal., 1971) found that 50%c of THC was pyrolyzed and 6% was lostin the side stream while noting that almost 21% of the THCremained in the butt when three-fourths of the cigarette isconsumed. Agurell and Leander (1971) studied the transfer of THC usingactual smoking subjects where only the main stream smoke wascollected. They found that 14-29%% of the THC was transferred inthe mainstream smoke for a cigarette and 45% for a pipe. However,they stated that this amount transferred would be comparable ifno butt was left. Agurell and Leander found that the amount transferred was noteffected by depth of inhalation but that smokers using deepinhalation retained 80% of the transferred THC while those usingsuperficial inhalation tended to exhale more than 20% of thetransferred THC. Mikes and Waser (1971) also found about 22% inthe mainstream smoke. These divergent data appear to be comparable when correctedfor loss to sidestream and retention in the unsmoked portion.Thus, the efficiency of delivery of THC by smoking and inhalationusing good techniques, and smoking the entire cigaretteapproximates 40-50% of the original THC contained. A smallfraction is lost in the uninhaled sidestream smoke, about 50% isdestroyed during pyrolysis and a variable amount is exhaled fromthe respiratory dead space. In apparent confirmation, Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972),using radiolabeled THC added to a marihuana cigarette, found thatthe initial plasma level of radioactivity after smoking was aboutonehalf the level after intravenous injection. Oraladministration of the same dose of THC in an alcohol vehicleproduced about one-half the peak level as smoking. However,Galanter et al. (1972) noted marked variability in the amount ofTHC absorbed using a standardized routine of inhaling,breath-holding and finishing the cigarette within a set timeperiod. EFFECT OF PYROLYSIS ON THE CANNABINOIDS Several investigators have studied the effect of pyrolysis onthe cannabinoids. Most have concluded that only negligiblechanges occur in the original cannabinoid fraction of marihuanaexcept for decarboxylation of the acids to the cannabinoids. Noevidence was found for isomerization of Delta 9 THC or Delta 8THC nor the formation of any new pyrolysis products (Manno etal., 1970; Coutselinis & Miras, 1970; Claussen and Korte,1968; Foltz et al., 1971; Agurell and Leander, 1971). Mikes andWaser (1971) suggested that a small percentage of cannabidiol wasconverted to Delta 9 THC, but this observation was not confirmedby the other groups. Coutselinis and Miras (1970) noted that less THC wasdestroyed during smoking when Delta 9 THC was the onlycannabinoid present rather than when a resin or a mixture ofcannabinoids were present. This was believed to be at leastpartially accounted for by the distribution of THC in thecigarette. More destruction occurred when the THC was evenlydistributed in the cigarette than when it was present in awell-defined lump. SET AND SETTING A most important variable encountered when evaluating theeffect of marihuana is the interaction of the drug with thenon-drug factors, set and setting. Set refers to the drug-taker'sbiological make-up including personality, past drug experiences,personal expectations of drug effect, and mood at the time of thedrug experience. Setting refers to the external surroundings andsocial context in which the individual takes the drug. Set andsetting exert their largest effect on psychoactive drugs, likemarihuana, with subtle subjective mental effect and minimalphysiological effect. Set and setting exert a variable but oftenmarked influence on the potential drug effects (Waskow et al.,1970; Wickler, 1970). The results of a series of experiments by Jones (1971)suggests the subjective state produced by "a sociallyrelevant dose of smoked marihuana.... 9mg THC" is determinedmore by set and setting than by the THC content of the marihuana. In one experiment, a greater variety and more intensepleasurable symptoms occurred in a fourman group allowingunstructured interpersonal interaction than in unstructuredsolitary test situations. Contrasting behavioral patterns wereobserved by the investigator and reported subjectively by theindividuals. Subjects tested individually demonstrated a relaxed,slightly drowsy, undramatic state as they read, listened to theradio, or sit doing nothing. In the group setting there waselation, euphoria, uncontrolled laughter, a marked lack ofsedation and much conversation. (Jones, 1971) This strongly emphasizes the importance of setting in themarihuana experience. The reason is apparent why marihuana isusually used with other people. However, most investigatorsstudying its effects evaluate their subjects alone, inwell-controlled, sterile, scientific laboratories. The importance of the placebo effect (the subject experiencesa drug effect from an inert material) to the "socialhigh" obtained from marihuana was studied in anotherexperiment (Jones and stone, 1970; Jones, 1971). Misjudgments ofthe pharmacologic potency of both the smoked placebo (marihuanawithout THC) and active marihuana were commonly made by thesubjects although physiologic and performance indices routinelymatched the distinction correctly. The smoking of a material thatsmells and tastes like marihuana by individuals with marihuanaexperience appeared to produce a mental state that is interpretedas being high if combined with the expectation of becoming high. The importance of learning to get high was demonstrated whenindividuals who smoked marihuana less than twice a month werecompared with those who used marihuana at least seven times aweek. Although both groups rated the active marihuana equallypotent, the frequent users rated the placebo equally to theactive drug, while the infrequent users experienced significantlyless high from the placebo. The infrequent users' experiences appears to reflect mainlypharmacologic factors with moderate set-setting influence.However, the frequent users' response to the placebo appears toreflect mainly learned set-setting influence and minimalpharmacologic factors. (Jones, 1971) Smith and Mehl (1970) call learning to get high "reverse tolerance." During the early exposures to marihuanathe individual learns to appreciate the subtle drug effect withrepeated experience with the drug. Consequently, less drug may berequired to experience the desired high in the early stages ofmarihuana use. Further evidence for this is seen when the familiar smokingroute and smell and taste cues are made ineffective by giving theactive and inactive material by the oral route (Jones and Stone,1970). Both groups of users can significantly distinguish theintoxication produced by 25mg of active material. But thefrequent user rates this high significantly poorer than hissmoking high while the infrequent user rates them correctly. TOLERANCE The development of tolerance is another important factor thatmay influence the psychophysiological effects of marihuana.Although tolerance occurs with many drugs and the process hasbeen studied for over a century, the mechanism of this complexphenomenon is not completely known. Kalant et a]., (1971) haveextensively discussed tolerance to the psychotropic drugs. Tolerance has two different connotations. The first, termed"initial tolerance," is an expression of the dose ofthe drug which the subject must receive at his first exposure toproduce a designated degree of effect. These authors state that avariety of congenital and environmental factors contribute to thewide range of differences in "initial tolerance"observed among different individuals, sexes, species, age groupsand so on. The second meaning of tolerance is that of an "acquiredchange in tolerance" within the same individual as a resultof repeated drug exposures so that an increased drug dose isrequired to produce the same specified degree of effect, or thesame dose produces less effect. In this chapter, tolerance willbe used synonymously with "acquired increase intolerance." -Tolerance can only be discussed for eachspecific drug action and not for all the actions of a given drugon the body. That is, tolerance occurs at different rates forsome of the various effects of the same drug on the body and maynot occur for other effects of the same drug. The relationshipbetween "initial tolerance" and "acquired changein tolerance" has not been clearly established. There are two classes of tolerance based on possiblemechanisms. The first, dispositional tolerance refers to changesin absorption, distribution, excretion and metabolism whichproduce a reduction in the intensity and duration of contactbetween the drug and the target tissue on which it acts. The second, functional tolerance includes changes in theproperties and functions of the target tissue making it lesssensitive to the same dose of the drug. Physiological toleranceimplies a, change in the target organ while psychological or"learned tolerance" implies the acquisition of newskills or functions to replace those changed in the target tissue(Kalant et al., 1971). Considerable evidence is accumulating which demonstrates thattolerance does develop in numerous animal species (pigeons, rats,dogs, monkeys, chimpanzees, mice) to the behavioral andphysiological effects of marihuana and THC in doses many timeslarger (from 1 mg. to 500 mg./ kg/day) than the minimal activedose (Carlini, 1968; Silva et al., 1968; McMillan et al., 1970,1971; Frankenheim et al., 1971; Carlini et al., 1970; Thompson etal., 1971; Pirch et al., 1972; Ferraro, 1971; Elsinore, 1970;Cole et al., 1971). Lipparini et al. (1969) were not able to demonstratetolerance in the rabbit. Tolerance, appears to develop rapidly to high doses even wheninjections are spaced up to about a week apart. Tolerance to highdoses appears to be long-lasting with little loss of toleranceeven after a month. But at low doses in the behavioral range,tolerance appears to completely dissipate in a few days after asingle dose. The magnitude of tolerance development can be large.After repeated exposure, a dose of over one hundred times theoriginal produces little effect (McMillan et al., 1971). The development of tolerance to THC in animals occurs forsome effects but not for others (McMillan et al., 1971; Pirch etal., 1972; Thompson et al., 1971 ). This differential developmentof tolerance may explain why tolerance to certain effects studiedhas not been demonstrated (Masur and Khazan, 1970; McMillan etal., 1971; Barry and Kubena, 1971; Kubena et al., 1971). Lomax (1971) and Thompson et al. (1971) have noted that thedevelopment of tolerance to one effect of the drug (hypothermiaor sedation) may allow the expression of the opposite effect(hyperthermia or stimulation) to which tolerance does notdevelop. Cross tolerance has been demonstrated between delta-9-THC,delta-8-THC and its synthetic analogues. Cross tolerance, has notbeen demonstrated between THC and lysergic acid diethylamide(LSD), mescaline or morphine (McMillan et al., 1970). Preliminary work performed by McIsaac (1971) and Harris etal., (1972) demonstrated a reduction in the duration and qualityof response on a conditioned learning task by monkeys on theseeond intravenously administered dose of THC. Tolerancedeveloped extremely rapidly so that no effect on behavior wasseen after five days. After a. two-week period without THC, theanimals were retested and the same degree of tolerance hadpersisted. The researchers believe these observations mightindicate a rapid behavioral adaption or "learned"functional tolerance. However, evidence indicates that dispositional toleranceand/or physiological type of functional tolerance also plays arole at least at higher doses. Tolerance develops to the centralnervous system depressant effects, hypotherma hypopnea (Thompsonet al., 1971) and the EEG effects (Pirch et al., 1971) of thedrug. McMillan et al., (1971) have demonstrated that tolerance tothe effects of THC on behavior can be blocked by the hepaticmicrosomal enzyme inhibitor, SKF-525-A which has been shown to bea potent inhibitor of THC metabolism (Dingell et al., 1971).Methodological techniques must be, developed which will allowmicrodistribution studies to be performed in tolerant animalswith low doses of THC before the mechanism of tolerancedevelopment can be clarified. Evidence for the development of marked tolerance by man hasbeen suggested by studies of heavy daily very long term users ofhashish, charas or ganja in foreign countries. Reports from the,Eastern literature (Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Dhunjibhoy, 1930;Ewans, 1904) and more recently from Greece (Miras, 1965; Fink etal., 1971) and Afghanistan (Weiss, 1971) relate daily consumptionof enormous quantities of potent cannabis preparation estimatedto contain up to about one gram of THC per day. Weiss (1971) has noted that daily charas smokers start withsmall doses and then in order to achieve the same effectgradually increase their daily dose about 5-6 times over a 20 to30 year period. Generally, most reach their maximum dose by age40 and then gradually decrease their daily dose by 50% usuallyceasing use by their 60's. Some smokers have been noted to raisetheir original daily dose up to a maximum of 10 times within thefirst two years. Others have noted that moderate use for many years does notnecessitate increased doses (Sigg, 1963). At least part of the increase in daily amount of drug used isaccounted for by the finding that the duration -of theintoxication becomes shorter over the years so that the veryheavy smoker must consume the drug more frequently to remainintoxicated. Additionally, smokers report that they have onoccasion discontinued use for days or months after which theyexperienced similar effects at smaller doses (Weiss, 1971). Fink et al. (1971) noted that as hashish users total dailydose was decreased by more than half over the years, thefrequency of use per day declined correspondingly. Rubin and Comitas (1972) noted that very long term Jamaicanganja smokers generally consumed an average of seven spliffsdaily (a ganja cigarette several times the size of an Americanmarihuana cigarette) with a maximum of 24. Further evidence for the development of tolerance, at leastto certain of the depressant effects, is that these very longterm smokers apparently tolerate the extremely high doses wellwithout dysphoria or decreased ability to perform their usualactivities (Weiss, 1971; Fink et al., 1971; Rubin and Comitas,1972). Smith and Mehl (1970) noted the, accumulating Americananecdotal evidence of mild tolerance development after heavydaily use for a number of years. Jones (1971) and Meyer et a].(1971) have suggested diminished effect on physiologic andpsyochomotor performance, that is, little or no impairment offunction in daily users compared with infrequent, intermittentusers of marihuana. Additionally, several investigators havenoted that frequent users had little or no impairment onpsychomotor performance tasks while marihuananaive individualsgiven the same dose had impaired function. (Clark et al., 1968,1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Weil etal., 1968). Subsequently (Mendelson et al., 1972) repetitive daily (freeaccess) use over a 21-day period by groups of long-termintermittent (average 7.7 sessions per month) and moderate,marihuana users (daily average, 33 smoking sessions per month)was studied. The development, of tolerance was strongly suggestedto the physiological pulse rate and general depressant effect onactivity as well as psychological effects which impair recentmemory, time estimation and psychomotor coordination. No tolerance development occurred to the subjective effectsof marihuana for experienced users over the 21-day period (global"highness", somatic, perceptual, awareness, feeling,control, friendliness, ambivalence and altered thinking).Furthermore, with the exception of a higher ambivalence ratingfor the daily riser group, there were no differences in thesubjective reports of the daily users or intermittent users.(Mendelson et al., 1972). The ambivalence score is believed (Katzet al., 1968) to be the best measure of "psychedelic effects" of hallucinogenic drugs. In a prior study (Meyer et al., 1971) found that while theheavy smokers experienced more profound subjective effects soonafter smoking, they were less intoxicated than the intermittentusers one hour later. These findings suggest to the investigators that the qualityof the "high" may be different for heavy andintermittent users and may change with heavy use. Tolerance, tothe subjective effects of marihuana may occur predominantly tothe depressant effects so that the stimulatory effects (orhallucinatory-like) would be predominant in the heavy users. Theintermittent users who smoked marihuana several times daily inthe, current study showed no increase in the ambivalence, rating. The increased daily frequency of marihuana use by both groupsover time by shortening the interval between smoking sessionsappears consistent with earlier observations (Meyer et al., 1971)that the duration of the desired "high" is shorter inheavy users than in intermittent users. Fink et al. (1971) confirmed several of these findings in astudy in which intermittent users smoked a fixed dose (14 mg. ofTHC) of marihuana. They noted a suggestion of development oftolerance to pulse rate, short-term memory, digit symbolsubstitution but not to the subjective high or EEG changes.However, the subjects did feel that the duration of theintoxication shortened progressively during the second half ofthe experiment. Schuster and Renault (1971) administered twice daily fixeddoses of marihuana (smoke from 430 mg. of marihuana with 1.5% THCcontent) to intermittent users over a 10-day period. A peaktachycardia, of 20 to 30 beats per minute and a usual social highwere produced. Preliminary observations revealed the developmentof tolerance to time estimation in a few days, but no evidencefor tolerance to the tachycardia, orthostatic blood pressure, orrating of the high. Hollister (1971), in preliminary studies found no significantevidence of tolerance after five daily oral doses of 20 mg. ofTHC. Clinical responses measured were subjective judgment of thehigh, mood, pulse rate, reading comprehension or excretion ofurinary metabolites. REVERSE TOLERANCE Smith and Mehl's (1970) clinical observations of manymarihuana smokers suggest a J-shaped time curve of tolerance tomarihuana. A novice marihuana smoker often reports feeling nohigh or requiring considerably more drug to get high on his firstfew trials with the drug than after he obtains more experiencewith the drug. This phenomenon has been called "reversetolerance." These clinicians believed this represented"learning to get high" or acquiring the ability toappreciate or become sensitive to the subtle aspects of theintoxication. Goode (1971) found that more frequent and term marihuanasmokers tend to require fewer "joints" to get high butdifferences were not statistically significant. Weil et al. (1968) reported that experienced users ofmarihuana achieved a "high" after being given the samedose as naive (non-users) persons who did not experience a highbut did demonstrate objective physiologic and psychomotor drugeffects. Meyer et al. (1971) found that heavy marihuana, users (dailyfor three years) were most sensitive to the "high" andrequired less marihuana to achieve a social high than infrequentintermittent users (use one to four times per month for less thantwo years). Phillips et al. (1971) reported an increase in severity ofsymptoms after repeated administration of THC to rats. This"sensitization" may be a correlate of reversetolerance. Lemberger et al. (1971) supplied additional evidence forreverse tolerance based on the intravenous administration of 0.5mg of THC to experimental subjects. Naive subjects experienced noeffect from this small dose. However, daily marihuana users, whowere told they were receiving a non-pharmacologically active doseof THC, reported a "marihuana high," which lasted up to90 minutes. Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972) and Mechoulam (1970) suggestedthe possibility that enzymes necessary to convert THC to a moreactive compound require prior use of marihuana. Reverse tolerance appears to be a complex phenomenon. Jones(1971) presented evidence which stressed the importance ofexpectation, setting and prior drug experience on learning to get"high." As the user gains more experience withmarihuana, the more the individual's mind is able to respond tothe expectation of the "high" by actually becoming highwhen given an inert material which smells and looks likemarihuana. Weil (1971) believes that the capacity to get"high" is an inherent characteristic of eachindividual's mind. He, believes that marihuana facilitates theuser's abilitv to achieve this altered state of consciousness,that is, learn how to get high. Mendelson et al. (1972) did not find evidence for reversetolerance. In fact, the daily users were more likely than theintermittent users to smoke two cigarettes per occasion. Bothgroups had had an average of five years of marihuana use. Severalother investigators did not obtain any evidence of reversetolerance after repetitive daily use in experienced subjects(Hollister, 1971; Schuster and Renault, 1971; Fink et al., 1971). METABOLISM Metabolism of the drug by the body exerts an importantinfluence on the psychopharmacologic effect of marihuana. Manylaboratories in many countries have been examining themetabolism, of the cannabinoids using in vitro liver microsomalenzyme preparations. With the recent availability of radiolabeled Delta 9 andDelta l THC, cannabinol and cannabidiol much activity hasoccurred in vivo in animals. A comprehensive review of theseareas including studies of absorption, disposition, excretion,metabolism and stimulation-inhibition of metabolism is beyond thescope of this report. Readers interested in further details inthis area are referred to an excellent comprehensive review byLemberger (1972). From animal and in vitro studies it appears that the liverrapidly changes Delta 9 and Delta 11 THC in a similar manner byhydroxylation to 11-OH THC. This compound appears to be as potentor possibly more potent pharmacologically than the parentcompounds This metabolite appears to be, rapidly hydroxylated to8-11 dihydroxy Delta 9 THC (7-11 dihydroxy All THC) which isinactive. The 8-OH Delta THC appears to be a minor activemetabolite (Christensen et al., 1971; Burstein et 1970; Ben-Zviet al., 1970; Foltz et al., 1970; Wall et al., 1970,71; Nilssonet al., 1970). These metabolites are excreted primarily into the bile andthen to the feces. Some evidence exists for an enterohepaticcirculation returning the drug to the blood. (Miras andCoutselinis, 1970; Klausner and Dingell, 1971) Another metabolic pathway appears to be present resulting ina series of acidic metabolites excreted primarily in the urine(Agurell et al, I., 1970). Recently, Burstein and Rosenfeld(1971) isolated and identified a majo r rabbit urinarymetabolite, 11-carboxy-2'-hydroxy-Delta 9 THC. They postulatethat other acidic metabolites might be esters or amides of thiscompound (Figure 7). Recently, Nakazawa and Costa (1971) demonstrated that A' THCwas metabolized by lung microsomes forming two unidentifiedproducts not found in liver homogenates. Lemberger et al. (1970, 1971, 1972) and Galanter et al.(1972) have performed metabolic studies in mail usingintravenous, oral and smoked Delta 9 THC. These studies indicatethat the THC disappears from the plasma in two phases. The initial rapid phase has two components and representsmetabolism by the liver and redistribution from the blood to thetissues. The slower second phase represents tissue retention andslow release and subsequent metabolism. The plasma 1/2 life of THC was significantly shorter in dailyusers than nonusers at both the first component of phase one (10minutes versus 13 minutes) and phase two (27 hours versus 56hours). Tissue distribution was similar in daily and nonuser (1/2life 2 hours). Therefore, immediate metabolism of THC and subsequentmetabolism is more rapid for daily user than the non-userimplying specific enzyme induction. THC persists in the plasmafor a considerable period of time, at least three days, with ahalf life of 57 hours for nonusers and 28 hours for daily users. The presence of 11-hydroxy THC and more polar metabolites inthe plasma of both users and nonusers within 10 minutes indicatesthat the metabolite probably accounts for the pharmacologicalactivity of marihuana, not THC. Further metabolism of the 11-hydroxy THC to more polarinactive 8-11 dihydroxy A' THC metabolite occurs more rapidly inusers than nonusers. During the first few hours after injection,unchanged THC, its polar metabolites and nonpolar metabolites inthe plasma, decline rapidly and then level off as they aredistributed to the tissues. THC persists in the plasma, for atleast three days, and both users and non-users excretemetabolites in the urine and feces for more than a week. Delta-9-THC is extensively metabolized to more polar compoundswhich were excreted in the urine and feces. Urinary excretion andbiliary excretion (reflected a day later in the feces) wasgreatest during the initial 24 hours, then gradually tapered off.All THC is metabolized since no unchanged THC was excreted in thefeces or urine. No difference in total cumulative excretion wasobserved but a significantly larger percentage of the metaboliteswere excreted in the urine of users than nonusers. About 40-45%of the metabolites were collected in the feces in both groups inone week. Urinary excretion in this period accounted for 30% indaily users and 22% in nonusers. (Lemberger et al., 1970, 1971,1972) Perez-Reyes et al. (1971) found a similar pattern ofexcretion of metabolites after oral administration. Urine contained no Delta 9 THC, only a small quantity (3%) of11-hydroxy THC and 90% more polar acidic compounds as yetunidentified. (Lemberger, 1971). Preliminary studies by Bursteinand Rosenfeld ('1971) suggest that these human acidic urinarymetabolites are identical to the 11-carboxy-2' hydroxy THC foundin rabbits. In man, Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972) found that 11-OH THCand 8-11-OH THC were primarily excreted in the feces. Twenty-twopercent of the metabolites in the feces were unchanged 11-hydroxyTHC and slightly less were 8-11-dihyd-roxy THC. The remainderwere unidentified more polar compounds, perhaps conjugates ofthese metabolites. All user subjects (Lemberger et al., 1970, 1971, 1972) but nonon-user noted a high after intravenous injection of the 0.5 mgdose of Delta 9 THC. This would be a dose range of 5 to 7micrograms/kg. Highs have been noted by Kiplinger et al. (1971)with smoking THC to deliver a dose of 6.25 micrograms/kg. Thehigh for some lasted up to 90 minutes. Thus, the plasma levels ofDelta 9 THC and its metabolites seen after intravenous injectionsuggest that psychopharmacologic effects are seen in the firstcomponent of the rapid phase and terminated by redistribution andmetabolism after the initial phase. The 11-hydroxy Delta 9 THCwould be present at this early phase and is probably responsiblefor the activity of Delta 9 THC in marihuana. Further evidence that the 11-OH Delta 9 THC is responsiblefor marihuana's effect was seen in oral and inhalation studies.By the oral route, blood levels of unchanged THC were relativelylow compared to the radioactivity levels of the metabolicproducts at the time of peak subjective effect. While the bloodlevel of unchanged THC at the peak oral effect was identical tothat after intravenous injection of the 0.5 mg. dose, thepsychologic, effect was much more pronounced after oraladministration of the larger 20 mg. dose of THC. Again afterinhalation, the plasma levels of the metabolites correlatetemporally with the subjective effects but the plasma levels ofunchanged Delta 9 THC do not. (Lemberger, 1970, 1971, 1972;Galanter, 1972) PATTERN OF USE The drug effect of marihuana can only be realisticallydiscussed within the context of who the user is, how long he hasused, how much and how frequently he uses and what is the socialcontext of the use. In general, for virtually any drug theheavier the use pattern, that is the longer the duration, themore frequently the use and the larger the quantity used on eachoccasion, the greater the risk for either direct or indirectdamage. Tolerance development is only one of a variety of occurrenceswhich are related to the repetitive use of marihuana. Anydiscussion of drug effect must take into account the time periodover which the drug is used (duration of use). This is necessaryin order to detect cumulative effects or more subtlegradually-occurring changes. Of course, the issue of causality isquite complex because of the multitude of factors other thanmarihuana use that have a direct or indirect effect on theindividual over a period of years. For the purposes of this report, immediate or acute effectswill refer to those drug effects which occur during the drugintoxication or shortly following it. Short-term or sub-acutewill arbitrarily refer to periods of less than two years;long-term, from two to 10 years; and very long term (or chronic),greater than 10 years. Frequency of use, will arbitrarily be designated in thefollowing manner: experimental use refers to use of marihuana atleast one time but not more than once a month; intermittent userefers to use more than once a month but not more than 10 times amonth (several times a week) ; moderate use refers to use of thedrug more than 10 times a month but not more than once a day;heavy use designates use more than once, daily and very heart userefers to use many times a day, usually with potent preparations(high THC content), producing almost continual intoxication sothat the smoker's brain is rarely drug free. AMOUNT OF DRUG CONSUMED Relatively little actual data are available on the amount ofmarihuana, smoked per occasion or per day by current users in theUnited States. (McGlothlin, 1971, 1972). Estimates of thequantity of THC consumed are difficult because of the variabilityof potency as well as weight and size of the marihuana cigarette("joint") and the degree of cleaning of stems and seedsfrom the dried leaves manicuring"). The analytic data available indicates most of the marihuanaused in the United States is of Mexican origin and averages aboutI % THC per dry cleaned weight of marihuana (Lerner and Zeffert,1968; Jones, 1971). Subjective ratings by experienced marihuanausers appear to substantiate the data that marihuana containing1% THC is of average quality (Jones and Stone, 1970; Weil et al.,1968). Marihuana cigarettes are estimated (McGlothlin, 1971, 1972)to average about 0.5 g in weight and, therefore, contain about 5mg of THC. Cigarettes used in the eastern states are generallysmaller than those, rolled in the west (McGlothlin, 1971; NewYork Police Department, 1969, 1970) Most data indicates that for the large majority of usersone-half to one cigarette (2.5 to 5 mg THC) is sufficient to"get high" in intermittent moderate users, althoughoften two or more cigarettes were smoked to achieve additionaleffect (Nisbet and Vakil, 1972; Shean and Fechtmann, 1971;McGlothlin et al., 1970- McGlothlin, 1972; Jones, 1971; Goode,1970). Current American daily users appear to consume one to twocigarettes per occasion (Jones, 1971) although some usersestimate they smoke three to five cigarettes per occasion(McGlothlin et al., 1970). Goode (1971), however, foundpractically no relationship between amount required to get highand frequency of use (daily to less than monthly) or duration ofuse (less than two years to six or more years). In fact, theheavy and longer term users were less likely to require more"joints." Thus, the estimated 15 mg THC for current daily users isabout one-half that estimated for confirmed regular users 30years ago in the United States (Mayor's Committee, 1944; Charenand Perelman, 1946) and one-third to one-fourth the median dailyconsumption of daily users in North Africa and India. The maximum daily consumption of 10 cigarettes (50 mg THC)for current heavy U.S. marihuana smokers (Jones, 1971;McGlothlin, 1972) is about the same as the average amountconsumed by daily chronic users in other countries, and aboutone-fourth or less of the maximum in these countries (Soueif,1967; Sigg, 1963; Indian Hemp Drug Commission's Report,1893-1894; Chopra, 1940; Chopra and Chopra, 1939). Studies of American military in Vietnam (U.S. Congress, 1971;Colbach and Crowe, 1970; Forrest, 1970), and Germany (Tennant etal., 1971) described the daily use of quantities of hashish orpotent marihuana comparable to amounts consumed by regularchronic users in other countries. Experimental data appear to confirm these estimates ofquantity of THC consumed. Isbell et al. (1967) and Jones (1971)found that most subjects reported a normal "high" aftersmoking 5-10 mg of THC. Meyer et al. (1971) found that a"very high" state was attained by ad libitum smoking of3.12 mg THC by daily users and 3.78 mg THC by intermittent users. In experiments by Johnson and Domino (1971), subjects wereurged to smoke until they were as high as they had ever been onmarihuana and felt they could not smoke any more. These subjectssmoked from one to four cigarettes containing 8.7 mg of THC toreach this level of intoxication. The range was from 8.7 to 30 mgof THC with a mean of about 20 mg THC. Intermittent and daily users were allowed to smoke marihuanaon a free choice basis over a 21day period in studies byMendelson et al. (1972). Each cigarette contained one gram ofmarihuana of approximately 2% THC content, or about 20 mg of THC. Subjects were asked to rate their high on a 10 point scalewith 10 corresponding to highest ever; five as moderately highand zero, no effect. Ratings for the daily user group ranged fromzero to nine with an average of about six for all cigarettesrated. Individual means ranged f rom three to about seven. Onalmost all occasions, subjects in both groups smoked the entirecigarette. Kiplinger et al. (1971) and Lemberger, et al. (1971) notedthat daily long-term users were able to detect effects of the"high" at doses calculated to deliver as low as 5-7micrograms/kg THC (equivalent to smoking about 100 mgs. ofmarihuana containing 1 % THC). Perhaps this explains the findingthat many users are able to "get high" smoking USwild-growing marihuana containing front near zero to 0.5% THC(Lerner, 1969; Phillips et al., 1970; Fetterman et al., 1971). Several ad libitum experiments were performed with marihuanaof unknown composition (Williams et al., 1946; Siler et al.,1933) using "confirmed regular marihuana users"confined over a 39 and six-day period. The users, who generallyconsumed three cigarettes per day, under these rather artificialconditions of the, experiment consumed means of 17 (range nine to26) and five (range one to 20) cigarettes per day respectively. Miras and Coutsilinis (1970) reported recent experimentaldata on chronic Greek hashish users who routinely use, singlesmoked doses of hashish containing 100 mg of THC. Under adlibitum conditions, these users averaged 150-350 mg of THC perday over a 30-day period. The subjects studied during a 21-day period of free choiceMarihuana consumption by Mendelson et al. (1972) generallyconsumed all of one cigarette containing 20 mg of THC per smokingsession. 'The subjects who were previously daily users were morelikely during the experiment to consumer more, than one,cigarette per session than the, previously intermittent users. Individual consumption by the intermittent users ranged froman average of about one-half to six cigarettes per day (group mean three) while the daily usersconsumed an average of three-anda-half to nine cigarettes per day(group mean six-and-a-half). Reasons given by the subjects forthe dramatic shift in the frequency of marihuana use includedboredom, testing the limits of their endurance, demonstrating itsharmlessness to the research staff, and subtle social pressure. DURATION OF USE Very little American data exists on the duration of marihuanause. Practically no data exists which demonstrates the extentthat persons who initiated marihuana use some 20-40 years agohave continued its use. Robins and Murphy (1967) in a follow-upstudy of St. Louis black males noted that 20% of those who hadtried marihuana by age 24 were still using it to some degree 15years later. McGlothlin et a]. (1970, 1971) reported on a sampleof predominantly white adults who began using, marihuana inadolescence and had continued infrequent use for more than 20years. In the case of Western and particularly middle class Americanuse of marihuana, the rapid climb to prominence of the phenomenonsince the midsixties raises the question of whether the entiredrug movement is transient or permanent. Certainly, the majorityof the youthful users and many of the adults have used the drugless than 10 years and probably less than five years. One 1970 survey (Lipp, 1970) revealed that 77% of thosestudents who initiated marihuana use four to five years earlierwere still using it to some degree. A recent study (Walters eta]., 1972) indicates that students who first used marihuanabefore entering college in September 1965 and had continued useof marihuana in February 1969 ("old user") differedfrom the, vast majority of users who began their drug use incollege ("new user"). The old user is more likely to experiment with a wide varietyof drugs, to be extremely active in radical politicalorganizations, to be alienated from American society, to be lessdefinite about career plans, and to have more heterosexualactivities. The Commission-sponsored National Survey indicated thatmarihuana use by both youth (12-17 years of age) and adults (18and over) is experimental in approximately 75% of those who haveever used marihuana. These individuals have, either stopped usingit (66% of adults and 57% of youth) or are, using, it once, amonth or less. In contrast, 13% of the ever used subsample (12%adults, 16% youth) use marihuana once a week or more. In other non-Western countries, cannabis use frequentlypersists for long periods. Especially in the East, persons usingit for 20-40 years or more are not uncommon. In other cultures,initiation is most common in adolescence. Once the habit isestablished it is likely to continue on a daily basis for manyyears and frequently continues as a lifetime practice (Weiss,1971; Sigg, 1963; Soueif, 1967; Watt, 1936; Chopra and Chopra,1939; Bouquet, 1951; VN, 1957). Probably the duration of use will vary considerably dependingon cultural acceptance or rejection (McGlothlin, 1972). INTERACTION WITH OTHER DRUGS Little experimental work has been done on the interactionbetween marihuana and other drugs used socially or medicallyalthough this will become an important area as usage increases. Marihuana is often used with sweet wines to enhance itseffect. Some evidence for an additive effect of marihuana andalcohol on motor and mental performance and subjective effect hasbeen seen experimentally (Manno et al., 1971; Jones and Stone,1970). Some degree of additive effects would be expected withbarbiturates based on their similarity to alcohol. A morecomplex, mixed pattern of effect might be expected withamphetamines and hallucinogens. These latter combinations arerarely used socially (Hollister, 1971). CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-13IA031-000655-B040-30http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113127 text/html 47310HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:31:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:04 GMTContent-length: 47092 Acute Effects of Marijuana (Delta 9 THC) The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse Acute Effects of Marihuana (Delta 9 THC) SUBJECTIVE EFFECTS Descriptive accounts of marihuana intoxication have beenwritten by noted authors, Beaudelaire (1961), scientists, Moreau(1945), and common users Tart, 1970, 1971; Isbell et al., 1967;Report by Advisory Committee, 1968). Adequate description of thestate of mind produced by low doses is difficult because it isnot approximated in the usual states of consciousness or by othercommonly used drugs. The closest non-drug approximation may bethe altered state of consciousness experienced in the hypnotictrance or transcendental meditation or the, transition zonebetween waking and sleep (Weil, 1971). Due to the highlysubjective nature of the experience, there is much individualvariation in the effects described. Tart (1970, 1971) studied the range of potential commoneffects in an extensive survey of 150 users. Changes noted bythese studies at low doses (usually smoked dose about five mg.THC) include euphoria, with restlessness and mild mentalconfusion. Sensory perception of the external environment. isaltered. Users often perceive an overestimation or slowing ofelapsed time and expansion of space, enhanced sense of tactile,olfactory, gustatory perceptions and often a feeling of hunger.Visual alterations reported are more vivid imagery and seeingforms and patterns in objects that are usually amorphous.Increased awareness of subtle qualities of sound such as purity,distinctness or rhythm are characteristically perceived by users.A dreamy, relaxed state and disinhibition, with uncontrollablelaughter is reported and users often believe that interpersonalrelations are altered, and act to potentiate social interaction. At moderate doses intensifications of changes experienced arereported. Users' reports include disturbed associations, dullingof attention, vivid visual imagery, fixed ideas, rapidly changingpositive and negative emotions, fragmentation of thought, flightof ideas, impaired immediate memory, altered sense of identity,increased suggestibility and a feeling of enhanced insight. Athigher doses, interpersonal relations are dulled and the userfeels less social and more withdrawn. At larger doses psychotomimetic (hallucinogenic-like)phenomena are experienced in a wavelike fashion. These includedistortion of body image, depersonalization, visual illusions anddistortions, synesthesia, dream-like fantasies and vividhallucinations. Data from Isbell et a]. (1967) and Perez-Reyes et al. (1971)have indicated that the hallucinogenic oral dose is in the rangeof 0.4 to 0.5 mg./kg Delta 9 THC. Thus, the hallucinogenic doseis 80 times larger than the delivered dose of smoked marihuanaproducing minimal subjective effects (five micrograms/kg.) orabout 11 to 14 times larger than the usual smoked dose. LETHALITY There is no conclusive evidence that short-term marihuana usealone directly results in any physical damage to man. A fewscattered fatalities associated with marihuana use areoccasionally reported. Most are from 19th century Indianexperiences with large oral doses of charas (Deakin, 1880;Bouquet, 1951; Ewens, 1904, Walton, 1938; Indian Hemp Drugs,1893). Brill et al. (1970) and Smith (1968) have noted that therehave not been any reliable reports of human fatalitiesattributable purely to marihuana, although very high doses havebeen administered by users. A frequently cited recent report from Belgium by Heyndrickxet al. (1970) describes an essentially negative pathological andtoxicological study of a 23-year-old man found dead in thepresence of marihuana, and hashish. A cannabinoid was detected inhis urine. However, this finding in no way inculpates marihuanaas the responsible agent. There are many possible causes ofsudden death which are not toxins and do not produce observablepathology; e.g. anaphylactic reactions, insulin shock, cardiacarhythmias, etc. A case report (Nahas, 1971) of an attempted suicide bysmoking hashish, recently in France is even more anecdotal. Anindividual was reported to have smoked consecutively ten pipes ofhashish containing approximately 200 mg of Delta 9 THC eachbefore losing consciousness. But recovery occurred aftersupportive treatment. Another case report (Hughes et al., 1970) relates severediabetic coma with ketoacidosis after the ingestion of hugeamounts of marihuana by a mental patient. However, it appearsthat the pronounced vomiting secondary to the marihuana ingestioncaused a severe electrolyte imbalance and alkalosis. Possibly avulnerable glucose-regulating system responded to the severestress inappropriately. Retrospectively, there was no history ofdiabetes noted previously but this was not confirmed or ruled outby lab tests prior to the episode. Several case reports (Henderson and Pugsley, 1968 King andCowen, 1970; King et al., 1970; Lundberg et al., 1971; Gary andKeylon, 1970) noted acute severe, physiological disturbances andacute collapse (shock, chills and fever) subsequent tointravenous injection of suspensions of marihuana. These symptomsmay have been due to an allergic reaction to injected foreignplant material, to a bacteremia and/or to the injection ofinsoluble particles which are filtered by the organs. Thesymptoms may be considered a complication of the mode of use,rather than results of the drug. Although a median lethal dose has not been established in man(Brill et al., 1970), one has been found in laboratory animals.Earlier reports (Lowe, 1946; Joachimoglu, 1965) used materials ofuncertain potency and composition. Recent studies utilizedcarefully quantified materials. One group, Phillips et al.(1971), utilizing THC extracted from marihuana, demonstrated thefollowing LD50 (the dose that causes death in 50% of the animals)in units of mg/kg of Delta 9 THC from mice,/rats: oral 481.9/666,intraperitoneal 454-9/ 372.9, intravenous 28.6/42.47. Thompson et al. (1971) under contract to the NationalInstitute of Mental Health have recently carried out extensivestudies in rats, dogs and monkeys in order to define the range oftoxicity of the drug. The group used synthetic Delta 9 and A' THCand a crude marihuana extract (CME) of carefully definecomposition. Delta 9 THC was more potent than Al THC. CME wasless potent than a similar quantity of A' THC. Acute toxicity was studied using intravenous, intraperitonealand oral routes of administration in rats. An LD50 similar tothat reported by Phillips et al. (1971) was found by theintravenous route (20 mg/kg of THC) and intraperitoneal route(400 mg/kg) but higher values were noted with oral administration(1140 mg/kg). Interestingly, the LD50 for males was 1400 mg/kgwhile for females it was 700 mg/kg by the oral route. The minimallethal dose orally was between 225 and 450 mg/kg. An LD50 was not attainable in monkeys and dogs by the oralroute. Enormous dose levels (over 3000 mg/kg of Delta 9 THC) wereadministered without lethality to most animals. A dose of about1000 mg/kg THC was the lowest dose which caused death in anyanimals The completeness of intestinal absorption of THC at thesehigh doses is unknown. Behavioral changes in the survivorsincluded sedation, huddled posture, muscle tremors,hypersensitivity to sound and hypermobility. The cause of death in the rats and mice subsequent to oralTHC was profound central nervous system depression leading todyspnea, prostration, weight loss, loss of Fighting reflex,ataxia, and severe fall in body temperature which led tocessation of respiration from 10 to 46 hours after single doseoral administration. No consistent pathological changes wereobserved in any organs. The cause of death when it rarelyoccurred in the higher species did not appear to be related tothe same mechanism as in the rats. Using intravenous administration, the acute one dose LD50 forDelta 9 THC was 100 mg/kg in dogs and 15.6 to 62.5 mg/kg inmonkeys depending on concentration of the solution. The minimallethal intravenous dose for dogs, also depending uponconcentration, was 25 to 99 mg/kg and for monkeys 3.9 to 15.5mg/kg. In contrast to the delayed death observed in rats after oraladministration, lethality in rats, dogs and monkeys afterintravenous injection occurred within minutes after injection.When sublethal amounts were injected, central nervous systemdepression with concomitant behavioral changes similar to thoseobserved after oral doses were observed. However, their onset wasmore rapid and the intensity of effect more severe withanaesthesia, and convulsions noted after injection. The monkeysand dogs that survived the intravenous injection of THC recoveredcompletely within five to nine days. The only consistent pathological changes were noted in theanimals which succumbed. Pulmonary changes including hemorrhage,edema, emphysema and generalized congestion were found and deathresulted from respiratory arrest and subsequent cardiac failure.The investigators presumed one mechanism possibly accounting forthese findings was due to the concentration of the THC solutionand its insolubility in water. Presumably, when these highlyconcentrated solutions mixed with the blood, the THC precipitatedout of solution. The precipitated foreign material then formedaggregates (or emboli) that were filtered out in the lungcapillaries causing a physical blockage of pulmonary blood flow. Subsequently, intravenous studies were repeated using Delta 9THC emulsified in a sesame oil-Tween 80-saline vehicle at 15mg/ml or 40 mg/ml. The emulsions were administered at a uniformrate of 2 ml/15 sec. Doses administered were 1, 4, 16, 64,92,128, 192 and 256 mg/kg. All monkeys injected with 92 mg/kg orless survived and completely recovered from all effects with twoto four days. All monkeys injected with 128 mg/kg or moresuccumbed within 30 minutes for all but one (180 minutes). Histopathological changes found in the lungs of the deceasedmonkeys were like those described after the, previous intravenousexperiment. All the monkeys that died exhibited severerespiratory depression and bradycardia within five minutes afterthe injection. Respiratory arrest and subsequent cardiac failureoccurred within minutes. Behavioral changes preceding death weresalivation, prostration, coma and tremors. Behavioral and physiological changes described clinically inthe surviving monkeys followed a consistent developmentalsequence and were roughly dose related in severity and duration.Onset was 15 minutes following injection and duration was up to48 hours. Huddled posture and lethargy were the most persistentchanges. Constipation, anorexia and weight loss were noted.Hypothermia, bradycardia and decreased respiratory rate generallywere maximal two to six hours post injection. Tremors with motionbut not at rest were believed to be caused by peripheral muscleinadequacy. In summary, enormous doses of Delta 9 THC, All THC andconcentrated marihuana extract ingested by mouth were unable toproduce death or organ pathology in large mammals but did producefatalities in smaller rodents due to profound central nervoussystem depression. The non-fatal consumption of 3000 mg/kg A THC by the dog andmonkey would be comparable to a 154-pound human eatingapproximately 46 pounds (21 kilograms) of 1%-marihuana or 10pounds of 5% hashish at one time. In addition, 92 mg/kg THCintravenously produced no fatalities in monkeys. These doseswould be comparable to a 154-pound human smoking at one timealmost three pounds (1.28 kg) of 1%-marihuana or 250,000 timesthe usual smoked dose and over a million times the minimaleffective dose assuming 50% destruction of the THC by smoking. Thus, evidence from animal studies and human case reportsappears to indicate that the ratio of lethal dose to effectivedose is quite large. This ratio is much more favorable than thatof many other common psychoactive agents including alcohol andbarbiturates (Phillips et al. 1971, Brill et al. 1970). PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS Much research has been reported on the effect of single dosesof marihuana or THC on a wide variety of indices of physiologicfunction in animals. Most animalt studies involved large dosesa-rid produced profound changes similar in nature but less inmagnitude than those described in the previous paragraphs. Thesehave been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere (Secretary HEW 1972,Forney, 1971; Secretary HEW, 1971) and should be consulted ifmore detailed information is required. Similarly, much research has been done in man. As discussedin the previous section on factors influencing thepsychopharmacological effect in man, an acute dose-responserelationship has been clearly defined over a dose range relevantto human usage patterns for these effects. Thus, with increasingdose, the larger the effect on the index being observed and thelonger the effect persists. However, there is a wide variationbetween individuals' responses but each individual is quiteconsistent. The most consistent physiological sign is an increased pulserate (Mendelson et al., 1972; Johnson and Domino, 1971; Renaultet al., 1971; Galanter et al., 1972; Domino, 1970; Hollister etal., 1968 Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee 1944; Waskow etal., 1970; Isbell and Jasinski, 1969; Meyer et al., 1971; Weil etal., 1968; Jones and Stone, 1970; Clark and Nakashima, 1968).This does not appear to be a direct drug effect on the heart(Manno et al., 1970). Instead, the drug appears to cause complexchanges in the autonomic nerves regulating heart rate. Thus,Kiplinger et al. (1971) demonstrated that the increase producedby marihuana in heart rate is prevented by pretreatment with aBeta-sympathetic nervous system blocking agent, propranolol. Acomparable increase rate was produced by treatment withisoprotemol, a Beta-sympathetic like drug. One subject developedan abnormal bigeminal rhythm after both marihuana andisoproternol. Renault et al. (1971) noted a consistent effect of marihuanaon the cardiac rhythm which also produced an increased heartrate. The effect was the suppression of the normal sinusarrhythmia usually produced by respiration. Respiration usuallyproduces a slowing of heart rate mediated by the vagalparasympathetic nerve supply. This depression of normal vagaltone was further evidenced by the absence of heart rate slowingduring forced expiration against a closed glotis (valsalvamaneuver). This effect seemed to wax and wane over severalminutes producing alternate periods of rapid and slowed heartrate. Both autonomic nervous systems seem to be affected bymarihuana; the sympathetic is stimulated while theparasympathetic is inhibited. Kiplinger et al. (1971) clearly demonstrated that the amountof increase in _pulse rate was directly related to the dose ofTHC administered as did Renault et al. (1971) and Johnson andDomino (1971) over a wide range of doses. Both experienced andinexperienced marihuana smokers demonstrated increases regardlessof the subjective state described. Tachycardia is noted rapidlyand reaches a peak about 15 to 20 minutes after finishingsmoking. The pulse rate returns to normal within one toone-and-a-half hours. Other than the one report of bigeminy (Kiplinger et al.,1971), little or no alteration of normal heart rhythm were notedby electrocardiogram (Isbell et al., 1967; Mayor's Committee,1944) other than sinus tachycardia (Mendelson et al., 1972).Johnson and Domino (1971) noted premature ventricularcontractions in a few of their subjects, but they felt thiseffect was more likely produced by the smoking itself rather thanby the drug. Conjunctival injection, reddening of the eyes due toincreased prominence of the conjunctival blood vessel anddilation of the scleral vessels, (Hepler et al., 1971; Kiplinger,et al., 1971) is another highly consistent occurrence (Mendelsonet al., 1972, Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Ames, 1958; Hollister,et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967; Manno et al., 1970; Waskow etal., 1979; Weil et al., 1968) produced by orally ingested andsmoked al., 1968). This finding is produced by orally ingestedand smoked marihuana (or THC). And thus the effect must be adirect drug effect and not caused by irritation from smoke(Perez-Reyes and Lipton, 1971). Kiplinger et al. (1971) notedthat this finding was dose-related although it develops slowlyreaching a maximum about one hour after smoking. Reported effects on blood pressure are inconsistent. Someinvestigators find lowered pressure (Hollister et al., 1968;Isbell et al., 1967; Waskow, et al., 1970) while others report aslight increase (Johnson and Domino, 1971; Domino, 1970; Mayor'sCommittee, 1944) and still others report increases and decreases(Mendelson et al., 1972; Perez-Reyes et al., 1971). Preliminary results of a carefully performed study of thecardiovascular effects (Weiss, 1971) demonstrated orthostatic,hypotension in the erect position and hypertension when supine. Little or no effect has been demonstrated in humans on a widevariety of parameters investigated. Body temperature is unchanged(Mendelson et al., 1971; Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al.,1967; Brooks, 1896) as is respiratory rate (Domino, 1970; Isbellet al., 1967; Weil et al., 1968), lung vital capacity and acutebronchospasni (Mendelson et O., 1972) and basal metabolism(Mayor's Committee, 1944). Several studies (Mendelson et al., 1972; Mayor's Committee,1944; Personal Communication, 1970) have examined changes inblood cells and blood chemistry. No acute effects weredemonstrated on red blood cell number, or structure; differentialand total white blood cell count; platelet count; reticulocyte,count; serum electrolyte concentrations; calcium and phosphorousserum levels; liver function tests; uric acid concentration; typeor quantity of serum proteins. Although increased frequency ofurination is often reported, increased urine volume has not beendemonstrated (Ames, 1958; Mayor's Committee, 1944) and noalteration of kidney function identified (Personal Communication,1970; Hollister et al., 1968; Mayor's Committee, 194-4; Mendelsonet al. 1972). Reports of increased hunger, especially for sweets (Allentuckand Bowman, 1942; Ames, 1958; Manno et al., 1970; Mayor'sCommittee, 1944), have focused attention on blood sugar and foodintake. No consistent significant change in blood sugar has beendemonstrated (Dornbush and Freedman, 1971; Hollister, 1971;Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967; Manno et -al., 1970;Personal Communication, 1970; Weil et al., 1968) with someinvestigators finding decreases (Beringer et al., 1932;Lindemann, 1933-1934), others finding increases (Manno, 1970;Mayor"s Committee, 1944), still others finding bothincreases and decreases (Miras, 1965). Podolsky (1971) found that although fasting blood glucose wasunchanged by smoking marihuana, higher 30 and 60 minute glucoselevels were noted after a standard dose of glucose. Nocorresponding alteration in insulin or growth hormone levels wasdemonstrated. Hollister and Gillespie (1970) found an increased total foodintake when the drug was administered after breakfast but notafter an overnight fast. Half the subjects reported subjectiveincreased hunger. Subjects' free fatty acid levels and bloodglucose remained unchanged while the placebo controls' free fattyacid values decreased. Another study suggested increased appetiteand food intake but was without adequate controls (PersonalCommunication, 1970). An investigation of physiological parameters of stress aftermarihuana (Hollister, 1969; Hollister et al., 1970) revealed onlya minimal increase in white blood cells and a minimal decrease incosinophils but no changes in serotonin, cortisol level andurinary catecholamines. However, another investigator (Chopra,1969) demonstrated increased catecholamine excretion especiallythose from the adrenal medulla. Hepler and Frank (1971) and Frank et, al(1971) have carefullystudied ophthalmological changes produced by marihuana. Swellingof the eyelids (Ames, 1958), ptosis (Isbell et al., 1967),photophobia and nystagmus (Allentuck and Bowman, 1942) anddilated, sluggish reacting pupils (Mayer-Gross et al., 1960;Mayor's Committee, 1944) were all mentioned in earlierdiscussions but were not demonstrated (Hepler et al., 1971). Findings which were quantifiable (Hepler et al., 1971) were aslight pupillary constriction with normal responsiveness to lightand accommodation and an increase in glare recovery time. Nochange was evident on near and far visual acuity, fundiscopicexam, visual field acuity and depth and color perception.However, a decrease in tear secretion and an increase inconjunctival injection was demonstrated. Hepler and Frank (1971) reported an average of about 25%decrease in the intraocular pressure of most normal subjectsafter smoking marihuana. A preliminary trial in one patient withglaucoma demonstrated similar findings (Frank, 1971). No objective impairment of improvement invisual acuity orbrightness perception (Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al.,1969) nor effect on depth perception and duration of after image(Clark and Nakashima, 1968) was noted in other studies. Neurological examinations have consistently revealed no majorabnormalities during marihuana intoxication. (Mayor's Committee,1944; Rodin and Domino, 1970; Rodin et al., 1970; PersonalCommunication, 1970). Subjects often report muscle weakness.Minimal decreased leg, hand and finger maximum muscle strengthhave been demonstrated objectively (Fere, 1901; Hollister et al.,1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944). However, electromyography wasreported to be normal (Personal Communication, 1970 A slightly increased briskness in the knee jerk has beendetected (Domino, 1971 - Rodin and Domino, 1970) while no changein threshold or elicitation of deep tendon reflexes is usually,reported (Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967). Incoordination, fine tremor and ataxia are often experiencedby the user (Ames, 1958; Beringer et al., 1932; Clark et al.,1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944). The presence of a fine tremor anddecrements in hand steadiness and static body equilibrium leavebeen demonstrated with refined measuring devices when they arenot grossly observable (Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee,1944; Mendelson et al., 1972). Kiplinger et al. (1971) usingsensitive apparatus demonstrated these fine hand tremors andchanges in body equilibrium are also dose related. Cranial nerve function and somatic sensation have not beensignificantly impaired or improved. Subjective reports ofincreased auditory sensitivity contributing to greater estheticappreciation of music (Winick, 1960) have been generallyunconfirmed in objective tests of auditory acuity and pitch,frequency or intensity or threshold discrimination (Aldrich,1944; Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al., 1969; Clark andNakashima 1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Meyers and Caldwell,1969). Objective improvement in auditory acuity in severalsubjects was noted (Walton, 1938; Williams et al., 1946). Similarly, improvement in visual acuity and discriminationand altered depth perception reported by users has beenunconfirmed objectively (Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al.,1969; Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944;Hollister and Gillespie, 1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Frank etal., 1971). A slight improvement in vibratory sensation (Rodin andDomino, 1970), no change in touch or two-point discrimination(Rodin and Domino, 1970; Williams et al., 1946) nor olfactory andgustatory senses (Williams et al., 1946) have been demonstrated.Decreased sensitivity to pain has been objectively demonstrated(Personal Communication, 1970) which corroborates its pasttherapeutic use as an analgesic. One of the most frequently reported subjective effects ofmarihuana intoxication is a distortion of time sense (Tart,1971). Actual elapsed time is overestimated or perceived as beinglonger than actual clock time. Thus, present events are perceivedas prolonged when intoxicated and isolated from the past andfuture. They are in the "hereand-now" (Melges et al.,1971). Many have confirmed this experimentally (Ames, 19,58;Clark et al., 1970; Mendelson et al., 1972; Dornbush and Freeman,1971; Hollister and Gillespie, 1970; Weil et al., 1968; Williamset al., 1946). The over-estimate is much greater during periodslit which the subject is performing a task than for unfilledtime, and the error is (greater as the time period is longer(Clark et al., 1970). Melges et al. (1971) have demonstrated that marihuanaintoxication induces temporal distortions with a greaterconcentration on the present and a shortening of span ofawareness into the past and future. They believe that under thedrug's influence, as the, subject becomes less able to integratepast, present and future, his awareness becomes more concentratedon present events. These present events are experienced asprolonged or timeless because they no longer appear to theintoxicated individual as transitions from the past to thefuture. Melges and Bowlby (1969) have described habitual marihuanasmokers who specifically use the drug to achieve the"here-and-now" orientation. These smokers claim thisfocus on the present permits them to be more open to immediateexperience while being less troubled by past and future concerns.This focus may also explain the belief that perceptions duringintoxications are both unexpected and never experiencedpreviously. The effect of intoxication on the restingelectroencephalogram are still unclear but generally have beenminimal, inconsistent and within normal limits. In early studies(Wikler and Lloyd, 1945; Williams et al., 1946) a decrease inalpha activity was noted. More recently (Ames, 1958) noted adelayed alpha increase with concomitant increases in beta andtheta activity. Rodin and Domino (1971) reported a slight shifttoward slower alpha frequencies. Three other studies (Jones and Stone, 1970; Hollister et al.,1971; Rickles et al., 1970), failed to find consistent changesbut noted increased alpha frequency, increased synchronizationand occasional paroxysmal activity. These effects were ascribedto relaxation and drowsiness. Two investigators (Chopra, 1935; Miras, 1969) reporteddecreased fast activity and other variable effects. Mostrecently, Volavka et al. (1971) and Fink et al. (1971), reporteda significant rapid onset effect occurring during the five-minutesmoking period and of short duration (less than 30 minutes) incontinuously alert individuals. The principal changes detected bycomputer analysis were a dose related increase in percent alphatime and an associated reduction in theta and beta hands. Roth et al. (1972), demonstrated that auditory evokedresponses were decreased in amplitude by marihuana and THCparticularly during the first few minutes of stimulation. Theseresults may indicate that the intoxicated individual may receiveexternal auditory stimuli differently during the intoxicationperiod. The prominent and frequently reported sedative effects ofmarihuana and the dreamlike states occurring during intoxicationdirected several investigators to study the effects of marihuanaon sleep. Fragmentary data from one sleep laboratory (Pivik etal., 1969) indicated decreased rapideye-movement (REM) sleeptime. Another sleep lab (Rickles et al., 1970), in preliminarywork demonstrated an increase in REM sleep time. Fink et al.(1971) noted that EEG defined sleep (stages one and two) weredose dependent but THC did not act like a classical sedative. Theoccurrence of EEG sleep was much more frequent in the placebo andlow dose (10 mg THC) conditions than in the high dose condition(20 mg THC). Mendelson et al. (1972) noticed an increased amount of totalsleep as well as an increase in discrete episodes of sleeprelated to marihuana smoking. These findings correlate well withquestionnaire data (Tart, 1970) indicating that at moderatedoses, users found it easier to induce sleep and that sleep wasconsidered to be more refreshing, while at higher doses bothaspects were impaired. In summary, marihuana containing Delta-9-THC is apharmacologically active drug with minimal acute physiologicaleffects at the low to moderate doses used by man. Based on its few consistently observed physiological effects,marihuana is a rather unexciting compound of negligible acutephysiological toxicity at the usual doses consumed by man. Thesubjective state characteristically described by the intoxicateduser is far more interesting to both the user and the scientistthan the objective one observed by the investigator. EFFECTS ON MENTATION AND PSYCHOMOTOR PERFORMANCE Characteristically, intoxication with psychoactive materialseffect psychomotor and mental functions. It is apparent from thesubjective assertions of users and a wide range of experimentalstudies that marihuana is no exception (Clark and Nakashima ,1968; Clark et al., 1970; Dornbush and Freedman, 1971; Hollisterand Gillespie, 1970; Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944;McGlothlin et al., 1971; Melges et al., 1970; Meyer et al., 1971;Weil and Zinberg, 1969; Weil et al., 1968; Volavka et al., 1971;Galanter et al., 1972; Kiplinger et al., 1971; Mendelson et al.,1972; Dornbush et al., 1971). Psychomotor tasks which have been tested include tappingspeed, handwriting and free-hand writing and free handdrawing,simple and complex reaction time, pursuit rotor and trackingtasks and continuous performance tests. Cognitive tasksfrequently tested are simple arithmetic problems, serial additionor subtraction, fine judgment tasks, 'digit-symbol substitutiontest, digit-code memory, reading comprehension, speech or verbalout-put, forward and backward digit spans, goal directed complexserial subtractions and additions to reach a set end sum, andshort-term or immediate memory functions. In general, Kiplinger et al. (1971) have clearly demonstratedthat the degree of impairment is dose related and varies indegree during the period of intoxication exerting its maximaleffect at the peak intoxication. Naive subjects commonly demonstrate greater decrement inperformance than experienced users but report less subjectiveeffect (Weil et al., 1968). Experienced users appear to bettercompensate to the effect of the drug especially for ordinaryperformance at lower doses (Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Clark etal., 1970; Crancer et al., 1969; Jones and Stone, 1970; Meyer etal., 1971; Weil and Zinberg, 1969; Jones, 1971; Mendelson et al.,1972). Performance of simple or familiar tasks (i.e. simplereaction time) during intoxication is minimally effected.However, on unfamiliar or complex tasks (i.e., complex reactiontime), performance decrements occur (Weil and Zinberg, 1969;Dornbush et al., 1971; Moskowitz et al., 1970). Performance decrements are further enhanced when verbal tasksare performed during delayed auditory feedback (Kiplinger et al.,1971). Also marked individual differences in performance arenoted between similar subjects. (Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Clarket al., 1970; Manno et al., 1970; Kiplinger et al., 1971). Acyclical waxing and waning of the intensity of the intoxicationand concomitant performance occurs periodically (Clark et al.,1970; Melges et al., 1970). Finally, when subjects concentrate on the task beingperformed at "normal social high," objective evidenceof intoxication is not apparent and the individual may performbetter than when drug free (Rodin and Domino, 1970; Mendelson etal., 1972). Obviously, these observations raise practical doubtsregarding the intoxicated individuals' ability to function atjobs requiring memory, concentration, and organization ofthinking. THE INTOXICATED MENTAL STATE Several investigators have suggested that shortterm memory isthe mental function most significantly affected by marihuana andcontributes to the subtle alterations of mental functioningnoted. Generally an impairment of recent or short term memory isdemonstrated (Abel, 1970,1971; Dornbush et al., 1971; Menges,1970-71; Tinklenberg, 1970; Clark et al., 1970; Weil et al.,1968). Thus, mental tasks requiring immediate informationacquisition (Abel, 1971) and/or retrieval (Weil et al., 1968) areeffected. Abel (1971) recently showed that marihuana blocks theacquisition process involved in the storage of new interfereswith the retrieval of already stored information. Decrements areproduced in decisions requiring recent memory or sustainedalertness (Clark et al., 1970) ; conversation (Well et al., 1968); calculations, or reading which requires retention, coordinatingand indexing sequential information termed temporaldisintegration (Melges et al., 1970, 1971). Melges eta]. (1970, 1971) theorizes that episodic impairmentof immediate memory produces voids which are filled withperceptions and thoughts extraneous to the organized mentalprocesses. He suggests that this leads to temporal disintegrationproducing a fragmented and disorganized temporal experience inwhich past and future time frames are blurred and the present isexperienced as prolonged or boundless. Thus, depersonalizationoccurs as the individual experiences himself temporally in astrange and unreal manner during marihuana intoxication. UNPLEASANT REACTIONS: "TOO STONED" AND"NOVICE-ANXIETY" These substantial cognitive and psychomotor effects areprobably responsible for many of the acute adverse reactions tomarihuana. One, of the most common is the heavy, drugged feelingwhere the individual feels mentally and physically sluggish sothat every motion and thought seems to require extreme effort(Smith and Mehl, 1970). This probably reflects impaired cognitivefunction and psychomotor retardation from getting "toostoned." This most frequently occurs after oral ingestion ofa large dose of drugs or in inexperienced smokers who have, notlearned to selftitrate their dose to achieve the desired high. In these instances, depression, anxiety, fatigue, short-termmemory loss, dizziness, nausea, incoordination, palpitations areexperienced as generalized discomfort, and ill-being. "Novice anxiety reactions" or panic reactionsaccount for a majority of acute toxic reactions to marihuana(Baker and Lucas, 1969; Baker-Bates, 1935; Gaskill, 1945;Grossman, 1969; Persyko, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Sonnenreich andGoes, 1962; Sigg, 1963; Dally, 1967; Hamaker, 1891; Marten, 1969;Smith and Mehl, 1970; Walton, 1938). When dosage, set and setting are optimal the distortion ofself (depersonalization) and temporal disintegration(timelessness of the present moment) common to marihuanaintoxication is recognized by the individual as time-limited anddrug-induced. It is usually experienced as pleasurable. But, ifdose, set and setting are not optimal the experience may causethe intoxicated individual to fear that loss of his identify andself control may not end or that he is dying or losing, his mind.Acute, anxiety or panic results (Mel et al., 1970). Non-drug factors of set and setting play a most importantrole in these, reactions. Of course, the great variability ofindividuals makes the effect of marihuana on any specificindividual rather unpredictable. The large majority of these anxiety reactions occur innovices who have intense underlying anxiety surrounding marihuanause such as fears of arrest, of disruption of family andoccupational relations and of possible physical and mentaldangers. Also, individuals with relatively rigid personalitystructures, whose values are more in line with those of the"straight"society and have little desire for new anddifferent experiences, appear to experience these, anxietyreactions much more frequently than those, individuals who aremembers of the "counterculture" (Smith and Mehl, 1970). In addition, simple episodes of neurotic depression may beobserved in these, same types of individuals during periods ofunusual psychological stress (Well, 1970). Both of these types ofreactions are transient and abate as the drug effects wear offover a few hours. Treatment should consist of gentle butauthoritative. reassurance that nothing is seriously wrong andthat the drug effects will wear off and the individual will feelnormal" again (Smith and Mehl, 1970; Well, 1970). ACUTE PSYCHOSES Rare cases of full-blown acute psychotic episodesprecipitated by marihuana use are reported in individuals withhistories of mental disorder, with marginal psychologicaladjustments or with poorly developed personality structures andego defenses (Talbott, 1968; Heiman, 1968; Kaplan, 1971; Pernot,1969; Keeler, 1968; Defer and Diehl, 1968; Wurniser et al., 1969;Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Bromberg, 1939; Bromberg, 1934;Curtis and Wolfe, 1939; Hughes et al., 1970; Isbell et al., 1967;Keup , 1970; Keeler, 1967; Talbott and Teague, 1969 Mayor'sCommittee, 1944). Marihuana intoxication may hinder the ability of these,individuals to maintain structural defenses to existing stresses,or, alternatively produce a keener awareness of personalityproblems or existing stresses (Smith, 1968). Psychotherapy andantipsychotic medications are useful in controlling andpreventing this reaction (Weil, 1970). Exceptionally rare reports from North America of nonspecifictoxic psychosis or actite brain syndrome have occurred afterextremely high drug dose consumption, although such reports are,more common in the eastern countries. These conditions areself-limited and clear spontaneously as the drug effect abates(Weil et al., 1968; Bartolucei et al. 1969 Ames, 1958; Isbell etal., 1967; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Williams et al., 1946). Finally, marihuana intoxication may trigger delayed anxietyreactions or psychotic episodes in a small percentage of personswho have prior experience with hallucinogenic drugs (Ungerleideret al., 1968; Ungerleider, 1969; Weil et al., 1968; Favazza andDomino, 1969). In summary, the acute psychomotor-cognitive effects ofmarihuana intoxication are, interesting academically to gainunderstanding of normal and abnormal mental function. Also, forpractically determining the danger-risk factor for the individualincluding determination of his functional level personally,vocationally and socially in this society. The effect onpersonal-social-vocational function is highly individualized anddifficult to predict at present. Although reports of anxiety attacks and psychotic episodesare more frequent as marihuana use spreads, they are stillexceedingly rare and their incidence appears to be decreasing asuse becomes more acceptable to more diverse populations. Forexample, during the nine-year period of 1961 to 1969, out of701,057 admissions to Los Angeles County Hospital, located in a,city with very high marihuana use, only three patients requiredhospitalization for psychic sequelae of marihuana smoking(Lundberg, et al., 1971). In contrast, many cases are being seen in Vietnam soldierswhere a extremely potent material is available and daily stressesare high, but, these probably represent only a small fraction ofmarihuana, users (Talbott and Teague, 1969; Talbott, 1968;Heiman, 1968). During the, academic year 1968 and 1969, eight students wereseen in the mental hygiene division of a private EasternUniversity student population (8,500) with acute anxietyreactions (Bialos, 1970). The frequency of marihuana-associatedacute adverse, anxiety reactions requiring attention at BostonUniversity Student Health Service (student population 20,000) isbetween five and seven yearly (Pillard, 1970). In a recent survey of newly admitted patients to a largemental hospital, marihuana was the direct cause of thehospitalization in only 0.9 per thousand admissions (Keup, 1970). PERSISTENT EFFECTS AFTER ACUTE DOSE Investigators have not noted persistent effects after smokingmarihuana for periods of more than three to five hours (Fink etal., 1971; Weil et al., 1968; Pillard, 1970). Users report only minimal hangover effects (Mayor'sCommittee, 1944; Haines and Green, 1970; McGlothlin et al., 1971)after very heavy use. Feelings of lassitude and heaviness of thehead, lethargy, irritability, headaches and loss of concentrationare reported especially when associated with lack of sleep(Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Indian Hemp, 1893). This may be relatedto preliminary data (Rickles et al., 1970) suggesting a subtleincrease in REM sleep time primarily seen in the last one-thirdof the night in individuals who smoked one to two cigarettes perday usually at night for at least a year. EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA USE ON CONCOMITANT BEHAVIOR Mendelson et al. (1972), under contract to the Commission,analyzed the effects on behavior of acute marihuana intoxicationon an extensive variety of assessine nts including a simpleoperant task, mood states, individual and group observationsbefore, during and after smoking and clinical psychologicalevaluations. Sleep-inducing properties were confirmed. Increased amountsof total sleep were observed in both number and length of shorterand longer blocks of consecutive hours of sleep related tomarihuana smoking. Examination of mood assessments prior, during and aftermarihuana smoking indicates that the acute effects were areduction of negative moods (anxiety, hostility, and guilt-shame)and an increase in the positive moods (carefreeness andfriendliness). Examinations of the mood prior to smoking revealedthat the subjects tended to smoke marihuana when they reportedgenerally positive moods. The effect of the drug was to increasethis positive mood. One paradoxical finding was that the subjectsalso reported feeling more depressed after smoking. Acute effects of marihuana on cognitive and motor functionswere studied with a battery of tests sensitive to brain function(Halstead Category Test, Tactile Performance Test, SeashoreRhythm Test, Finger Tapping Test, Trail Making Test and theWeschler Adult Intelligence Scale). No alterations in performanceas a result of acute intake of marihuana were noted in any ofthese. The acute effect of marihuana smoking on social behavior wasinvestigated, by observing the individual and his interaction insmall groups. The data indicated very strongly that marihuanasmoking, in addition to being a subjective drug experience, isalso a social activity around which verbal interaction and othertypes of social behavior are centered. Although marihuana smoking tended to be, a group activity,subjects did not always engage in verbal communication whilesmoking. Subjects often were observed withdrawing from the socialinteraction and then participating in some type ofnoncommunicative passive activity, such as watching television,listening to music, reading or staring at objects or people. Thisdecrement in total interaction appeared to be a drug effect. Heavy marihuana users tended to be more withdrawn than theintermittent users, often listening to the stereo and focusing onthe personal effects of the drug. The intermittent users tendedto watch television which provided group entertainment, thusenhancing the social effects of the drug. Verbal interaction in formal task-oriented discussion groupsdiminished when several group members were simultaneouslyintoxicated. How-ever, groups engaged in problem-solving tasksperformed more efficiently because less suggestions anddiscussion ensued before proposing a workable solution. Thegroups tended to become more convivial and less task-orientedalthough none failed to arrive, at the goal. Marihuana did notappear to increase hostility during these sessions andfurthermore tended to change the nature of hostile communicationfrom direct criticism to indirect sarcasm. Assessment of risk-taking behavior revealed that under theinfluence of marihuana, users tend to become more conservative inthe decision making. In summary, it appears that marihuana does exert subtleeffects on measurable components of social behavior andinteraction. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-14IA031-000655-B040-62http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1f.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113145 text/html 23096HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:31:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:17 GMTContent-length: 22878 Marijuana -- Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use ANIMAL STUDIES (PRECLINICAL) Studies have only begun in this area in the last 10 years.Subacute toxicity studies in rats involving 30 dailyintraperitoneal injections of up to 30 mg/kg THC were recentlyreported by Phillips et al. (1971). No fatalities were observed.Total body and organ weight (rains were significantly retardedover the period. However, no significant differences in organhistology were detected although in a few animals there weresuggestions of change in liver and testicular cells. Aninteresting phenomena also observed was a suggestion of increasedsensitivity to effects of Delta 9 THC occurring after two weeksof daily treatment. Thompson et al. (1971) under contract to NIMH studied thetoxicity in rats treated daily for seven, 28, 91 and then 119days with oral Delta 9 THC, A" THC and crude marihuanaextract at doses from 50 to 500 mg/kg. The findings weregenerally similar for all three preparations although A"effect was greater than All THC which in turn was greater thanCME. A bimodal pattern of behavorial toxicity was exhibited by thecannabinoids for all time periods of dosing ranging from five to119 days. Initially, a dose-related generalized central nervoussystem depression was noted. This was characterized by huddledposture, inactivity, drowsiness, slow movements, unkemptappearance, loss of appetite, wide stance, constipation, weightloss, depressed respiration and heart rate and fall in bodytemperature. Tolerance gradually developed to the initialdepressant effects starting after two to five doses and continuedat different rates for different parameters. Concomitant to the development of tolerance, rats exhibitedprogressively more hyperactivity, manifesting increasedexploratory behavior, grooming and motor activity. The dailyduration of the altered behavior progressively shortened.Tolerance to the hyperactivity was not seen in the rats. Later,in the experimental period, the rats became hyper-irritable andexhibited fighting behavior, especially at lower doses.Additionally, tremors and later chronic convulsions occurred insignificant numbers of rats. The onset and frequency of chronic convulsions weredose-related and the severity increased as the duration of dosagewas extended. Cumulative toxicity, as evidenced by increasedmortality, was observed in the rats but most deaths and maximaltoxicity (central depression) occurred 36 to 72 hours followingfirst treatment. Drug dose-related histopathological changes inall treated rats (in addition to decreased body and organ weightgains) were hypocellularity of the spleen and bone marrow,vacuolization of the adrenal gland and degeneration of the testes(seminiferous tubules) or ovarian stronia. Extended doses fromfive to119 days were not significantly more toxic except to theadrenals. No evidence of abstinence syndromes were noted uponabrupt cessation of these doses. Similar behavorial and clinical findings were observed inmonkeys given 50-500 mg oral Delta 9 THC, All THC and equivalentCME for up to 91 days. Cumulative toxicity was less severe andall monkeys survived the initial moderately severe centralnervous system depression. Tolerance to the depression occurredand the monkeys returned to their undrugged behavior. Mildhyperactivity was noted only in several of the median dosedanimals. Three of 28 monkeys studied became moribund on days 10, 14 and16 respectively. These were sacrificed and the onlyhistopathology seen was severe hemorrhagic and probablydrug-related enterocolitis. The bone marrow and kidney changesseen probably were due to severe electrolyte imbalance resultingfrom the intestinal lesion. The thymus lesion is consistent withstress due to this electrolyte imbalance. Pancreatic atrophy wasdue to weight changes. Eight additional monkeys were sacrificedat 28 days in fair-to-good condition and no histopathology wasdemonstrable. Several other monkeys had bloody diarrhea, butrecovered spontaneously without demonstrable histopathology. The remaining 17 monkeys were all in fair-to good condition at28 days and hyperactivity was no longer observed. They weretreated at the same dose for an additional 63 days. Tolerance tothe central depression continued to develop so that the effectslasted only one to two hours at 91 days. No additional monkeyfatalities were recorded -and the remaining 17 monkeys werenormal histopathological at autopsy. Urine and ophthalmologicalexaminations were all within normal limits. Hematological andblood chemical changes after 28 and 91 days were minor and littleaffected in the surviving monkeys. Thus, a. minimal toxicity in monkeys, either physical orbehavorial, is evident after 91 daily doses orally of enormousamounts of Delta 9 THC. However, significant cumulative toxicity,primarily a generalized central nervous system depression, isevident in the first few days but tolerance rapidly develops tothese effects. A dose-related hemorrhagic enterocolitis occurredwhich may lead to electrolyte imbalance and death in a fewmonkeys. This probably is a direct irritative phenomena. Again, the enormous daily doses of THC that were administeredto these animals cannot, be compared to the daily doses used inman even by the heaviest users. The effects were observed of 28 daily administrations tomonkeys of intravenous Delta 9 THC in sesame oil-Tween 80-salinevehicle at doses of 5, 15 and 45 mg/kg. Behavioral, clinical,hematological and hemochemical changes were similar for monkeysgiven single or repeated injections. However, the duration wasextended in the 28-day groups and tolerance gradually developed.Delayed death indicative of cumulative toxicity occured on dayseight and 19 in two of four animals given the largest dose. Histopathological changes, noted in the two animals whichsuccumbed and in one of the highdose monkeys, were acutehemorrhagic pneumonia resembling the finding in thesingle-intravenous studies at doses of 128 mg/kg or greater.Additionally in the repeated dose study, edema, ulceration andfibrosis at the injection sites probably contributed to minorhematological and hemachemical alterations. In summary, the 1972 Marihuana and Health Report to theCongress from the Secretary of HEW noted that these doses wereemployed in rodents and mammals to test the limits of toxicity.The doses are much higher than those used by man and the routesof administration substantially dif ferent. These studies haveshown that the margin of safety between the lethal dose and thepharmacologically active doses of Delta 8 and All THC and crudemarihuana extract is large. Consequently, it has been determinedthat these compounds could be safely administered to man forPhase I and early Phase II clinical studies (Secretary of HEW,Feb. 11, 1972, p. 158-160). HUMAN EXPERIMENTS (CLINICAL) Only a few investigators have studied the subacuteadministration of marihuana to man. Marihuana cigarettes ofunknown potency were made available to 34 military prisoners inPanama by Siler et al. (1933). The mean daily consumption wasfive cigarettes (range one to 20). The usual behavior effectsassociated with marihuana use were noted. No ill effects wereobserved nor abstinence syndrome seen. Williams et al. (1946) made available marihuana cigarettes ofunknown potency to six prisoner addicts who were experiencedmarihuana users in the Public Health Service Lexington Hospital.The subjects were permitted to freely consume the drug in anyquantity desired. The number of cigarettes consumed increasedonly slightly over a 39-day period. The daily range was from nineto 26 per day with a mean of 17. Only minimal evidence oftolerance was seen. There was no evidence of physical dependence;that is, no observable abstinence, syndrome was observed afterabrupt termination of the drug. In general, the following observations were made on thesesubjects: daily rectal temperature increased slightly; pulse,rate increased for three weeks, then returned to normal; nochange was noted in respiratory rate, coordination, or rotememory ; increase was noted in sleep and body weight whilecaloric intake initially increased then progressively decreased;mild confusion was observed; general intelligence tests wereslightly impaired while psychomotor tests were performed fasterbut less accurately; EEG showed inconsistent changes but returnedto normal five days after cessation; and mood was euphoric forseveral days followed by general lassisitude and indifference. In a recent uncontrolled preliminary study (PersonalCommunication, 1970), marihuana extract was administered daily toeight terminal cancer patients from four to 13 days (mean 8.5days). Daily doses were purposefully raised by the investigatorfrom 7.5 mg (mean daily dose 19.8 mg THC). The total dose perindividual patient averaged 168 mg with a range from 75-210 mgs. Euphoria was experienced by all eight subjects and one had atransient anxiety episode at a high dose. Three subjectsdemonstrated decreased-opiate analgesic needs indicating ananalgesic-effect of the drug. Five subjects reported improvedappetite and five, of six tested, demonstrated objectiveimprovement in depression on Back scale. No new changes were seenin physiological parameters, neurological status, blood cell andchemistry values or urine examination. During the period of drugeffect, drowsiness was common but not lethargy, lassitude orindifference. In fact, all became more active on the ward. Noevidence of abstinence symptoms were seen after abruptdiscontinuation of the drug. Volavka et a]. (1971) in preliminary experiments administeredtwo marihuana cigarettes daily (13 mg Delta 9 THC) to fourdetoxified heroin addicts. Pleasant effects peaked during thesecond week and then leveled off. Prominent dysphoric effects anddepressive reactions with paranoid thoughts appeared during thethird to sixth days and persisted causing cessation of the studyby one subject after 10 days and after 17 days by another. Theother two subjects completed the entire planned 22 days. Again no abstinence syndrome was seen and the dysphoricsymptoms disappeared within five days after the last dose.Consistent electroencephalogram changes developed in three offour subjects indicating increased synchronization. Their EEGchanges first appeared immediately after smoking. In two of the f our subjects they were detectable, in thepresmoking records after days 12 and eight, and did not begin tosubside until 48 hours after the last dose in two subjects andpersisted for the entire 72 hours follow-up in a third subject. Fink et al. (1971) subsequently studied five medical andgraduate students who had been almost daily marihuana smokers incollege and were currently weekend smokers. Each subject smokedunder laboratory conditions one marihuana cigarette containing 14mg of THC each morning daily for 21 days. No subject reported any adverse effects from smoking. Thesubjects were generally able to conduct their usual dailyactivities including jobs. However, they reported they did notfunction completely up to par during the several hour duration ofthe acute drug effect. There were no effects which persisted formore than three to five hours and cumulative effects were notnoted day to day. No persistent decrements were seen in behavior,mental status, EEG, heart, rate, short-term memory, orpsychomotor function tests. In sum, daily marihuana smoking for21 days was well tolerated by well-adjusted graduate students. Mendelson et al. (1972) performed a Commission-sponsored studyof the biological and behavioral concomitants of 21 days repeateddoses of marihuana. Subjects were individuals whose life style,activities, values and attributes were more characteristic of theunconventional youthful subculture than most of their peers inthe general population. Their mean age was 23. Based on I.Q.testing they were superior intellectually although they hadcompleted, on the average, two-and-a half years of college. Theirjob histories were rather erratic and characteristic of a patternof itinerant living. Their family background was a middle orlower-middle socioeconomic status. In addition alcohol use wasinfrequent while use of drugs, especially hallucinogens andamphetamines, was significant. Two groups of 10 subjects each were investigated over separate31-day periods of confinement on a comfortably furnished researchward equipped with an array of recreational materials. A large,open yard was available for outdoor recreational activities. Theresearch period was divided into three periods: a pre-drug periodof five days during which the subjects were drug free; a,subsequent 21-day period when marihuana, could be earned byperforming a, work-contingent operant task, then purchased andsmoked on a free-choice basis; and a five-day post-drug periodwithout access to marihuana. All attempts were made to not interfere in any way withperformance of the operant task or free choice marihuana smokingalthough the subjects were under constant observation. A vastarray of behavioral and biological assessments were made duringthe experimental period to determine any effect of repeat dosesof marihuana over this time. Two groups of subjects, studied separately, differed primarilyin the frequency of marihuana smoking over the past year. Bothgroups had averaged about five years of marihuana use (range twoto 17 years). The first group studied, referred to as the"casual" users by the authors, reported an averagefrequency of marihuana use, of 7.7 occasions per month (rangethree to 15 occasions). The second group studied, referred to asthe "heavy" users by the authors, reported almost dailyuse of marihuana (average 33 sessions per month; range 20+ to 75,including one substitute subject to fill the group who onlysmoked about 10 times a month). During the first 20 days of the smoking period, the casualgroup's consumption averaged three cigarettes daily (individualaverage was one-half to six) while that of the heavy usersaveraged six-and-a-half cigarettes daily (individual averagethree to eight-and-a-half). Both groups demonstrated a,progressive trend toward increased daily consumption during theexperiment. Close examination of the consumption patterns forindividual subjects showed that the trend toward increased useoccurred in the subjects who were initially the heaviest users.Several subjects who were initially the least frequent users didnot increase their use of marihuana over the course of the study. Subjects in both groups tended to smoke practically all ofeach cigarette including the butt. Each cigarette contained about20 mg- Delta 9 THC. Therefore, the heavy users average dailyintake was 130 mg of THC or a total of almost, Joni- -grams ofTHC over the 21-day period. The casual users average intake wasslightly less than half this amount. No abstinence syndrome or physical dependence was observedafter abrupt termination of smoking. Signs of mild to moderatepsychological dependence. were possibly seen in the heavy groupbut no evidence of psychological dependence was seen in thecasual users. No consistent clinically significant physiological orbiochemical changes were demonstrated during or after the periodof repeated use of marihuana. Urinalysis, complete blood counts, cell morphologies anddifferentials, and blood chemistry determinations (calcium,phosphorous, glucose, blood urea nitrogen, uric acid,cholesterol, total protein, albumen, total bilirubin, alkalinephosphatase, lactic dehydrogenase, and serum glutamic oxalacetictransaminase) were unaffected. Weight gain occurred in all but one subject. Maximal gain wasseen during the marihuana smoking period. The subjects were notjudged to be clinically malnourished prior to the experiment. Normal body temperature was not altered. No significantchange, in pulmonary function (decreased. vital capacity or acutebroncho spasm) was observed during the marihuana smoking period. Variable inconsistent changes in upright blood pressure werenoted. Effects on pulse rate were related only to acute drugadministration and were more pronounced during the initialsmoking phases. This suggests that tolerance developed todrug-induced tachycardia. No significant electrocardiographicchanges were observed. Marihuana smoking had no apparent effecton exercise related cardiac vascular function. Physical examinations revealed only the development ofpersistent conjunctival injection, lateral gaze nystagmus andfine, finger tremors. These findings were believed to be acutedrug effects and of no clinical significance. No signs ofneurological abnormality were observed. No cumulative effect ofmarihuana to cause, impairment of cognitive function was noted ona battery of tests sensitive to organic brain function. An increased amount of sleep in both shorter and longer blocksof consecutive hours was observed. Also an increase in the numberof discrete episodes of sleep, especially one to three hourepisodes also occurred during the marihuana use period.Reappearance of pre-drug pattern was seen during the post-drugperiod. This reversion appeared to begin toward the end of thedrug period which may be indicative of tolerance, to the acutedepressant-like effects of marihuana. Generally, performances on short-term memory, psychomotorskills and time estimation suggests that repeated marihuanasmoking had no discernible effect on the ability to improveperformance with practice on these measures. Tolerance appearedto develop to the acute decrement in performance on thesemeasures. On the time estimation task, a tendency appeared forthe subjects to increasingly overcompensate for the acute drugeffect with repeated testing in the nonintoxicated state. Both casual and heavy users had a marked decrement in totalsocial interaction during the first portion of the marihuanasmoking period. Total interaction of the casual subjectscontinued to diminish subsequently. Heavy users subsequentlytended to exceed presmoking levels of interaction indicating theyaccommodated to the depressant effects of repeat doses ofmarihuana. Both groups became progressively more convivial and lesstask-oriented in group discussions. They offered less suggestionsin problem-solving tasks but continued to efficiently solve theproblem. Casual users reported general relative increases in negativedaily moods and decreases in positive daily moods during thecourse of the study. The trend began with the onset of smokingand persisted through the post-smoking period. This trend couldbe a sequelae of repeated marihuana use or related to non-drugvariables (set and setting). The heavy users did not evidence this trend toward relativeincreases in dysphoric mood until the post-smoking period. Againthis may be related to repeated marihuana use, reflectpsychological dependence or be related to set and settingvariables, such as boredom and tension associated with theprolonged study period. Finally, repeated use of marihuana over the 21day period didnot decrease motivation to engage in a variety of social andgoal-directed behaviors. Almost without exception, every subjectearned the maximum number of points every day throughout allnon-drug and drug periods. No consistent alteration in pattern ofwork could be related to repeated marihuana use. Subjects oftenperformed very high work output while they were smoking marihuanaand experiencing the maximum drug effects. Repeated marihuana use, did not decrease subject's motivationto complete the study. Nor was any noticeable effect observed oninterest and participation in a variety of personal activities,such as, writing, reading literature, keeping up with currentnational and world events, and participation in both athletic andesthetic endeavors. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-15IA031-000655-B040-95http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1g.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113214 text/html 56245HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:31:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:05 GMTContent-length: 56027 Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Patterns of marihuana use in Western countries, particularlythe United States are primarily long term (two t o 10 years).Additionally, Western investigators have been able to observethose who use marihuana at most, daily and more often, moderatelyor intermittently. Consequently, observed effects are rare.Knowledge is incomplete but certain trends appear to be emergingin regard to American usage patterns. The relevance of Eastern reports of heavy hashish use isuncertain. Nutrition, disease prevalence and quality of medicalcare impose limits on transferring Eastern observations toWestern conditions of use. DEPENDENCE AND TOLERANCE Neither severe physical dependence, nor prominent withdrawalsymptoms after abrupt termination of very heavy usage issuggested by some overseas experience (Charen and Perelman, 1946;Fraser, 1949; Ludlow, 1857, Marcovitz and Myers, 1944; Siler etal., 1933; Walton, 1938). Other studies, however, suggest markedpsychological dependence from heavy use producing compulsive drugtaking in very heavy users (Indian Hemp, 1893; Chopra and Chopra,1957; Bouquet, 1944; Lambo, 1965). Psychosomatic abstinence syndromes often reported werephysical weakness, intellectual apathy, loss of appetite,flatulence, constipation, insomnia, fatigue, abdominal cramps andnervousness, restlessness, and headache. For most heavy users thesyndrome of anxiety and restlessness seem to be comparable tothat observed when a, heavy tobacco smoking American attempts toquit smoking. However, the psychological dependence appears to be severe asevidenced by the f act that one group of subjects were unable tocease their habitual use although the frequency of use, was onlyeight to 12 times per month (Soueif, 1967). This psychologicaldependence may have made some users claim physical dependence sothat the government did not terminate dispensing them their drug.Studies in the United States using must lower doses for shorterperiods of time have revealed little if any evidence ofpsychological dependence (Bromberg, 1934 Mayors Committee, 1944;Williams et al., 1946). Tolerance to the subjective and depressant effects of the drug(discussed in an earlier section) does probably occur in man,with heavy use. Thus, increasingly larger and more frequent dosesbecome necessary to experience the desired effects. Several investigators have recently studied the question ofphysiological and psychological dependence to Delta 9 THC inmonkeys using intravenous self-injection techniques. Deneau and Kaymakcalan (1971) demonstrated that no monkeyinitiated self-administration over a three-week period when giventhe opportunity to self-inject a behaviorly effective dose of 100micrograms per kilogram of Delta 9 THC in a Tween solution. Theresearchers subsequently administered to these monkeys this doseevery six hours. Tolerance developed to the behavioral effectswithin a few days. Dose administered was progressively increasedup to 400 micrograms per kilogram over the course of a month.When the injections were abruptly discontinued, all six monkeysshowed after twelve hours, behavioral and physiological changesdescribed by the researchers as mild abstinence signs. Two of thesix monkeys then initiated and maintained for several weeks theself-administration of THC. The investigators believe these findings are evidence for mildpsychological and physiological dependence on THC. However,vehicle controls were not included in the research design. Thus,the abstinence signs and subsequent behavior may possibly beaccounted for by the biological effects in of the Tween vehicle. Harris et al. (1972) utilized several procedures to maximizethe possible conditions necessary for developing self-injectionin monkeys. These procedures included: spontaneous Delta 9 THCself administration with no previous training to the technique;self-administration of A' THC after training, with cocaine aloneand a mixture of cocaine and Delta 9 THC. Doses utilized rangedfrom 20 to 500 micrograms per kilogram suspended inpolyvinylpyrrolidone. In all cases, monkeys failed to self-administer Delta 9 THC. The researchers conclude that A' THC lacks the reinforcingeffects of psychomotor stimulants and depressants which monkeysreadily self infuse with no auxiliary incentives. Also Delta 9THC lacks a reinforcing function even for monkeys that arewell-trained with cocaine and have experienced several days ofrather large quantities of Delta 9 THC during the early pleasesof extinction of the cocaine reinforced response. Finally, the results demonstrate that a two week period ofexposure to Al THC (in a mixed solution with cocaine) does notresult in the degree of homeostatic imbalance which occurs withmorphine, ethanol, barbiturates and sometimes the amphetamineswhich accounts for the continued self-administration of thesedrugs. PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS Permanent congestion of the transverse ciliary vessels of theeye and accompanying yellow discoloration is the only physicaleffect firmly linked to long-term marihuana use (Ames, 1958;Chopra, and Chopra, 1957; Dhunjibhoy, 1928). Although there areseveral suspected or reported effects, none has been conclusivelydemonstrated in a valid study. Some (Chopra and Chopra, 1939;Indian Hemp, 1893) claim that bronchitis, asthma and otherrespiratory problems may be produced by chronic and excessive useof potent compounds in India. Eastern smoking, preparations areoften a mixture of tobacco and hashish. Indian users reportedly exhibit digestive tract abnormalities,weight loss and disturbed sleep (Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Soueif,1967). However, the contributing factors of poor livingconditions, malnutrition and prevalence of communicable diseasecould not easily be separated. A high percentage of heavy Moroccan users have developedobliterative arteritis of the lower extremities (Sterne, 1960)possibly related to the occurrence of tropic foot ulcers (Ganja-foot) (Miras, 1965). The progression of this abnormality isclaimed to parallel prolonged use of the drugs. Mendelson et al. (1972) were unable to demonstrate clinicallysignificant abnormalities in the extensive battery of testsperformed which could be attributed purely to the subjectslong-term use of marihuana. No histories were obtained ofneurological, hepatic, renal, pulmonary, cardiac,gastrointestinal, (renitourinary, or nutritional disorders. Nohistory of psychotic illness was given. All subjects were Judged to be in normal mental, health bypsychiatric interview and psychological tests (MMPI and EdwardsPersonality Preference Inventory). Three subjects were felt to beneurotic. Pre-drug complete physical exams, chest X-ray,electrocardiogram, urinalysis, complete blood count and bloodchemistry profile did not demonstrate, any clinically significantabnormalities. No subject showed evidence of poor nutrition. Pulmonary vital capacity and one second forced expiratoryvolume were reduced in 12 of the 20 subjects initially. Thesechanges were not correlated with either current cigarette smokingor f requency or duration of marihuana smoking. Histories of pastcigarette use, past patterns of marihuana use and past or presentcontact with environmental air pollutants were inadequate toattempt to account for these pulmonary findings. Many of the subjects were in fair to poor physical conditionas judged by a cardiac exercise tolerance test. Four of the 20 subjects' initial performance on a battery ofcognitive functions tests was poorer than would have beenpredicted by high average to superior I.Q. scores and educationalbackgrounds. One of the casual subjects demonstrated improvementwith retesting consistent with good brain function. Thus,behavioral impairment was present in three subjects. Whether the impairment is related to prior drug histories,particularly the excessive use of LSD by the two heavy users,cannot be ascertained. For the casual users, nothing in the casehistories possibly elucidated the reason for relatively poorperformance based on the exceptionally high I.Q., 139 and 128. Many Western investigators have suggested that smoking hashishor marihuana may possibly cause bronchitis, asthma orrhinopharyngitis (Bloomquist, 1967; Waldman, 1970; Tylden andWild, 1967; Schwartz, 1969). Tenant et al. (1971) described bronchitis, sinusitis, asthmaand rhinopharyngitis in 22 American soldiers in Germany whosmoked daily enormous quantities (100 grams or more) of hashishfor six to 15 months. These conditions, believed to be caused byirritation of the respiratory tract by hashish smoke, seemed toimprove, with diminished hashish use. Twenty-one of the subjects were tobacco cigarette, smokers andoccasionally smoked hashish rolled in a tobacco cigarette. Ninepatients had symptomatic bronchitis. Five of these subjectsunderwent pulmonary function tests while consuming their usualdaily amount of hashish and again three days after discontinuinguse. A mild obstructive pulmonary deficit was demonstrated whichwas at least partially corrected with diminished hashish intake.Hashish contributed to rbinopharyngitis in 12 of the patients andthis effect was not allergic in origin. Urticaria, acne, diarrheaand gastrointestinal cramps were less frequent complaints.Extensive hemotological and hentochemical studies including liverfunction tests were performed and were within normal limits. Mann et a]. (1970, 1971) and Finley (1971) studied the effectof marihuana smoking on the pulmonary function of eightnon-cigarette smoking marihuana smokers (20-27 years old).Marihuana smoking history was defined in marihuanacigarette-years, that is, one marihuana cigarette daily for oneyear or the equivalent over a longer or shorter period. The meanmarihuana cigarette years for the group was 11 and the range from2.5 to 26. Three of the marihuana users also used hashish. ChestX-ray, comprehensive spironietry deterinitiations, lung volumesand carbon monoxide diffusion studies were observed and retestedwith prednisone. Pulmonary functions were essentially normal forall of the non-cigarette smoking marihuana smokers andnon-smoking controls. These investigators were able to distinguish differences inquantity and structure and function in pulmonary macrophages andminor material between marihuana smokers and nonsmokers. Intobacco smokers more marked changes were noted. These changes donot indicate a diminution in defensive capacity of these cells. Kew et al. (1969) has suggested a possible hepatotoxic effectof marihuana. right persons who smoked marihuana for two to eightyears, at least six times a week, evidenced mild liverdysfunction by liver function tests and liver biopsy. Several ofthe patients admitted to the use of alcohol and oral amphetaminesbut denied use of intravenous drugs. The authors concluded thatthe findings were not unequivocally due to marihuana. Hochman and Brill (1971) noted abnormal liver function testsin 10 of 50 frequent marihuana users. However, all admitted tolong-term, regular and heavy use of alcohol. When these subjectsabstained from alcohol for one month but continued their usualmarihuana usage, evidence of disturbed liver function cleared innine out of 10 subjects. Recently, Liskow et al. (1971) reported the appearance of ananaphylactoid reaction in a 29year-old woman after smokingmarihuana for the first time. Skin tests were positive for anallergy to marihuana, constituents. Allergy to marihuana,especially in areas of the country where it grows wild, may bemore common than generally believed. Campbell et al. (1971) presented evidence of ventriculardilatation consistent with cerebral atrophy by airencephalography in 10 young males (average age 22) with historiesof consistent marihuana use for three to 11 years as well as lessfrequent use of LSD and amphetamines. The first four of thepatients had been referred originally for neurologicalinvestigation of behavioral change, memory loss or headache. Theremaining six subjects were selected from patients tindertreatment for drug abuse because of their long history ofmarihuana use and concomitant neurological and behavioralsymptoms. However, the patients showed personality behavioral and mentaldisorders, as well as histories of head trauma and psychomotor orgrand mal epilepsy that are commonly associated withventriculographic changes. Also alcoholism can be associated withthese findings. Additionally, the authors compared their subjectsventriculograms with those of normal young adults originallyreferred for loss of consciousness, syncope and headache withoutsubsequent development of neurological illness. Thus, the authors demonstrated dilation of the thirdventricle, of the frontal or temporal horn, or of the trigone ofthe lateral ventricle. All of these are commonly associated withpersonality and mental disorders such as these patients shelved.However, whether these changes are caused by marihuana is notproven because no specific neuropathological cause for thecerebral atrophy was identified. Further carefully designedstudies are required to clarify this finding. The LaGuardia Report (Mayor's Committee, 1944) indicated nodamage to the cardiovascular, digestive, respiratory and centralnervous system, nor the liver, kidney or blood in individuals whohad used from two to 18 cigarettes of unknown potency (averageseven) for a period of two-and a-half to 10 years (averageeight). However, this study was not up to modern standards as itlacked double-blind precautions and placebo controls and adequatestatistical analysis of the data. Bias was present in reporting.Small numbers of prisoners were used as subjects. Another less comprehensive American study of 310 individualswho used marihuana on the average of seven years was performed onsoldiers (Freedman & Rockmore, 1946). It did not demonstrateany evidence of physical or mental deterioration. Another team of investigators (Meyer et al., 1971; Mirin etal., 1970) examined a group of 10 male marihuana users (averageage 25) who had consumed the drug about 20 to 30 times a monthfor all average of 4.4 years (one-half to five year range) andhad smoked daily for three of the 4.4 years. Heavy use wascorrelated with psychological dependence, search for insight ormeaningful experience, multi-drug use, poor work adjustment,diminished goal directed activity, decreased ability to masternew problems, poor social adjustment and poorly establishedheterosexual relationship. No physical or neurological orpsychiatric abnormalities were noted in their work-up. Indeed, numerous American investigators have not reportedabnormalities in baseline, examinations of their experimentalsubjects who have various patterns of marihuana use from veryinfrequent to many times a day. GENETICS AND BIRTH DEFECTS Much concern about possible effects on the unborn generationshas arisen because of marihuana's use by persons in theirreproductive years. Presently, most studies are preliminary. There are three isolated case reports in man (Gelehrter, 1970;Carakiishansky et al., 1969; Heelit et al., 1968) of birthdefects in mail in the offspring of parents who had usedmarihuana and LSD. However, due to their complex gestationalhistories and the high level of birth defects seen in a"normal" population, a causal relationship cannot beattributed to cannabis or anything else. At present, there is nosubstantial evidence indicating that marihuana at the dosecommonly used is a teratogen in man. Marihuana has been implicated as a teratogen in animals byseveral groups at high doses. One study (Miras, 1965) showedreduced fertility in rats impregnated after being fed a dietcontaining marihuana extract for several months. However, theoffspring were normal. The reduced fertility may be related tothe finding of marked decrease rate of cellular division, butwithout chromosomal damage, -when Delta 9 or All THC is added towhite blood cell cultures (Neu et al., 1969 Martin, 1969). Dorrance et al. (1970) and Gilmore et al. (1970) detected nosignificant difference in lymphocyte chromosomes in groups ofusers and nonusers. No significant differences were, found inlymphocyte chromosomes between heavy, long-term. Jamaican ganjausers and matched nonusers. (Rubin and Comitas, 1972) Pregnant mice injected with cannabis resin on day six ofgestation caused stunted but not malformed offspring. Fetalreabsorption occurred when the dose was given on days one to six(Persand and Ellington, 1967). A second experiment using ratsinjected on days one to six produced a high frequency ofmalformed progeny. Another investigator (Geber, 1969; Geber andSchramm, 1969) demonstrated congenital malformations in fetalhamsters and rabbits after large multiple doses of cannabisextract. Another group (Pace et al., 1971) have administered a widerange of dosages of Delta 8 and Delta 9 THC and marihuana extractby subcutaneous, intraperitoneal and intravenous routes atvarying intervals pre- and post-conception to rats, hamsters andrabbits. Delta 9 THC up to 200 mg/kg in variety of dose schedulesproduced reduced average litter size and stunted pups at highdoses but no birth defects. A low incidence of abnormalitiesoccurred in rats and rabbits with marihuana extract, but a highincidence of neonatal deaths was observed apparently due toinadequate material lactation. Studies with radioactive labeled THC (Idanpaaiini-Heikkila etal., 1969) indicated that it did cross the placenta in highconcentrations early in gestation during the developmentallylabile phase. These studies suggest that Delta 9 THC itself is not ateratogen. Instead, perhaps some unidentified substance orsubstances in the plant extract may be causing the teratogeniceffect noted by this group and others when injected. It isuncertain whether this theoretical substance(s) volatilizesduring smoking or enters the pulmonary vasculature (Pace et al.,1971). Consequently, the following FDA label required of manycurrently prescribed psychoactive drugs warning about use inPregnant women and women of childbearing age, appeals indicated."Safe use of the drug during pregnancy and lactation has notbeen established; therefore, in administering the drug toPregnant patients, nursing mothers, or women of childbearingpotential, the potential benefits must be weighed against thepossible hazards. Animal reproduction studies have yieldedinconclusive results. . . . There have been clinical reports ofcongenital malformation associated with the use of this drug, buta causal relationship has not been confirmed." ORGANIC BRAIN DAMAGE Deterioration of mental functioning allegedly due to long-termuse of marihuana can be subdivided into four major categories:organic brain damage, mental illness-psychosis, amotivationalsyndrome, and recurrent-pnuenomenia. As with alcoholism, it isquite often impossible to distinguish whether the describedeffects result from drug use or represent personality traits orchanges which would have been present without the drug use. When marihuana consumption was irregular, mental deteriorationwas not evidenced (Freedman and Rockmore, 1946) in 310 users withan average history of seven years of use. Sixty-seven heavy usersin New York showed no evidence of dementia attributable to druguse although they did have underlying personality disorders.Another investigation (Mayor's Committee, 1944) of individualswho used a daily average of seven marihuana cigarettes (two to 18range) for average of eight years (two-and-a-half to 16 range)showed no evidence of brain damage or mental deterioration. Reports from India (Chopra, 1935; Chopra, 1940; Chopra andChopra, 1939; Chopra, Chopra, and Chopra, 1942) relate minorimpairment of judgment and memory, limited self -neglect andinsomnia, when potent preparations are consumed regularly inlarge amounts for many years. No evidence for mentaldeterioration or brain damage has been noted. Miras (1967) has described a Greek population of heavy hashishsmokers who appear as outcasts from the community after 15 to 20years of heavy hashish use. They appear mentally sluggish anddepressed. They are reported to exhibit laziness, psychicinstability, amorality and apparent lack of drive and ambition.Their speech and behavior has been described as -peculiar. Somedegree of responsibility is retained in that some do work tocover their living and drug purchasing expenses. Some of them arestill quite intelligent. Memory is not deteriorated except duringthe intoxication. They appear overly suspicious. Samples of theirelectroencephalograms were believed to demonstrate abnormalities. However, Miras believes that this effect is related to thequantity and frequency of hashish use. He describes threecategories of long-term hashish users. Type A uses low dosesintermittently and is socially and mentally unaffected. Type B1uses low doses daily and no interference is caused in function.Type B 2 uses high doses daily causing dependence and performancedecrements. Type C uses very high doses daily allegedly causingmental deterioration and abnormal behavior described above. Finkand Dornbush (1971) are currently intensively studying thispopulation. The results will be described in a later section. Non-differentiated psychosis noted in foreign populations mayalso be included within this diagnostic category. These will bediscussed with the psychosis. PSYCHOSIS The alleged connection between mental illness and cannabisderives from Africa, the Middle East and India. These areas arecurrently developing economically and scientifically, but formany years medical care and especially psychiatric care weregiven low priority. Many chronic illnesses still persist in thesecountries which may affect mental functioning. Furthermore,well-trained psychiatrists and methodologists are very rare inmental hospitals in these countries. Consequently, the findingsof earlier studies are questionable due to lack of controls,biased sampling and poor data collection and failure to accountfor variables like nutrition, living standard, cultural factorsand socioeconomic status. India's mental institutions were widely quoted to support the,connection between excessive cannabis consumption and insanity.The Indian Hemp Commission performed a thorough and objectiveinvestigation of this question, although methodologically it wasnot up to modern standards. The Commission was unconvinced of thereliability of hospital statistics, where often the diagnosis wasnot made by a psychiatrist but by a referring policeman. Therefore, the Commission examined all admissions to Indianmental hospitals for one year. They found that cannabis risecould not be considered a factor in more than seven to 13% of allcases of both acute and chronic psychosis. Chopra et al. (1942) carefully performed the same examinationof admission to Indian mental hospitals from 1928 through 1939when cannabis use was extremely high. They found 600 cases ofacute and chronic psychosis which could be traced to cannabisuse. Other reports from India have produced varying estimates ofthe incidence of cannabis psychosis (Peebles and Mann, 1914;Chopra, 1971; Dhunjibhoy, 1930 Evens, 1904). In Egypt 27% to 33%of mental hospital admissions were cannabis related (Ireland,1893; Warnock, 1903). Benabud (1957) reported that cannabis users comprised 68% ofall mental hospital admissions in Morocco but only 25% of theseadmissions could be called cannabis psychosis. Watt (1936 and1961) reported that 2% to 3% of mental hospital admissions inSouth Africa were due to the use of dagga (cannabis). Boroffka (1966) and Asuni (1964) reported that 14% ofpsychiatric admissions in Nigeria used cannabis. Toxic psychosisaccounted for half of these and cannabis was felt to aggravateunderlying schizophrenia in the remainder. Several statistical studies from other countries includingJamaica, Colombia, Algeria, Panama and Tunisia support this typeof data (Prince et al., 1970; Beaubrun, 1971 Allentuck andBowman, 1942; Bouquet, 1951; Chevers, 1870; Defer and Dielil,1968; Fraser, 1949; Freedman and Rockmore, 1946; Porst, 1942;Siler et al., 1933; Reales-Aroyco, 1953; Medical Staff, 1938). Very little information is available on the prevalence ofpsychosis in the overall population of cannabis users. Chopra andChopra (1939) classified 2% of the ganja and charas smokers and0.5% of the bhang drinkers in their sample of 1,200 as psychotic. Roland and Teste (1958) estimated that no more than 0.5% ofkif (cannabis) smokers in Morocco suffer from recurrent mentalconditions. Prince et al. (1970), in a study in Jamaica, noted that about20 patients per year are admitted to mental or general hospitalswith acute psychotic reactions allegedly precipitated by ganja.In one general and one mental hospital the, ganja smokerscomprised 20% of the psychiatric admissions. Furthermore, thepercentage of heavy ganja smokers in the community wassignificantly higher than 20%. Thus, a larger percentage ofpsychiatric admissions were, derived from non-ganja smokers in acomparable lower socioeconomic segment of the population. This finding contrasts with the 68% prevalence of cannabis useamong psychiatric admissions reported by Roland and Teste (1958)which is considerably higher than the prevalence of cannabis usein the general population of Morocco. Studies based on several hundred cases indicate that the largemajority of individuals hospitalized in mental institutions for"cannabis psychosis" have suffered acute toxicpsychoses associated with a sharp toxic overdose or massiveexcesses among habitual users. Occasional smokers and moderatehabitual users seldom had psychotic reactions and then only whenthere were substantial predisposing factors. The acute clinical picture seen in these delirium withconfusion, disorientation, terror, and subsequent amnesia is thatof a severe exogenous psychosis. It does not typically involvethe type of thought disorder characteristic of schizophrenia.Short recovery times ranging from a few days to six weeks areuniformly reported in sharp contrast to the lengthy recoveryperiod of functional psychoses (Chopra et al., 1942; Roland, andTeste, 1958; Defer and Diehl, 1968; Beaubrun , 1971; Stringaris,1939). Consequently, the psychiatric literature on cannabis-inducedchronic psychosis is quite confused. In general, it appears thatcannabis use probably produces a specific psychosis, but thismust be quite rare, since the prevalence of psychosis in heavycannabis users, world-wide, is only doubtfully higher than theprevalence in general populations (Murphy, 1963). However,incidence and prevalence data for these countries on psychosis ofusers and non-users of cannabis does not exist. A Morroccan investigator, Christozov (1965), studied 140chronic heavy hashish users hospitalized in a mental hospital.Their behavior was characterized by a confusional state ofconsciousness, an impulsivity, an irresponsible attitude, and aninstability of mood and character. The patients were oftenpsychotic with persistent hallucinations. Intellectual functionswere reduced in over half the cases although this was related toa low intellect prior to drug use. Electroencephalography showedno specific changes. In addition, it was noted that half of thepatients were also alcoholics. The majority of the patients were, sedated and showed a rapidimprovement, allowing them to be discharged and be employed,Although it appeared that these characteristics are reversible,the patient often returned to heavy drug use again causing returnof the syndrome. Thus, the existence of a more long lasting cannabis-relatedpsychosis is poorly defined. Some evidence indicates theexistence, of a, quite rare slow-recovery, residualcannabis-psychosis following heavy chronic use. Patients oftenexhibit schizophrenic-like withdrawal, mental confusion and mildresidual hallucinations; but there is little tendency for the,symptoms to become organized or proliferate. The symptoms developgradually and then subside gradually before proceeding tofull-blown psychotic symptoms. These may produce gradual psychicdeterioration in the habitual excessive user after prolongedperiods of time. Several authors theorized that the chronicpsychosis consists of recurrent acute attacks with gradualdeterioration in habitual excessive users (Roland and Teste,1958; Chopra, et al., 1942; Stringaris, 1939; Sigg , 1963). Most investigators, therefore, find it exceedingly difficultto distinguish a psychosis due to cannabis from other acute andchronic psychoses because, few, if any symptoms, are uniquelyfound in it and not observed in other psychoses. Often thediagnosis of cannabis psychosis is made because of the history ofheavy marihuana or hashish use. Several have suggested that acharacteristic cannabis psychosis does not exist and thatmarihuana will not produce a psychosis in a well-integrated,stable person (Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Reales-Aroyco, 1953). In addition, alcohol often played a part in producing themental derangement (Medical Staff, 1938; Porst, 1942). Most datarefers to any form of psychosis in marihuana users; notspecifically cannabis psychosis. Although it is fairly well-established that cannabis useattracts the mentally unstable, the prevalence of major mentaldisorder among cannabis users appears to be little if any higherthan that in the general population. Therefore, true cannabispsychosis must be earlier, very rare or it must substitute forother forms of psychosis. Perhaps, cannabis use alternatively isprotecting some less stable individuals from a psychosis (Murphy,1963). Because of these many difficulties, the role of cannabis usein acute and especially chronic psychoses in these countries isimpossible to determine with certainty. Finally, the Eastern literature often mentions the existenceof a characteristic psychic degeneration among older habituesafter prolonged excessive use (Chopra et al., 1942; Christozov,1965; Indian Hemp Commission, 1893; Roland and Teste, 1958;Stringaris, 1939; Warnock, 1903). They are frequently describedas showing a single minded, carefree state, such as"Kif-happy vagabonds." Soueif (1967) administered psychomotor and cognitiveperformance tests to imprisoned hashish users and non-hashishusers in Egypt. Preliminary results indicate that, on most of thetests, the hashish sample scored 10% to 20% below the control,and differences were larger for those with higher educationallevels. These results do not necessarily indicate a causalrelationship. Assessment of the significance of these findingsmust await further description of the samples utilized. Experience in the U.S. and Western Europe has not involved alevel of marihuana use comparable to the above-mentionedcountries. Consequently, the associated chronic psychoticdisturbances have not been seen. In Western countries, Bromberg (1939) and Allentuck and Bowman(1952) reported on acute psychotic episodes with clear-cut onsetduring the marihuana intoxication. Most symptoms cleared within afew days although several had a, prolonged illness. These rareacute psychotic episodes, discussed earlier, have been describedrecently by a variety of authors in scattered countries (Smith,1968; Weil, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Keeler, 1967; Milman, 1971;Pesyko, 1970 Kaplan, 1971; Prince et al., 1970; Baker and Lucas,1969; Grossman, 1969; Beaubrim, 1971; Spencer, 1970). Some of these reported cases are quite transient and clearrapidly with support of others and may be more like acute panicreaction than psychosis. Still others appear to fit the pictureof transient toxic psychosis. A few cases of marihuana psychosis reported by Kaplan (1971)recovered very slowly after extensive psychotherapy. However, thehigh incidence of schizophrenia and borderline states describedin these patients and their families may indicate that marihuanause merely aggravated or precipitated an underlying psychosis inthese individuals. George (1970) reported a case in Britain in which an acuteepisode of confusion, disorientation, hallucination, anxiety,paranoia, agitation and memory loss related to cannabis use wasfollowed by a more chronic schizophrenic-like syndrome withthought disorder, incongruous affect and hallucinations. Thisindividual was experiencing considerable financial and maritalstress prior to these two separate acute episodes. The chroniccondition eventually responded to psychotherapy. Bernhardson. (1969) reported aggravation by cannabis ofschizophrenic conditions in several Scandinavian patients. Perna(1969) reported a case in which marihuana appeared to aggravatean extended psychosis for which the patient had requiredpsychiatric treatment prior to the use of marihuana. Keup (1970) reported 14 cases of prolonged psychotic symptomsrequiring hospitalization associated with the use of marihuana.He noted evidence for the existence of a, high level ofpsychopathology in many of them which predated their marihuanause. Kolansky and Moore (1971) in a widely publicized report ofcases of individuals ages 13-to-24 has claimed profound adversepsychological effects from smoking marihuana two or more times aweek. Of 38 individuals reported, all had decompensatedpersonalities, eight had psychoses (four attempted suicide) and13, according to the authors became sexually promiscuous due tomarihuana. These clinical impressions were, all based on, atmost, a few interviews with the, individuals who were referred tothese psychiatrists for consultation for problems (includingone-third by legal authorities after arrest for possession ofmarihuana). Unfortunately, the authors made sweeping generalizations toall young adolescent marihuana users from this biased andnon-representative sample. No attempt was made to interview otheryoung marihuana users who have not been referred for psychiatrichelp, and the high prevalence of promiscuity and psychopathologyin comparable adolescent populations was totally disregarded. Inaddition, case histories of previous mental health were obtainedintrospectively from the patient, their families or the referralsource. Thus, it is impossible, to state unequivocally, as the authorsdo, that since marihuana use and psychiatric problems occurred atthe same time the former is causative of the latter. Several authors have reported acute toxic psychosis followingmarihuana use by soldiers in Vietnam (Talbott and Teague, 1969;Colbach and Crowe, 1970, Bey and Zecchinelli, 1971). All these cases represented transient reactions and clearedrapidly with treatment. In many cases, personality disorders orborderline personality states appeared to be predisposing factorsin the development of the psychotic state. Often revealed wereproblems of identify diffusion, ego weakness, low self-esteem andinability to form close interpersonal relationships. Also thestressful conditions of the setting in which the drug was useddeserves emphasis. Halikas et. al. (1971, 1972) performed intensive psychiatricinterviews on a population of 100 regular marihuana users and acontrol group of 50 of their non-using or casually using friends.Half of each group met the criteria for some psychiatricdiagnosis. Psychiatric illness and antisocial behavior most oftenpreceded marihuana use. Some attempts have been made to estimate the incidence, ofpsychosis and other adverse reactions to marihuana in Westerncountries. Obviously, such estimates depend on how thesereactions are defined-one questionnaire study of 2,700psychiatrists, psychologists, internists and generalpractitioners in the Los Angeles area reported 1,887"adverse reactions" to marihuana in an 18-month period(Ungerleider et al., 1968). Adverse reactions were not defined bythe authors in the survey. Those reported ranged from mildlyunpleasant parental objections to use to severe anxiety or acutepsychosis. Keeler (1967) reported on "adverse reactions" tomarihuana (paranoid feelings, etc.) which are limited to theimmediate period of intoxication. These phenomena occasionallyoccur in such a light proportion of regular users that they areof little interest in the present discussion, e.g., 80% of usersreport they sometimes have paranoid reactions during themarihuana intoxication (Tart, 1970). Other estimates have been based on hospital admissions inwhich marihuana use was the recognized precipitating cause.Lundberg et al. (1971) reviewed the admission records for the LosAngeles County General Hospital for the period 1961-1969 andfound marihuana use was listed as the reason for admission inonly nine out of 700,000 cases, and five of these were forintravenous injections. Keup (1970) reports that 0.9 per 1,000 of the 1968 admissionsto a Brooklyn psychiatric hospital were directly related tocannabis use, and in another 1.9 per 1,000 it was found to be acontributory factor. In 1966, psychiatric hospitals in England listed 82 admissionsfor which cannabis use was considered a factor (Baker and Lucas,1969) in 1967, the number was 140 (George, 1970). For the 1966data, further analysis revealed that eight of the 82 cases wereacute psychotic reactions to cannabis, 20 were related to"cannabis addiction as a way of life," and cannabiscould not be established as a definite factor in the remainder(Baker and Lucas, 1969). Colbach and Crowe (1971) estimate that among a population of45,000 U.S. soldiers in Vietnam in 1969, some 40 to 50 per monthwere hospitalized for psychiatric reasons and about five of thesewere associated with (usually heavy) marihuana use. Among college populations, Pillard (1970) estimates five toseven marihuana-associated anxiety reactions are, seen per yearby the Boston University Health Service which cares for a studentpopulation of 20,000; and Bialos (1970) reported 11 cases duringa one-year period (1968-1969) for a student population of 8,500. If it is assumed that about one-third of the Vietnam andcollege populations are using marihuana to some degree, theannual incidence of hospitalized cases in Vietnam would be aboutfour per 1,000 users; the rate for student-health cases, 0.3 to1.3 per 1,000 users. The 1972 Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare's reporton Marihuana and Health prepared by the National Institute ofMental Health noted in summary that marihuana can clearlyprecipitate certain less serious adverse psychiatric reactions,such as simple depression and panic, particularly ininexperienced users. In these reactions, non-drug factors may be the most importantdeterminants. Psychotic episodes may also be precipitated inpersons with a preexisting borderline personality or psychoticdisorder or those persons under excessively stressful conditions.These acute psychoses appear to share considerable clinicalsimilarities with the acute toxic psychoses noted in the Easternliterature. Both these psychoses resemble an acute brain syndromein that they occur primarily after heavier than usual usage andare self-limited and short-lived after the drug is removed fromthe body. Some reports describing a prolonged psychotic course after aninitial acute episode cannot rule out the role of pre-existingpsychopathology. At the present time evidence that marihuana is asuf ficient or contributory cause of chronic psychosis is weakand rests primarily on temporal association. This issue may beclarified by extensive epidemiological and controlled clinicalstudies. (Secretary, HEW, 1972) AMOTIVATIONAL SYNDROME Another type of possible mental deterioration or subtlepersonality and behavioral changes associated with heavylong-term cannabis use is the amotivational syndrome. This syndrome has been described world-wide in its extremeform when the most potent preparations are, used (Miras, 1967;Chopra. and Chopra, 1957; Chopra et aL, 1942; Christozov, 1965;Indian Hemp, 1893; Benabud, 1957; Warnock, 1903). Its mostextreme form depicts a loss of interest in virtually allactivities other than cannabis use. The resultant lethargy socialand personal deterioration and drug preoccupation may becomparable to the skid row alcoholics' state. Benabud (1957) describes the occurrence of this syndrome inindividuals chronically intoxicated with hashish. Theseindividuals are unlikely to show conventional levels ofmotivation. Also the time required to obtain and consume enoughdrug to maintain this state is not likely to leave much time forother pursuits. The passive user tends to lose interest in workand other long-term goals. The question of whether there exists a significant causal asopposed to an associative or correlational relationship, onlyattracted attention when the traditionally achievement-orientedWestern youth adopted cannabis use. The traits of passivity oramotivation are commonly described among heavy cannabis userthroughout the world. A number of Eastern authors have expressed the opinion thatthis is a result of organicity from chronic cannabis use in largeamounts, without objective studies being performed. Recently the term has been used to describe the behavior ofnumbers of young Americans who are for a variety of reasonsdropping out of school, refusing to prepare themselves fortraditional adult roles and smoking marihuana. This type of social maladjustment is not comparable inmagnitude to that described in other cultures. However, theindividual may lose the desire to work, to compete, to facechallenges. Old interests and concerns are lost and theindividual's life, becomes centered around his compulsive druguse. In addition, the individual may ignore personal hygiene,experience loss of sex drive and avoid social interaction (Mirinet al., 1970; Smith, 1968). West (1970) and McGlothlin and West (1968) have described aclinical syndrome as a result of observations of regularmarihuana users for four years. Their clinical impressions arethat these individuals show subtle changes in personality overtime which might represent an organic syndrome. These includediminished drive, lessened ambitious decreased motivation,apathy, shortened attention span, loss of effectiveness,introversion, magical thinking, derealization anddepersonalization, decreased capacity to carry out complex plansor prepare realistically for the future, a peculiar fragmentationin flow of thought, and a progressive loss of insight. Another psychiatrist, Powelson (1971), has also concluded onthe basis of over five years clinical experience with drug usersat the University of California, Berkeley, that the effects ofmarihuana are cumulative. He, feels that after a period ofprolonged use a disorder of thinking characterized by a lack ofcoherence and a pathological thinking process results. These disturbing findings are being reported more frequently,especially in adolescent and young-adult groups. Recently,tentative and preliminary data (Francois et al., 1970; White etal., 1970) has been presented on a group of 19 hospitalized14-to-20-year-old patients with behavioral disorders who had usedmarihuana and other drugs heavily. In addition to "amotivation," they showed primitiveand magical modes of thought and low frustration tolerance.Subtle EEG patterns were detected although this finding is notuncommon in adolescents with behavior problems. The researchers are presently carrying out a study innon-hospitalized adolescents without behavioral disorders whohave similar patterns of drug use in order to clarify theirfindings. Kornhaber (1971) believes that at least twice daily marihuanause for a year, in a 13-to-18-yearold population, has adeleterious effect upon the developing adolescent. Theintoxicated state facilitates a regression fromlogical-mathematical thought processes to a more primitiveconceptual mode of fantasy and magical thinking and impairslearning ability and judgment by decreasing attention andconcentration. Thus, the developing youth turns away from realitytoward fantasy and from structure and activity to passivedependency. Kornhaber suggests that marihuana facilitates the developmentof normal adolescent turmoil into a pathological state. However,he feels that the existence of the syndrome depends partially onthe individual's vulnerability to the drug influence. A possibly milder variation of this syndrome has beenclinically observed by Scher (1970) in individuals in the20-to-30 age group who have used marihuana daily for five yearswhile apparently functioning normally in society with good jobs,often creative ones. These individuals begin to experience avague sense of functioning at reduced efficiency level. Thus, thedisabilities experienced are personal and internal ,andconstitute a vague neurotic depressive-like syndrome,. In addition to the methodological problems of (Establishingcausative as opposed to associative relationships, it is alsovery difficult to obtain a sample of heavy cannabis users in theWest who have not had substantial experience, with other drugs,especially the strong hallucinogens. Koridiaber (1971) has described a sample of 50 adolescentpsychiatric patients who used marihuana daily and also took otherdrugs. He concluded that marihuana exercised a "chronic,tranquilizing, psychomotor-depressant effect" among thesepatients, and facilitated regression, fantasy and magicalthinking. School performance, participation in sports, andpersonal hygiene also declined. He reported improvement in schoolperformance, mood and the underlying depressive symptoms for manypatients four to six weeks after discontinuing marihuana use. Given there is a fairly strong tendency for heavy cannabisusers to be passive and apathetic, to emphasize the present overthe future, and to choose fantasy over rationality, there areseveral ways by which this relationship might come about(McGlothlin, 1972). First,, persons who already exhibit these, traits may simplybe attracted to the use of cannabis. Sociologists tend to favorthis explanation, arguing that the relationship between cannabisuse and various behavioral indicators is not causal, but simplyone manifestation of a general pattern of youthful deviance orrebellion (Goode, 1970). Utilizing a large sample, Johnson (1971) found that marihuanause is associated with impaired school performance and severalforms of deviance; however, other indicators such as premaritalsex and high school truancy predicted the dependent variable aswell or better. Tobacco and alcohol use were nearly as goodpredictors as marihuana. A second related explanation is that the illegal. context inwhich the drug is taken forces the adoption of a nonconforminglife style. The users is thus further alienated from the dominantculture through his close ties with the cannabis-using group. Third, cannabis use and associated activities may largelysubstitute for other interests. The individual may focus so muchof his time and energy on cannabis that he has little time forother endeavors. Fourth, heavy cannabis use may act pharmacologically toproduce a chronic tranquilized state. Although the acute phase ofintoxication is relatively short, there is some evidence of alethargic hangover effect (Haines & Green, 1976). Fifth, personality and behavior changes may result through theroutine process of learning via exposure. If an impressionableyouth spends a great deal of his time in the world of cannabisintoxication, he may learn to think in a similar manner when notintoxicated. In particular, he may learn to choose the drugfantasy as an alternative to solving personal problems and facingadult responsibility. A related explanation is that cannabis acts as a catalyst,creating a condition which facilitates change, providing othernecessary conditions are present. Cannabis, along with the stronghallucinogens, produces a kind of mind-loosening effect in whichmechanisms providing structure and stability to perception ofself-image, environment, time sense,, etc., are temporarilysuspended. The, more frequent users welcome this effect and reportutilizing the loosening effect of the drug to achieve furtherpersonality change in the direction of less conformity and morespontaneity, that is. the "hang-loose ethic" (Suchman,1968; Simmons and Winograd, 1966). In addition, the cannabis intoxication produces a heightenedsuggestibility which likely makes the user more amenable toadopting the attitudes and values of the subculture in which thedrug is taken. At a minimum, it may be concluded that the effectsof cannabis can reinforce and provide a rationalization forpreviously existing tendencies. Finally it is possible that chronic cannabis use can result inorganicity (Soueif, 1967). In summary, if cannabis use produces personality and behaviorchanges via one or more of the above mechanisms, the extent ofsuch changes is likely to be strongly related to the amountconsumed and the age of the user. According to evidence found inWestern literature, frequent use may be quite disruptive duringthe formative years of adolescence. On the other hand, the Eastern literature indicates that,although the very heavy user (200 mg. THC or more per day) islargely incapacitated, manual laborers often function adequatelywhile consuming amounts containing 30 to 50 mg. THC per day(Roland and Teste, 1958; Chopra and Chopra, 1939). Similarly,many musicians and entertainers in the United States have livedproductive lives while using marihuana (Winick, 1960). RECURRENT PHENOMENON Another poorly understood phenomenon is the spontaneousrecurrence of all or part of the drug intoxicated state (somaticand visual sensations) when not under the influence of the drug.This phenomenon has been called a "flashback" when itoccurs spontaneously or "a contact high" when it occursin the presence of others who are intoxicated. Flashbacks have been reported with marihuana use alone.However, these occurrences are apparently predominant inmarihuana users, who have taken hallucinogenic drugs previously.These marihuana, users occasionally find that marihuana highschange for them after their hallucinogenic. experiences. Forexample, a simple hallucination experienced previously mayreoccur while high on marihuana. These flashbacks may be interpreted as pleasant, even desiredexperiences by some but unwelcome and disturbing to others. Therecurrences are benign in most individuals and tend to disappearas the hallucinogenic experience recedes in time (Keeler, 1967;Smith, 1968; Weil, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Blumenfield, 1970). Truly vivid experiences which recapture most of the elementsof the original experience are extremely rare (Smith and Meld,1970). More often they resemble an anxiety state occurring afteran unpleasant high or the recurrence of a new perceptualawareness gained while high. It is difficult to differentiatethese recurrences from the not uncommon deja vu phenomenon inwhich a person has the illusion that a perceived situation hasoccurred before. These recurrences are intermittent and usuallyoccur within a few days to weeks following the use of marihuana. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-16IA031-000655-B040-138http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1h.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113231 text/html 90475HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:32:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:52 GMTContent-length: 90257 Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term CannabisUsers Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term Cannabis Users Proving a causal relationship between the use of any substanceand an associated illness or condition is extremely difficult.Ideally, prospective longitudinal studies on large populations ofboth substance users and nonusers matched for socioeconomic andpsycho-cultural variables should be performed for many years inorder to detect subtle or cumulative effects. Unfortunately, theenormous expenditures of research effort and finances that wouldbe required for a large scale investigation of this nature areprohibitive. Consequently, carefully designed and controlled, clinical andepidemiological studies of very heavy, very long-term cannabisusers in foreign countries must be relied upon to provideimportant data on possible effects because these populations arenot obtainable in the United States. GREECE Preliminary results (Freedman and Fink 1971, Fink and Dornbush1971, Fink 1971) from an intensive medical, neurological, andpsychiatric study of 31 male chronic hashish users in Greece,performed under contract to the National Institute of MentalHealth, have revealed few abnormalities in these individuals.Non-users matched for socioeconomic, and psycho-cultural factorsincluding life style, alcohol and tobacco consumption andnutrition and general health have not been studied. In collaboration with Professors Miras and Stefanis in Athens,Fink and co-workers are studying a population of chronic hashishusers that Professor Miras has known for many years. Thepopulation studied is composed of 31 male subjects ranging in agefrom 26 to 69 years with a mean of 46 years. The subjects report starting hashish use at 13 to 35 years ofage with a mean of 19. They have -used hashish from 10 to 49years, with a median of 28 years. In the past they used anaverage of eight grams of hashish daily with a range of 2 to 24:grams daily. (The hashish it estimated to contain 4% THC on theaverage. Therefore, average daily use was 320 mg. of THC). In the past, 27 of the subjects were daily -users and fourused every other day. Frequently of hashish use per day was: onceper day-2 subjects, twice per day-6 subjects, three times perday-14 subjects, four times per day-4 subjects, and five, or moretimes per day-5 subjects. The men reported a reduction in drug use with time ascribed toincreasing difficulty in obtaining adequate supplies due toincreased enforcement of the drug regulations. At present theyuse an average of three grams of hashish daily (320 mg. of THC)with a range of one to 10 grams daily. Twelve now use hashish daily, eight use, every other day and11 use less frequently. Frequency of daily hashish use is: onceper day-5 subjects, twice per day-12 subjects, three times perday-10 subjects, four times per day-2 subjects, and gve(sic) ormore times per day-2 subjects. The men are primarily hashish users. One has used opiates. Twoare heavy users of alcohol and six report occasional to frequentuse of alcohol at the present time. Tobacco is smoked by allsubjects averaging 40 cigarettes per day. Twenty-three of the subjects report periods of abstinence fromhashish averaging ten months but up to three years. Hashish useis primarily social by 20 subjects, and 15 subjects smoke insolitude. Pipes and cigarettes in which hashish is mixed with tobaccoare used interchangeably. The usual time of smoking is after work(21 subjects) but 12 subjects smoke before work and five smokeanytime. In this population, the median education is three-and-a-halfyears of school with a range of none to nine. Five of the men areilliterate. Twenty-one of the men are married, one is cohabiting,four are single and five are divorced or separated. All of the married men are employed and support theirfamilies. The subjects report changing their jobs frequently and11 had periods of unemployment from three to 120 months. Ten wereclassified as skilled workers and 21 as unskilled workers. Theirjobs include selling scrap metals, general labor, cartage,messenger, maintenance assistants, etc. Arrests are common and 19 report at least one non-hashishrelated arrest. Eighteen have been in regular military service,six were exempt because of hashish use and seven for otherreasons. Interestingly, 10 of the 15 wives interviewed prefer thebehavior and attitudes of their husbands when they are usinghashish compared to when they are drug-free. In regard to family and personal background 20 had refugeeparents, 13 had alcoholic or hashish using fathers, 26 had threeor more siblings, 19 had dominant mothers. Fifteen of 21 haddominant wives. Seven reported broken homes under age 16. Apparently, the subjects participation in society isconsistent with their lower socioeconomic background. No grossbehavioral deviation was detected I in this population. Psychiatric status was evaluated by history and psychiatricinterview. Nine have had psychiatric hospitalization of whichthree were in the military and related to hashish use. Two have,had psychiatric outpatient treatment. Eight had histories ofneurotic traits during childhood. In their psychiatricevaluation, three men are considered to have psychiatricpathology. Two of these were considered sociopaths on the basisof homosexuality and criminal behavior. The third was diagnosedas a schizophrenic. No overt signs of any organic mental syndromewere detected. None of the three men were believed to requirepsychiatric intervention. The schizophrenic, although suspiciousand withdrawal, is a successful business man and lives with hisfamily on weekends. Complete physical and neurological examination revealed threeprominent findings. All had very poor dentition which the menascribed to hashish smoking. Chronic bronchitis was detected in14 of the men and emphysema in three others. This finding is notsurprising because all subjects were tobacco cigarette smokersaveraging 40 cigarettes per day, in addition to their very heavyhashish consumption. Enlarged livers were also found in nine ofthe 31 subjects. Because no extensive psychological test battery has beendeveloped or standardized in Greece, American tests were used.These tests are not culture-free, and it is possible that certainitems or subtests were inappropriate for the subjects becausethey had not acquired the type of knowledge or skills requireddue to their poor level of education. The Wechsler-Bellevue I.Q. tests were translated into Greekand administered. Because of these, factors, comparison of levelof performance between these subjects and white middle classAmericans is meaningless. The mean I.Q. is 86 with a range of 69 to 109. The mean verbalis 90.3 and the mean performance was 83.6. The group of subjectsperformed lower than expected on digit symbol, digit span andsimilarities but higher than expected on comprehension,arithmetic, vocabulary and picture completion. The RavensProgression Matrices showed a similar pattern and mean I.Q. Thesignificance of these findings will depend on a comparison with amatched nonuser population. Resting electroencephalograms were obtained in 30 subjects andevaluated independently by four experts. Twenty-five were withinnormal limits. Testing was incomplete in one record. One record in a subjectwho had a head injury within the prior three months showed focalslowing. Two of the four experts judged the remaining three, records asshowing low degrees of average to low voltage theta activityindicative of cerebral dysfunction. The remaining two expertsjudged these records as within normal limits. This medical and psychological data suggests some effects ofvery long term, very heavy hashish use. Without a matchedcomparison group, factors independent of hashish use, such asage, socioeconomic conditions, or environmental conditions, mayaccount for the observed changes. However, the researchers note that these men have survivedchronic hashish use in high doses without gross behavioraldeviation. JAMAICA Another foreign investigation (Ruben et al., 1972) conductedin Jamaica (under contract for the National Institute of MentalHealth) studied chronic cannabis users and matched nonusercontrols. Preliminary findings have shown little evidence ofsignificant differences between the two groups in the extensiveanthropological, medical, psychiatric and psychologicalinvestigations. Ganja use is widespread and endemic in the Jamaican lowestsocioeconomic strata, and in particular in a millenial-religioussect known as the Rastafarians. More than 50% of all maleJamaicans are estimated to use some form of cannabis, andprobably about 20% are regular heavy users of ganja. The drug was brought to Jamaica from India over 130 years agoby indentured East Indian laborers. However, presently theheaviest ganja users are Afro-Jamaicans who comprise 90% of thepopulation. The Rastafarian religious sect, founded by Marcus Garvey,preach a "Back to Africa" destiny and claim HaileSelassie to be God. The Rastafarians have always worn. long hairand beards and dressed eccentrically. They believe that "theherb" was given them by God to help them to understand hiswisdom exemplified in their greeting, "Peace and Love." The Rastas reject the values of the dominant society andregard the government as "the powers of Babylon". Theyhave, chosen to opt out of conventional society and instead workand live in a communal existence in poverty. They emphasize thevalue of ganja in achieving a new level of meaning in thisexistence. The Rastafarians add ganja to their infant first bath andstart feeding the drug to their infants from the time of weaningin an infusion known as ganja tea. They continue to smoke anddrink the drug throughout life. They, like many other Jamaicans, believe in its medicinalproperties especially for asthma and indigestion and promotion ofhealing; that it gives protection from evil spirits; that itcleanses the skin and purifies the blood; that it promotes sexualvigor; that it gives energy for work and relieves fatigue andprovides relaxation after work. Extensive in-depth studies have been carried out by a team ofanthropologists from The Research Institute for the Study of Manin conjunction with The Departments of Psychiatry, Pathology,Physiology and Medicine, of the University of the West Indies.Anthropology field workers lived for extensive periods of time infive rural communities (including fishing, farming and canecutting areas) and two urban districts. Over 2,000 people were observed and studied in thesecommunities. Overall life styles of the ganja users were notnotably different from nonusing individuals in the Jamaicanlowest socioeconomic strata. Users are working, maintainingstable families and homes, and actively participating in theirsociety. No evidence was noted of crime or aggressive behavior ordrug use other than alcohol related to ganja use. No evidence ofphysical dependence was demonstrated. Minimal psychologicaldependence was observed but no drug craving was expressed. Thirty long-term ganja smokers and 30 nonusers matcheddemographically to control factors other than ganja use, werechosen as representative of this functioning lower socioeconomicpopulation and selected for intensive hospital study in order todetermine, differences between the two groups. The mean age of the subjects was 33 with a range of 23 to 51.The primary occupation of one-third of the subjects was farming.The next most common occupations were, fishing, skilled andsemiskilled laborers. Half practiced no formal religion, fivewere Rastafarians and the remainder practiced a wide variety oftraditional religious. Almost three-fourths of the males hadstable "marriages" and the remaining single subjectswere predominantly the younger ones. The subjects were divided into three groups. Twenty-three werenonganja smokers, 28 were regular daily ganja smokers and 9 wereoccasional ganja smokers using the drug several times a we orless. Three types of regular ganja smokers were delineated: lightsmokers using one to four spliffs daily moderate smokers usingfour to seven spliffs daily; and heavy smokers using eight ormore spliffs per day. Age of first use ranged from 8-36 years of age. Regular use ofganja occurred at a median age of 16 years with a range of 9-25years. All ganja smokers had used the drug at least 7 years andsome up to 37 years with a mean of 17.5 years. The ganja users consumer on the average seven spliffs of ganjadaily with a range of one to 24 per day. The typical ganjacigarette or cigar, termed a spliff is roughly a four-inch-longpaper cone and contains about two to three grams of ganja with adelta 9 THC content of about 2.9% on the average (range of0.7-10.3%) mixed with about half of a Tobacco cigarette. Alsomany smoke ganja in a Chillum pipe using very deep inhalation tofill their lungs with smoke. They consume 14 pipe fulls per weekon the average, with a range of 1-25 per week. No significant differences in neurological abnormalities,electroencephalographic abnormalities, hemochemical changesincluding liver function, urinalysis, chest X-ray abnormalitiesor chromosome damage in lymphocytes were found in the users orcontrols. One user had a long history of bronchial asthma and anotherhad a mild case of Jamaican neuropathy, but nothing suggeststhese disabilities were in any way related to ganja use. Minorelectrocardiographic abnormalities were present in aboutone-third of both users and controls. This may be related to asyndrome of unknown etiology known as Jamaican cardiomiyopathy. Thorough physical examination and hematological studiesrevealed only minimal significant differences between ganjasmokers and non-ganja smoking controls. Comprehensive evaluationof red blood cell indices revealed that the ganja smokers hadsignificantly higher hemoglobin levels and packed red cellvolumes (hematocrit) than the non-ganja smokers. These hematologic findings are compatible with those reportedrecently (Sangan and Balberzak, 1971) for heavy tobacco cigarettesmokers. The authors noted that cigarette smoking causes afunctional tissue hypoxia due to deficits in lung func tionwithresultant arterial oxygen unsaturation. Thus, an increased demandis placed on the bone marrow to provide more red blood cells toincrease the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. In addition to the heavy smoking of ganja in spliffs andpipes, 27 of the 30 ganja smokers were tobacco smokers, andseveral have smoked tobacco cigarettes heavily. 19 of the 30non-ganja smokers were tobacco cigarette smokers and tended to belight tobacco cigarette smokers. Thus, the data appears to suggest that a combination offactors including number of years and quantity of cigarettesmoking, ganja spliff smoking and ganja chilum pipe smoking issignificantly correlated with the hematological changesindicative of functional hypoxia. However, pulmonary functionstudies did not demonstrate significant decrements correlatedwith ganja or tobacco smoking. No significant differences were found between groups by athorough psychiatric and psychological examination. All subjectswere judged to be in normal mental health. Subjects wereadministered a battery of standardized reliable Americanpsychological tests known to be sensitive to impairment in brainfunction. These tests were not culture free so that comparison ofperformance, between Jamaicans and Americans is meaninglessNineteen tests evaluating 47 variables were performed includingone personality test, three tests of intelligence and verbalabilities, and 15 neuropsychological tests. Two of 47 variables had statistically significant differencesbetween ganja smokers and non-smokers. The smokers scored higheron the digit span subtest of the Wechsler Adult IntelligenceScale and bad a more centralized personality organization on theLowenfeld Mosaic Test. Non-smokers had the best performance on the number of edgecontacts with the non-dominant hand on the Holes Test. These fewsignificant differences were considered chance findings by theinvestigators. In general no consistent differences were found on thesepsychological tests between ganja smokers and non-smokers. Thedata clearly indicate that the long-term ganja use by these mendid not produce demonstrable intellectual or ability deficitswhen they were without the drug for three days. No evidence inthese results suggest permanent brain damage. The alleged role of ganja in producing personality change inthe direction of a loss of competitive striving and anunwillingness to work, termed the amotivational syndrome was alsoinvestigated. Based on clinical impressions gained from careful sociologicaland psychological techniques, the investigators noted that thechronic ganja smoker differed little in work habits or recordfrom his matched control. No evidence of an amotivationalsyndrome was found. In fact, the subjects believe ganja has afunctional value as a work adjunct. It provides energy for workand helps them do arduous boring jobs. In the Jamaican culture, ganja may produce a"motivational syndrome". In an objective videotapeevaluation of work energy output and ganja smoking, ganja use didnot lower productivity on simple repetitive tasks, such aswoodcutting which requires compulsive concentrated effort. A study of cultivators points up the relationship ofpopulation, land, and economic pressures to ganja use. In thearea studied land resources are scarce, farms small andcultivation difficult on the hilly slopes. Market conditionsdetermine income from cash crops and restrictions on migrationmaintain population pressures on limited resources. For these farmers, the researchers suggest that ganja use,decreases total cultivated acreage and consolidates productionwhile disruption of competition and social cohesiveness among thefarmers is avoided. These data may indicate that heavy ganja use duringcultivation in farming situations with limited alternatives mayserve to maintain the status quo. However, it is possible thatthe compulsive concentrated effort experienced by the cultivatorswith heavy ganja use may be productive in areas with good soiland climatic conditions where systematic weeding can increasecrop yields. As a result of the extensive anthropological study, theinvestigators believe that ganja use in Jamaica is a culturallydetermined phenomenon. A "ganja complex" exists whichconsists of closely related, learned patterns of behaviormanifested by the members of the society. The ganja complex appears to be functional for theworking-class Jamaican. Various elements Of the complex includingeconomic, social and personal are interrelated in ways thatcontribute to operation of the whole culture. AFGHANISTAN Dr. Salamuddin Weiss (1971) studied 1011 chronic hashish usersin Kabul in order to obtain a general picture of the charas habitin Afghanistan. Cannabis is cultivated in this tropical country. Aconcentrated product, charas, the resin obtained from theflowering tops of the female plant, is the preparation generallyused. The most common method of smoking charas is in a clay waterpipe called a Chelum. Next most commonly used is a pipe or needleand straw. Infrequently, charas is smoked in tobacco cigars orcigarettes. Chewing the leaves or drinking a charas mixture as aconfection is quite rare. Although charas smokers are found throughout society, they arepredominantly found in certain groups. The ages of the subjectsstudied ranged from 13 to 70 years old. More than 75% were,married. Almost all were males. Socioeconomic status was as follows: 70%, lower, 28% middleand 2% upper. 82% are illiterate, 27% had a primary schooleducation and less than 1% had any higher education. Most smoking occurs in groups of two to 20 friends in quietout of the way places. Most users smoke several times a day. Thelonger one has smoked charas, the shorter the duration of thehigh and the more often the individual can smoke each day. Weakness, sexual difficulties and physical impotence arecommonly reported by smokers. Most report they have a goodappetite and eat more than normal, but malnutrition is common. One hundred chronic smokers were selected at random andexamined medically: 93 were malnourished; no evidence of illnesswas found in 79 subjects; 13 showed signs of respiratory illness(bronchitis) ; 7 showed sleep disturbances and one had pulmonarytuberculosis. No deaths have been reported from charas overdose.One subject out of the 1,011 was known to be chronicallypsychotic. A review of over 150,000 outpatient and inpatient psychiatricvisits per year over the past 10 years revealed 20 short-termpsychotic episodes yearly involving charas alone and 16,short-term psychotic episodes yearly involving both charas andother drugs. An absence of chronic mental illness related tocharas use was noteworthy. Most charas smokers commence use during their teens, graduallyincreasing their use about five or six times until they reachtheir highest dose between the ages of 20 to 40 years. At the extreme, smokers have raised their daily dosage up to10 times their starting dose within the first two years. Theythen gradually decrease their daily requirement by about 50% uponreaching their 60's. Generally, most smokers cease charas useafter their 60's, but some. use extremely low doses for the restof their lives. I These patterns of use are consistent with the development oftolerance. Additionally, chronic smokers note they are able touse larger doses than they did when they began use without anysignificant signs of intoxication. Also after stopping charas usefor a few days or months, the users report they restart use atsmaller doses to achieve the desired effect. No physical dependence was noted. Marked psychologicaldependence was present which makes it difficult to stop theirhabitual use. Discontinuation of charas use produced mildpsychologic abstinence signs. These signs, generally includerestlessness loss of appetite, sleeplessness, nervousness,headache, and gastrointestinal upset. Most smokers after discontinuation of use are quite able tolive with their families and perform their jobs withoutdiscomfort. Most chronic smokers return to charas use within daysor months. Out of a group of 100 randomly selected ex-smokers whohad used for eight to 22 years, 42 have not returned to charasuse, 16 use occasionally and 42 have returned to daily use withinone to 13 months. Most common explanation given by the subjects for restartinguse were to continue close relationships with charas usingfriends and lack of a busy job. A group of 100 opium addicts were selected at random from thecommunity; 51 of these started their drug use with charas andlater substituted opium for charas. Generally, charas smokers report that they become faster intheir daily jobs, but observation reveals a slowness in theseactivities. The ability to perform a non-complicated job iscomparable to non-charas smokers. They tend to be cooperative butlazy persons. They tend to be more theoretical than practical andavoid making decisions. They do not demonstrate creativity orcontribute significantly to the improvement of their community. Summary Marihuana has been used by man in countries around the worldfor many centuries. Scientifically, more is known aboutmarihuana's effects than many other botanical substances consumedby man. Marihuana is one of several preparations from the plant,cannabis sativa. The plant contains many different chemicals, buttetrahydrocannabinol appears to be the major activepsychopharmacologic ingredient. The potency of the preparation isdetermined by the THC content, which varies according to theorigin of the seed, the conditions of cultivation, and the extentof manicuring. Several important factors exert significant influences on thepsychopharmacological effect. These include dose, method of use,set and setting, and pattern of use including frequency andduration of use. The acute subjective experience is dose-dependent. At lowdoses commonly used in this country a mild intoxication occurs,but at higher doses psychotomimetic experiences can occur. Fewconsistent physiological effects are noted. No pathologic bodilychanges have been conclusively demon, strafed from acute use.Subtle effects on recent memory, psychomotor function, and socialbehavior have been demonstrated. The margins of safety between the effective dose and the toxicdose is quite large. No human fatalities have been noted in thiscountry caused by marihuana. The most common adverse reactionsare becoming too intoxicated, and the acute anxiety panicreaction. Both of these are transient and related to doseconsumed as well as set and setting factors. Acute psychotic, reactions are quite rare. They usually last afew days to weeks and occur in predisposed persons either withpreexisting mental disorders or borderline personalitiesespecially under stressful conditions. Transient acute brainsyndrome or toxic psychosis is possible at extremely large doses. Evidence has accumulated which indicates that differentialtolerance does develop at least, in persons who smoke largeamounts of marihuana several times a day. Development oftolerance to the depressant effects on behavior appears toprecede development of tolerance to the intoxicant effect. Physical dependence has not been demonstrated. Little, if any,psychological dependence is present in most intermittentmarihuana users. Moderate psychological dependence occurs inmoderate to heavy users and marked psychological dependence hasbeen described in very heavy chronic users. Some detrimental effects have been conclusively linked toshort- and long-term marihuana use for very heavy users. The mostfrequently reported change in the heavy, long-term smokers oflarge quantities of potent preparations is chronic bronchitiscomparable to that developed by a heavy, long-term tobaccocigarette smoker. A chronic cannabis psychosis probably occursrarely in heavy chronic, hashish smokers in Eastern countries.Most psychotic episodes are the acute variety and clear in a fewdays to weeks. No objective evidence has been demonstrated thateven very heavy, long-term hashish use causes organic braindamage. Objective studies of chronic, heavy smokers of potentpreparations have not causally linked this drug with theamotivational syndrome which has been described by manyclinicians. Almost all chronic, heavy hashish smokers areindistinguishable from their peers in the lower socioeconomicstrata of their respective societies in social behavior, workperformance, mental status and overall life style. REFERENCES ,Abel, E: "Marihuana and Memory," Nature, 227 (5263)1151-1152 (1970). Abel, E. L.: "Effects of Marihuana on the Solution ofAnagrams, Memory and Appetite," Nature, 231: 260-261 (1971). Abel, E. L. "Marihuana and Memory: Acquisition orRetrieval," Science, 173: 1038-1040 (1971). Abel, E. L.: "Retrieval of Information After Use ofMarihuana, " Nature, 231 (5297) : 58 (1971). Abelson, H. Cohen, R. and Sehrayer. D.: Public AttitudesToward Marihuana, Princeton: Response Analysis (1972). Adams R.: "Marihuana," Bulletin of the New YorkAcademy of Medicine, 18: 705-730 (1942). Adams, R.: "Marihuana," Harvey Lectures, Series 37:16,8-197 (1941-1942). Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence, Cannabis (WoottonReport), London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office (1968). Agurell, S. and Leander, K.: "Stability, Transfer andAbsorption of Cannobinoid Constituents of Cannabis (Hashish)During Smoking," Acta Pharmaceutica, Succica, 8: 685 (1971). Aldrich, C. K.: "The Effect of a Synthetic Marihuana-LikeCompound on Musical Talent as Measured by the SeashoreTest," Public Health Reports, 59 (13) : 431-433 (1944). Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M.: "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99: 248-251 (l942). Ames, F.: "A Clinical and Metabolic Study of AcuteIntoxication With Cannabis Sativa and Its Role in the ModelPsychoses," Journal of Mental Sciences, 104 (437): 972-999(1958). Asuni, T.: "Socio-Psychiatric Problems of Cannabis inNigeria," United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 16 (2) 17-28(1964). Aubin, J.: "Le Test Evolutif dans l'IntoxicationChronique per le Kif," Algerie Med (1944). Baker, A. A. and Lucas, E. G.: "Some Hospital AdmissionsAssociated With Cannabis," Lancet, 1 (7580) : 148 (1969). Baker-Bates, E. T.: "A Case of Cannabis IndicaIntoxication," Lancet, I: 811 (1935). Barry, H. and Kubena, R. K.: "Repeated High Doses ofDelta-l-Tetrahydrocannabinol Enhance Acquisition of ShockAvoidance in Rats," Proceedings 79th Annual Convention ofthe American Psychological Association, 749-750 (1971) Bartolucci, G. Fryer, L., Perris, C. and Shagass, C.:"Marihuana Psychosis: A Case Report," CanadianPsychiatric Association Journal, 14 (1) 77-79 (1969). Baudelaire, C.:In: Ebin, D. (Ed.) The Drug Experience. FirstPerson Accounts of Addicts, Writers, Scientists and Others, NewYork: The Allon Press (1961), pp. 1640. Beaubrun, M. H.: "The Pros and Cons of Cannabis Use inJamaica," Prepared by the Department of Psychiatry,University of the West Indies as a Working Paper for Panel onYouth and Drugs, Costa Rica (January 8, 1971). Benabud A.: "Psychopathological Aspects of the CannabisSituation in Morroco: Statistical Data for 1956," UnitedNations Bulletin on Narcotics, 9(4) : 1-16 (1957). Ben-Zui, Z., Mechoulam, R. and Burstein, S.:"Identification Through Synthesis of an Active A' (6)Tetrahydrocannabinol Metabolite,," Journal of American,Chemical Society, 92 (11) : 3468-3469 (1970). Bercht, C. A. L., Kuppers, F. J. E. M., Lousberg, R. J. J. Ch.and Kalemink, C. A.: "Constituents Volatiles du CannabisSativa L.," United Nations ST/SOA/SER .5/29: 1-11 (July22,1971). Beringer, K., et al.: "Zur Klinik desHashisclirausches," Der Nervenarzt, 5 (7) : 337-350 (1932). Bernhardson, G.: "Cannabis Psychosis," SvenskaLakartidn, 66: 1230-1234 (1969). Bey, D. R., and Zecchinelli, V. A.: "Marihuana as aCoping Device in Vietnam," Military Medicine, 136 (5) :448-450 (1971). Bialos, D.: "Adverse Marihuana Reactions: A CriticalExamination of the Literature with Selected Case Material,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (6) : 119-123 (1970). Bloomquist, E. R.: "Marihuana: Social Benefit or SocialDetriment?" California Medicine, 106: 346-353 (1967).Blumenfield, M.: "Flash-back Phenomena in Basic Trainees whoEnter the U.S. Air Force," Presented 17th Annual Conferenceof Air Force Behavioral Scientists, School of Aerospace Medicine,San Antonio (January 1970). Roroffka, A.: "Mental Illness and Indian Hemp inLagos," East African Medical Journal, 43 (9) : 377-384(1966). Bouquet, J.: "Cannabis," United NationsBulletin on Narcotics, 2 (4) : 14-30 (1950) ; 3 (1) : 22-45(1951). Bouquet, J.: "Marihuana Intoxication (letter),"Journal of the American Medical Association, 124: 1010-1011(1944). Bright, T. D., Kiplinger, G. F., Brown, D. Phillips, J. andForney, R. B.: "Effects of Beta Adrenergic Blockade onInduced Tachycardia," Committee on the Problem of DrugDependence, II: 1737-1744 (1971). Brill, N. 0. Crumpton, E., Frank, 1. M., Hochman, J. S.,Lomax, P., McGlothlin, W. H. and West, L. J.: "The MarihuanaProblem," Annals of Internal Medicine, 73 (3) : 449-465(1970). Bromberg, W.: "Marihuana, A Psychiatric Study,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 113: 4-12 (1939). Bromberg, W.: "Marihuana Intoxication, A Clinical Studyof Cannabis Sativa Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry, XCI (2) : 303-330 (1934). Burstein S. and Rosenfeld, J.: "The Isolation andCharacterization of a Major Metabolite of Delta 9-THC," ActaPharmaceutica, Suecica, 8: 699-700 (1971). Burstein, S. H., Alenezes, F., Williamson, E. and Mechoulam,R.: "Metabolism of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. An ActiveMarihuana Constituent," Nature, 225: 87-88 (1970). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. P. and Merriam, P.E.: "Auditory and Visual Threshold Effects of Marihuana inMan," Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29: 755759 (1969). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. F. and Merriam, P.E.: "Auditory and Visual Threshold Effects of Marihuana inMan," Addendum, Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29: 922 (1969). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. F. and Merriam, P.E.: Psychotomimetic Drugs, New York: Raven Press(1970),pp.299-321. Campbell, A. M. G., Evans, Al., Thomson, J. L. G. andWilliams, M. J.: "Cerebral Atrophy in Young CannabisSmokers," Lancet, II: 1219-1226 (1971). Carakushansky, G., Neu, R. F. and Gardner, L. I.:"Lysergide and Cannabis As Possible Teratogens in Man,"Lancet, 11: 150-151 (1969). Carlini, E., Hanaoni, A., Bieniek, D. and Korte, F.:"Effects of (-)Delta 9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol and aSynthetic Derivative on Image Performance of Rats,"Pharmacology, 4 (6) : 359-368 (1970). Carlini, E. A.: "Tolerance to Chronic Administration ofCannabis Sativa (Marihuana) in Rats," Pharmacology 1:135-142 (1968). Charen, S. and Perelman, L.: "Personality Studies ofMarihuana Addicts," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:674-682 (1946). Chopra, G. S.: "Alan and Marihuana." InternationalJournal of the Addictions, 4 (2) : 215-247 (1969). Chopra, G. S.: "Marihuana and Adverse PsychoticReactions," U.N. Bulletin on Narcotics, 23 (3) :15-21(1971). Chopra, 1. C. and Chopra, R. N.: "The Use of theCannabis Drugs in India," United Nations Bulletin onNarcotics, 9 (1) : 4-29 (1957). Chopra, R. N.: "Drug Addiction in India and ItsTreatment," Indian Medical Gazette, 70 (3) : 121 (1935).Chopra, R. N.: "Use of Hemp Drugs in India," IndianMedical Gazette, 75 (6) : 356-367 (1940). Chopra, R. N. andChopra, G. S.: "The Present Position of Hemp-Drug Addictionin India," Indian Medical Besearch Memoirs, (31) : 1-119(1939). Chopra, R. N., Chopra, G. S. and Chopra, 1. C.: "CannabisSativa. in Relation to Mental Diseases and Crime in India,"Indian Journal of Medical Research, 30 (1) 155-171 (1942). Christensen, H. D., Freudenthal, R. I., Gidley, J. T.,Rosenfeld, R., Boegli, G., Testino, L., Brine, D. R., Pitt, C. G.and Wall, .M. E.: "Activity of A' and Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Related Compounds in the Mouse,"Science, 172 (3979) : 165-l67 (1971.). Christozov, C. : "Morrocan Aspects of CannabisIntoxication in the Light of Studies on Chronic MentalPatients," Maroc Medical, 44: 630-642, 866-889 (1965).Clark, L. D., Hughes, R. and Nakashima, E. N.: "BehavioralEffects of Marihuana: Experimental Studies," Archives ofGeneral Psychiatry, 23 (3) : 193-198 (1970). Clark, L. D. andNakashima, E. N.: "Experimental Studies of Marihuana,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 125: 379-384 (1968). Claussen, U. and Korte, P.: "Haschisch XV," LiebigsAnnals of Chemistry, 713: 162-165 (1968). Colbach, E. Al. and Crowe, R. R.: "Marihuana AssociatedPsychosis in Vietnam," Military Medicine, 135 (7) : 571573(1970). Cole, J. Al., Pieper, W. A. and Rumbaugh, D. M.: "Effectsof Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Spaced Responding in GreatApes," Communications in Behavioral Biology, 6: 1-9 (1971). Curtis, H. C. and Wolfe, J. R.: "Psychosis Following theUse of Marihuana with Report of Cases," Journal of theKansas Medical Society, 40: 515-517, 526-528 (1939). Dally, P.: "Undesirable Effects of Marijuana,"British Medical Journal, 367 (1967). Deakin, S.: "Death from Taking Indian Hemp," IndianMedical Gazette, 71 (1880). Defer, B. and Diehl, M. L.: "Les Psychoses CannabiquesAigues: A Propose de 560 Observations," Annales MedicoPsychologiques, 126 (2) : 260-266 (1968). Deliyannakis, E. C., Paragopoulos, C. and Huott, A. D.: "The Influence of Hashish on the Human EEG,"Clinical EEG, 1: 108-117 (1970). Deneau, G. A. and Kaymakcalan, S.: "Physiological andPsychological Dependence to Synthetic Delta9-Tetrahydroeannabinol (THC) in Rhesus Monkeys," ThePharmacologist, 13 (2) :246 (1971). Dhunjibhoy, J. E.: "A Brief Resume of the Types ofInsanity Commonly Met With in India With a Full Description of'Indian Hemp Insanity' Peculiar to the Country," Journal ofMental Science, 76: 254-264 (1930). Dhunjibhoy, J. E.: "The Role of 'Indian Hemp' InCausation of Insanity in India," Far Eastern Association ofTropical Medicine, Transactions of 7th Session, I : 400407(1928). Dingell, J. W., Wilcox, H. G. and Klausner, H. A.:"Biochemical Interactions of Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabiol," The Pharmacologist, 13: 296 (1971). Domino, E. F.: "Human Pharmacology of MarijuanaSmoking," Presented 71st Annual Meeting of American Societyfor Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics (1970). Domino, E. F.: "Neuropsychopharmacologic Studies ofmarihuana : Some Synthetic and Natural THC Derivatives in Animalsin Man," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:166-191 (1971). Domino, E. F., Hardman, H. F. and Seevers, Al. H.:"Central Nervous Systems Actions of Some SyntheticTetrahydrocannabinol Derivatives," Pharmacological Review(in press 1972). Doorenbos, N. J., Fetterman, 11. S., Quinby, M. W. and Turner,C. E.: "Cultivation, Extraction and Analysis of Cannabissativa L.," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:3-14 (1971). Dornbush, R. L., Fink, M. and Freedman, A. M.:"Marijuana, Memory and Perception," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 128 (3) : 194-197 (1971). Dorrance, J., Janiger, 0. and Teplitz, L.: ".In VivoEffects of Illicit Hallucinogens on Human LymphocyteChromosomes," Journal of the American Medical Association,212 (9) : 1488-1491 (1970). Dott, A. B.: "Effect of Marihuana on Risk Acceptance inan Automotive Simulator," Prepared by the U.S. Public HealthService, Injury Control Research Laboratory, Providence, RhodeIsland: Contract No. ICRL-RR-71-3 (June 1971). Elsmore, T. P.: "Some Behavioral Effects ofDelta-9Tetrahydrocannabinol," Current Trends in Army MedicalSciences Psychology, 12-19 (1970). Ewens, G. P. W.: "Insanity Following the Use of IndianHemp," Indian Medical Gazette, 39: 401-413 (1904). Fahrenholtz, K. E., Lurie, M. and Kierstead, R. W.: "TheTotal Synthesis of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Four of ItsIsomers," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 89:5934-5941 (1967). Fahrenholtz, K. E., Lurie, M. and Kierstead, R. W.:"Total Synthesis of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and ofdl-Y.Tetrahydrocannabinol, Racemates of Active Constituents ofMarihuana," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 88:2079-2080 (1966). Favazza, A. and Domino, E. F.: "Recurrent LSD Experience(Flashbacks) Triggered by Marihuana," University of MichiganMedical Center Journal, 35: 214-216 (1969). Fere, C.: "Note sur l'Influence du Haschisch sur leTravail," Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de laSociete de Biologic, (Ileme serie), 3: 696-700 (1901). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, 1). AL and Lynch, W. C.:"Behavioral Effects of Small Doses of Marihuana Extract inChimpanzees," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. HSM 42-21-75, Department of Psychology,University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (November 1971). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, D. M. and Lynch, W. C.:"Comparison of Behavioral Effects of Synthetic Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Marihuana Extract inChimpanzees," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. HSM 42-21-75, Department of Psychology,University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (November 1971). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, D. M. and Lynch, W. C.: "Study ofLong-Term Effects of Marihuana in Chimpanzees," Prepared forthe National Institute of Mental Health, Contract No. HSM42-21-75, Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico,Albuquerque (November 1971). Fetterman, P. S., Keith, E. S., Waller, C. W., Guerrero, O.,Doorenhos, N. J. and Quimby, M. W.: "MississippiGrownCannabis Sativa 1: Preliminary Observation on Chemical Definition'of Phenotype and Variation in Tetrahydrocannabinol ContentVersus Age, Sex, and Plant Part," Journal of PharmaceuticalSciences, 60 (8) :1240-1249 (1971). Fink, M.: "The Biology of Cannabis; The State of OurKnowledge, 1970," Presented at American Public HealthSymposium on Cannabis, San Francisco (May 1970). Fink, M.: "Summary Report: Marihuana Study Program278M7C," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, (November 1971). Fink, M., Professor of Psychiatry and Dornbush, R. L.,Assistant Professor of Psychiatry, Personal Communication, NewYork Medical College, December 30, 1971. Fink, M., Stefanis, C. and Staffs: "Interim Report: Studyof Marihuana Users in Greece," Prepared for the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Contract No. HSM 42-70-98, Departmentof Psychiatry, New York Medical College (October 1971). Finley, T. N., Personal Communication, Director, PulmonaryLaboratory, 'Mount Zion Hospital and Medical Center, SanFrancisco, California, December 13, 1971. Foltz, R. L., Fentinan, A. F., Leighty, E. G., Walter, J. L.,Drewes, 11. R., Schwartz, W. E.. Page, T. P. and Truitt, E. B.:"Metabolite of Trans-Delta 8-Tetrahydrocannabinol:Identification and Synthesis," Science, 168: 844-845 (1970). Foltz, R. L., Kinzer, G. W., Mitchell, R. I., and Truitt, E.B.: "The Fate of Cannabinoid Components of Marihuana DuringSmoking," to be published (1972). Forney, It. B.: "Toxicology and Pharmacology ofMarihuana," Presented at New York Academy of Science, (May1971). Forrest, D. V.: "Marihuana to Heroin . . . A MissingLink?" American Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (5) : 164165(1970). Francois, G. R., Barrat E., Russel, G.. Barker, T. and White,R. B.: "The Marihuana Dilemma-A Clinical and ExperimentalApproach," Presented at Annual Meeting of the AmericanPsychiatric Association, (May 1970). Frank, 1. M., Hopler, R. S., Stier, S. and Rickles, W. H.:"Marihuana, Tobacco and Functions Affecting Driving,"Presented at Annual Meeting of the American PsychiatricAssociation, (May 1971). Frank, 1. R., Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Hepler, R.S., Assistant, Professor of Opthmalogy, Personal Communication ofPreliminary Data, University of California, School of Medicine,Los Angeles, California, September 1971. Frankenhein, J. M., McMillan, D. E. and Harris, L. S.:"Effects of I-Delta 9 and I-Delta 8Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Scheduled Controlled Behavior ofPigeon," Journal of Pharmacology Experimental Therapeutics,178: 241-252 (1971). Fraser, J. D.: "Withdrawal Symptoms in Cannabis IndicaAddicts," Lancet, II: 747-748 (1949). Freedman, A. M. and Fink, M.: "Cannabis Psychosis,"Presented at Symposium on Biochemical and Pharmacological Aspectsof Dependence and Reports on Marihuana Research, Amsterdam(October 1971). Freedman, H. L. and Rockmore, M. J.: "Marihuana, a Factorin Personality Evaluation and Army Maladjustment," Journalof Clinical Psychopathology, 7: 765-782 (Part 1) ; 8: 221-236(Part H) (1946). Galanter, M., Wyatt, It. J., Weinberger, L., Weingartner, H.,Vaughan, T. B. and Roth, W. T.:"Delta-9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol Administered by Smoking:Studies of Blood Levels, Pulse and Subjective Effects,"Science, (in press 1972). Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulani, R.: "Isolation, Structure, andPartial Synthesis of an Active Constituent of Hashish,"Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86: 16461647 (1964). Gary, N. E. and Keylon, V.: "Intravenous Administration-of Marihuana," Journal of the American Medical Association,211 (3) : 501 (1970). Gaskill, 11. S.: "Marihuana, An Intoxicant,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 102: 202-204 (1945). Geher, W. F.: "Effects of Marihuana Extract on PetalHamsters and Rabbits," Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology,14: 276-282 (1969). Geber, W. F. and Schramm, L.: "Teratogenicity ofMarihuana Extract as Influenced by Plant Origin and SeasonalVariation," Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamie etde Therapie, 177 (1) : 224-239 (1969). Gelehrter, 1. D.: "Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) andEstrophy of the Bladder," Journal of Pediatrics, 77:1065-1066 (1970). George, H. R.: "Two Psychotic Episodes Associated WithCannabis," British Journal of Addiction, 65: 119-121 (1970). Gill, E. IV.: "Propyl Homologue of Tetrahydrocannabinol: Its Isolation from Cannabis, Properties and Synthesis,"Journal of the Chemical Society Organic, (3) : 579-582 (1971). Gill, E. W., Paton, W. D. M. and Pertwee, R. G.:"Preliminary Experiments on the Chemistry and Pharmacologyof Cannabis," Nature, 228: 134-136 (1970). Gilmour, D. G., Bloom, A. D., Leli, K. P., Robbins, E. S. andMaximilian, C.: "Chromosomal Aberrations in Users ofPsychoactive Drugs," Archives of General Psychiatry, 24:268-272 (1971). Goode, E.: "Drug Escalation: Marihuana Use as Related tothe Use of Dangerous Drugs," (October 1971). Goode, E.: The Marihuana Smokers, New York: Basics Book, Inc.(1970). Grinspoon, L.: "Marihuana," Scientific American,221: 1725 (1969). Grossman, W.: "Adverse Reactions Associated With CannabisProducts in India," Annals of Internal Medicine, 70 (3) :529-533 (1969). Haines, L. and Green, W.: "Marihuana Use Patterns,"British Journal of Addiction 65 (4) : 347-362 (1970). Halikas, J.A., Goodman, D. W. and Guze, S. B.: "Marihuana Effects: ASurvey of Regular Users," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 217: 692-694 (1971). Halikas, J. A., Goodman, D. W. and Guze, S. B.:"Marihuana Use and Psychiatric Illness," Department ofPsychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,Missouri, (submitted for publication 1972). Hamaker, S. T. A.: "Case of Overdose of CannabisIndica," Therapeutic Gazette, 7: 808 (1891). Harris, R. T., Personal Communication, Psychological Research,Texas Research Institute of Mental Sciences, Houston, August,1971. Harris, R. T., Watters, W. H. and Henderson, G.:"Evaluation of Abuse Potential A' THC in RhesusMonkeys," (unpublished) 1972). Harris, R. T., Watters, W. H. and McLendon, D.:"Behavioral Effects in Rhesus Monkeys of RepeatedIntravenous Doses of Marihuana Extract Distillate,"(unpublished 1972). Hecht, F., Beals, R. K., Lees, M. H., Jolly, H. and Roberts,P.: "Lysergic-Acid-Diethylamide and Cannabis as PossibleTeratogens in Man," Lancet, II: 1087 (1968) Heiman, E. M.: "Marihuana Precipitated Psychosis inPatient Evacuated to CONUS," USARU Medical Bulletin, 40 (9):75-77 (1968). Henderson, A. H. and Pugsley, D. J.: "Collapse AfterIntravenous Injection of Hashish," British Medical Journal,3: 229-230 (1968). Hepler, R. S., Frank, I. A. and Ungerleider, J. T.: "TheEffects of Marijuana Smoking on Pupillary Size,"(unpublished 1971). Heyndrickx, A., Scheiris, C. and Schepens, P.:"Toxicological Study of a Fatal Intoxication in Man Due toCannabis Smoking," Journal de Pharmacie de Belgigue, 24:371-376 (1969). Hively, R. L., Mosher, W. A. and Hoffmann, F. W.:"Isolation of Trans-Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol FromMarijuana," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 88:1832-1833 (1966). Ho, B. T., Fritellie, G. E., Englert, L. F., McIsaac, W. M.and Idanpaan-Heikkila, J. E.: "Marihuana: Importance of theRoute of Administration," Journal of Pharmacy andPharmacology, 23: 309--310 (1971). Hochman, J. S. and Brill, N.: "Chronic Marihuana Usageand Liver Function," Lancet, 11 (7728) : 818 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Human Pharmacological Studies onCannabis," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 673 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Hunger and Appetite After Single Dosesof Marihuana, Ethanol and Dextroamphetainine," ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 12 (1) : 44-49 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Marilhuana in Man: Three YearsLater," Science, 172: 21-29 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Status Report on Clinical Pharmacologyof Marihuana," Annals of the New York Academy of Science,191: 132-141 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Steroids and Moods: Correlations inSchizophrenics and Subjects Treated with Lysergic AcidDiethylamide (LSD), Mescaline, Tetrahydrocannabinol, andSynhexyl," Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 9: 24-29(1969). Hollister, L. E. and Gillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana,Ethanol and Dextroamphetamine: Mood and Mental FunctionAlterations," Archives of General Psychiatry, 23 (3) 199-203(1970). Hollister, L. E.. Moore, F., Kanter, S. and Noble E.: "Delta-l-Tetrahydrocannabinol, Synhexyl and MarihuanaExtract Administered Orally in Man: Catecholamine Excretion,Plasma Cortisone Levels and Platelet Serotonin Content,"Psychopharmacologia (Berlin), 17 (4): 354-360 (1970). Hollister, L. E., Richards, R. K. and Gillespie, H. K.:"Comparison of Tetrahydrocannabinol and Synhexyl inMan," Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9 (6) 783-791(1968). Hollister, L. E., Sherwood, S. L. and Cavasino, A.:"Marihuana and the Human Electroencephalogram,"Pharmacological Research Communications, (in press 1971). Hughes, J. E., Steahly, L. 11. and Bier, M. M.:"Marihuana and tile Diabetic Coma,"Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 214 (6) : 1113-1114 (1970). IdinpiRin-Heikkila, J., Fritchie, G. E., Englert, L. F., Ho,B. T., and McIsaac, IV. 'M.: "Placental Transfer ofTritiated (l)-NO-Tetrahydrocannabinol," New England Journalof Medicine, 281: 330 (lW9). Iddanpaan-Heikkila, J. E., McIsaac, W. M. and Ho, B. T.: ",A' THC Distribution in Monkeys, Mice andHamsters," Presented at the International Symposium on theChemistry and Biological Activity of Cannabis, Stockholm (October1971). Indian Hemp Drug Commission Report 1893-1894, Silver Spring:Thomas Jefferson Publishing Company (RAprinted 1969), 1). 3281. Isbell, H., Gorodetzsky, C. W., Jasinski, D. R., Claussen, U.,Von Spulek, F. and Korte, F.: "Effects of (-)-Delta9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Psychopharmacologia (Berlin), 11 184-188 (1967). Isbell, H. and Jasinski, D. R.: "A Comparison of LSD-25With (-)-Delta-9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and AttemptedCross Tolerance Between LSD and THC," Psychopharmacologia,14: 115-123 (1969). Isbell, H., Jasiuski, D. R., Gorodetsky, C. W., Korte, P.,Claussen, U., Haage, M., Sieper, H. and Von Spulak, F.:"Studies on Tetrahydrocannabinol," Bulletin, Problemsof Drug Dependence, National Academy of Science, Division ofMedical Science, 4832-4846 (1967). Joachlinoglu, G.: Ciba. Foundation Study Group 21, 10, (1965). Johnson, B. D.: "',social Determinants of the Use of'Dangerous Drugs' by College Students," Columbia University,Doctorial Thesis (.June, 1971). Johnson, S. and Domino, E. F.: "Some CardiovascularEffects of Marihuana Smoking oil Normal Volunteers,"Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 12 (5) : 762768 (1971). Jones, R. and Stone, G.: "Psychological Studies ofMarihuana and Alcohol in Man," Psychopharmacologia (Berlin),18 (1) : 108-117 (1970). Jones, R. T.: "The Marihuana Induced 'High': Influence ofExpectation, Setting and Previous Drug Experience,"Presented at Annual Meeting of the Federations of AmericanSocieties for Experimental Biology, Chicago (April 1971). Jones, R. T.: "Tetraliydrocannabinol and the MarihuanaInduced Social 'High' or The Effects of the Mind onMarihuana," Annals of the New York Academy of Scienee, 191:155-165 (1971). Kalant, N., LeBlanc, A. E. and Gibbins, R. J.: "ToleranceTo, and Dependence On Some Non-Opiate Psychoactive Drugs,Pharmacological Reviews, 23 (3): 135-491 (1971). Kaplan, H. S.: "Psychosis Associated withMarihuana," New York State Journal of Medicine, 71 (4) : 433-435 (1971). Katz, M. Al., Waskow, 1. E., Almon, J.: "Characterizingthe Psyehological State Produced by LSD," Journal ofAbnormal Psychology, 73: 1-14 (1968). Keeler, 11. H.: "Adverse Reaction to Marihuana,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 124: 674-677 (1967). Keeler, M. H.: "Alarihuana Induced Hallucinations," Diseases of the Nervous System, 29: 314-315 (1968). Keeler, M.H. and Reifler, C. B.: "Grand Alai Convulsions Subsequent toMarihuana Use: Case Report," Di8eam of the Nervous System,28: 474-475 (1967). Keeler, M. H., Reifler, C. B. and Liptzin, M. B.:"Spontaneous Recurrence of Marihuana Effect," AmericanJournal of Psychiatry, 125: 384-386 (1968). Kennedy, J. S. and Waddell, W. J.: "Whole BodyAutoradiography of the Pregnant Mouse After Administration ofC14-Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. (Delta 9-THC)," FederationProceedings, 30: 279 (1971). Keup, W.: "Psychotic Symptoms Due to CannabisAbuse," Diseases of the Nervous System, 31 (2) : 119-126(1970). Kew, Al. C., Bersohn, L. and Siew, S.: "PossibleHepatotoxicity of Cannabis," Lancet, 1: 578-579 (1969). King, A. B. and Cowen, D. L.: "Effect of IntravenousInjection of Marihuana," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 210 (4) : 724-725 (1969). King, A. B., Pechet, G. S. and Pechet, L.: "IntravenousInjection of Crude Marihuana," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 214: 30 (1970). Kiplinger, G. F., Manno, J. E., Rodda, B. E. and Forney, R.B.: "Dose-Response Analysis of the Effects ofTetrahydrocannabinol in Alan," Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 12 (4) : 650-657 (1971). Klausner, H. A. and Dingell, J. V.: "The Metabolism andExcretion of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in the Rat," LifeScience, 10: 49-59 (1971). Klein, F. K., Rapoport, H. and Elliott, H. W.: "CannabisAlkaloids," Nature, 232: 258-259 (1971). Kolansky, H. and Moore, W. T.: "Effects of Marihuana onAdolescents and Young Adults," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 216 (3) : 486-492 (1971). Kornhaber, A.: "Marihuana in an Adolescent PsychiatricOut Patient Population," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 215 (12) : 1988 (1971). Kubena, R. K., Perlach, J. L. and Barry, H.:"Corticosterone Elevation Mediated Centrally byDelta-1-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats," European Journal ofPharmacology, 14: 89-92 (1971). Lambo. T. A.: "Medical and Social Problems of DrugAddiction in West Africa, With Special Emphasis on PsychiatricAspects," United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 17 (1) :3-13 (1965). Lemberger, L.: "The Metabolism of theTetrahydrocannabinols," Advances in Pharmacology andChemotherapy, 10: (in press 1972). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, I. J.: "ClinicalStudies on the Disposition and Metabolism of A' THC and TheirCorrelation With Its Pharmacological Effects." ActaPharmaceutical Suecica, 8: 692 (1971). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, J.: "Metabolism andDisposition of A' Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Pharmacological Review, 23: 371-380 (1971). Lemberger, L., Alexrod, J. and Kopin J.: "The Metabolismand Disposition of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Federation Proceedings, 30: (1971). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, J.: "Metabolism andDisposition of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Naive Subjects andChronic Marihuana Users," Annals of New York Academy ofScience, 191: 142-154 (1971). Lemberger, L., Silberstein, S. D., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, 1.J.: "Marihuana studies on the Disposition and Metabolism ofDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," Science, 170 (3964) :1320-1322 (1970). Lemberger, L., Tamarkin, N. R., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, L:"Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol: Metabolism and Disposition inLong Term Marihuana Smokers," Science, 173 (3991) : 72-74(1971). Lemberger, L., Weiss, J. L., Watanake, A. Al., Galanter, 1.M., Wyatt, R. J. and Cardon, P. V.:"Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol's Temporal Correlation of thePsychological Effects and Blood Levels After Various Routes ofAdministration," New England Journal of Medicine (March1972). Lerner, P.: "The Precise Determinations ofTetrahydrocannabinol Isomers in Marihuana and Hashish," U.N.Bulletin on Narcotics, XXI(3) : 39-42 (1969). Lewin, L.: Phantastica, Narcotic and Stimulating Drugs, NewYork: E. P. Dutton and Co., Inc. (1964), pp. 107122. Lindemann, E.: "The Neurophysiological Effects ofIntoxicating Drugs," American Journal of Psychiatry, 90:1007-1037 (1933-1934). Lipp, M. R.: "Marihuana Use By Medical Students,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 128: 208-212 (1971). Lipparini,F., Decarolis, A. and Longo, U. A.: "NeuropharmacologicalInvestigation of Some Tetrahyrocannabinol Derivatives,"Physiology and Behavior, 4 (4) 527-532 (1969). Liskow, B., Liss, J. L. and Parker, C. W.: "Allergy toMarihuana," Annals of Internal Medicine, 75: 571-573 (1971). Loewe, S.: "Studies on the Pharmacology and AcuteToxicity of Compounds With Marihuana Activity," Journal ofPharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 88: 154-161 (1946). Lomax, P.: "Acute Tolerance to the Hypothermic Effect ofMarihuana in the Rat," Research Communications, ClinicalPathology and Pharmacology, 2: 159-167 (1971). Ludlow, F.: The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages from the Lifeof a Pythagorean, New York: Harper and Brothers (1857). Lundberg, G. D., Adelson, J. and Prosnutz, E. H.:"Marihuana Induced Hospitalization," Journal ofAmerican Medical Association, 215 (1) : 121 (1971). Magus, R. D. and Harris, L. S.: "Carcinogenic Potentialof Marihuana Smoke Condensate," Federation Proceedings, 30(2) : 277 (1971). Mann, P. E. G., Cohen, A. B., Finley, T. N. and Ladman, A. J.:"Alveolar Macrophages. Structural and Functional DifferencesBetween Non-Smokers and Smokers of Marihuana and Tobacco,"Laboratory Investigation, 25 (2): 111-120 (1971). Mann, P. E. G., Finley, T. N. and Ladman, A. J.:"Marihuana Smoking: A Study of Its Effects on AlveolarLining Material and Pulmonary Macrophages Recovered byBronchopulmonary Lavage," Journal of ClinicalInvestigations, 49 (6) : 60a-61a (1970). Manno, B. R., Manno, J. E., Kilsheimer, G. S. and Forney, R.B.: "Response of the Isolated Perfused Rat Heart toDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)," Toxicology and AppliedPharmacology, 10: 98 (1970). Manno, J. E.: "Clinical Investigations With Marihuana andAlcohol," Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, IndianaUniversity, Doctoral Thesis (1970). Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G., Bennett, 1. F., Haine, S. E. and Forney, It. B. : "Comparative Effects of SmokingMarihuana On Motor and Mental Performance lit Humans,"Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 11 (6) : 808--815 (1970). Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G., Scholz, N. E., Forney, R. B., andHaine, S. E, : "The Influence of Alcohol and Marihuana onMotor and Mental Performance," Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 12: 202-211 (1970). Marcovitz, E. and Myers, H. J.: "The Marihuana Addict inthe Army," War Medicine, 6: 382-391 (1944). Marten, G. W.: "Case Report: Adverse Reaction to the Useof Marihuana," Journal of the Tennessee Medical Association,62 (7) : 627-630 (1969). Martin, P. A.: "Cannabis and Chromosomes," Lancet,I: 370 (1969). Masur, J. and Khazan, N.: "Induction by Cannabis Sativa(Marihuana) of Rhythmic Spike Discharges Overriding REM SleepCortigram in Rats," Life Sciences, 9 (1) 1275-1280 (1970). Mayer-Gross, W., et al.: Clinical Psychiatry, London: Cassell(1960). Mayor's Committee on -Marihuana: The Marihuana Problem in theCity of New York: Sociological, Medical, Psychological andPharmacological Studies, Lancaster: Cattell Press (1944). McGlothlin, W. H.: "Marihuana: An Analysis of Use,Distribution and Control," Prepared for the Department ofJustice, Washington, D.C. (June 1971). McGlothlin, W. H.: "Use and Effects of Cannabis,"Prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,Washington, D.C. Department of Psychology, University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles (January 1972). McGlothlin, W. H., and Arnold, D. O.: "LSD Revisited: ATen-Year Follow-Up of Medical LSD Use," Archives of GeneralPsychiatry, 24: 35-49 (1971). McGlothlin, W. H., Arnold, D. O., and Rowan, P. K.:"Marihuana Use Among Adults," Psychiatry, 33: 433443(1970). McGlothlin, W. H. and West, L. J.: "The MarihuanaProblem: An Overview," American Journal of Psychiatry, 125:126-134 (1968). McIsaac, W., Personal Communication, Director, Texas ResearchInstitute, Houston, Texas, October 28, 1971. McIsaac, W., Harris, R. T. and Ho, B. T.: "BehavioralCorrelates of Brain Distribution of Tetrahydrocannabinol,"Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 703 (1971). McMillan, D. E., Dewey, W. L. and Harris, L. S.:"Characteristics of Tetrahydrocannabinol Tolerance,"Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191: 83-99 (1971). McMillan, D. E., Harris, L. S., Frankenbeim, J. M., andKennedy, J. S.: "(I)-Delta 9 Trans-TetrahydrocannabinoI inPigeons: Tolerance to the Behavioral Effects," Science, 169:501-503 (1970). Mechoulam, R.: "Marihuana Chemistry," Science, 168(3936): 1159-1166 (1970). Mechoulam, R., Personal Communication, Professor, School ofPharmacy, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, October 28, 1971. Mechoulam, R.: "Recent Advances in CannabinoidChemistry," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 675-676 (1971).Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y.: "The Absolute Configuration ofDelt 1-Tetrahydrocannabinol, The Major Active Constituent ofHashish," Tetrahedron Letters, 12: 1109-1111 (1967). Mechoulam, R., Shani, A., Edery, H. and Grunfeld, Y.:"Chemical Basis of Hashish Activity," Science 169:611-612 (1970). Medical Staff, Pretoria Mental Hospital: "Mental SymptomsAssociated With the Smoking of Dagga," South African MedicalJournal, 12: 85 (1938). Melges F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and TemporalDisintegration," Science, 168 (3935) :1118-1120 (1970). Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and the Temporal Span ofAwareness," Archives of General Psychiatry, 24: 464-567(1971). Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Temporal Disintegration andDepersonalization During Marihuana Intoxication," Archivesof General Psychiatry, 23: 204--210 (1970). Mendelson, J. H., Meyer, R. E., Rossi, A. M., Bernstein, J.,Patch, V. D., Babor, T., O'Brien, J., Sagotsky, G., Reid, H.,Salzman, C., Koehansky, G. E., Porrino, L., Becker, D., DeRubis,E., Cambria, T. J., Gallimore, P. B., Klinkert, C. E., Pope, S.,Savitsky, J. B., Thompson, J.: "Behavioral and BiologicalConcomitants of Chronic Marihuana Smoking by Heavy and CasualUsers," Prepared for the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse, Department of Psychiatry, Boston City Hospital(January 1972). Merkus, F. W. H. M.: "Cannabivarin andTetrahydrocannabivarin, Two New Constituents of Hashish,"Nature, 232: 579 (1971). Meyer, R. E., Pillard, R. C., Mirin, S. M., Shapiro, L.S.:"Administration of Marihuana to Heavy and CasualUsers," American Journal of Psychiatry, 128 (3) : 198204(1971). Meyers, S. A. and Caldwell, D. F.: "Effects of Marihuanaon Auditory and Visual Sensation," Research Bulletin, 20-22(1969). Meyers, S. A. and Caldwell, D. F.: "Effects of Marihuanaon Auditory and Visual Sensation, A Preliminary Report," TheNew Physician, 18: 212-215 (1969). Mikes, P. and Waser, P. G.: "Marihuana Components:Effects of Smoking of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol andCannabinol," Science, 172: 1158-1159 (1971). Milman, D. H.: "Adverse Effects of Cannabis," NewYork State Journal of Medicine, 71 (13) : 1675 (1971). Miras, C. J.: "Some Aspects of Cannabis Action" In:Hashish: Its Chemistry and Pharmacology, Ciba Foundation GroupNo. 21, London: J. & A. Churchill (1965). Miras, C. J.: Drugs and Youth, Springfield: C. C. Thomas(1969), pp. 191-198. Miras, C. J.: Hashish, Its Chemistry and Pharmacology, Boston:Little, Brown & Co. (1965), pp. 37-52. Miras, C. J.: "Marihuana and Hashish," UCLA lecture,(September 11, 1967). Miras, C. J. and Coutselinis, A.: "The Distribution ofTetrahydrocannabinol in Humans," Report No. 24, UnitedNations Secretariat publication ST/SOA/SER. S/24 (November 1970). Miras, C. J. and Coutselinis, A.: "The Presence ofCannabinoids in the Urine of Hashish Smokers," Report No.25, United Nations Secretariat publication ST/SOA/ SER. S/25(November 1970). Mirin, S. M., Shapiro, L. M., Meyer, R. E., Pillar, R. C.,Fisher, S.: "Casual Versus Heavy Use of Marihuana, ARedefinition of the Marihuana Problem," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 127: 11.134-1140 (1971). Moreau, J.: "Du Hachisch eit de I'Alientation,Mental," Etudes Psychologiques, 34: Libraire de Fortin,Masson, Paris (1845). Nahas, G. C.: "Lethal Cannabis Intoxication," NewEngland Journal of Medicine, 284: 792 (1971). Nakazawa, K. and Costa, E: "Induction by Mothyloholan.threne of Delta 9 Tetrahydrocannabinol (A-THC) Metabolism in RatLung,11 Pharmacologist, 13: 297 (1971). Neu, R. L., Powers, H. O., King, S. and Gardner, L. I.:"Cannabis and Chromosomes," Lancet, I-675 (1969). New York Police Department, Annual Reports 1969 and 1970, Cityof New York (1969, 1970). Nilsson, L. M., Agurell, S., Leander, K., Nilsson, J. L. G.and Widman, M.: "Cannabidiol: Structure of Three MetabolitesFormed in Rat Liver," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 701(1971). Nisbet, C. T. and Vakil, F.: "Some Social and EconomicCharacteristics of UCLA Marihuana Users," Social ScienceQuarterly (in press 1971). Ohlsson, A., Abou-Chaar, C. I., Agurell, S., Nilsson, 1. M.,Olofsson, K. and Sandberg, F.: "Cannabinoid Constituents ofMale and Female Cannabis Sativa," Bulletin on Narcotics, 23(1) : 29-32 (1971). Osinger, 0. and Fulginiti, S.: "Effects of CannabisSativa On Learning in Rats," Pharmacology, 3: 337-344(1970). Pace, H. B., Davis, '.%I. W., Borgen, L. A.:"Teratogenesis and Mariliuana," Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Science, 191: 123-131 (1971). Paton, W. D. M. and Pertwee, R. G.: "The GeneralPharmacology of Cannabis," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8:691 (1971). Peebles, A. S. M. and Mann, H. W.: "Ganja as a Cause ofInsanity and Crime in Bengal," Indian Medical Gazette, 49:395-396 (1914). Perez-Reyes, M. and Lipton, M. A.: "The Rate ofAbsorption and Excretion of Orally Administered Delta 9Tetrahydrocannabinol to Man," Prepared for the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Contract #HSM 4269-62, Department ofPsychiatry, University of North Carolina (July 1971). Perez-Reyes, M., Lipton, M. A. and Wall, M. E.: "TheMetabolism of Delta-9-Tetrahydroeannabinol in HumanSubjects," Paper presented at the 5th World Congress ofPsychiatry, Mexico City (December 1971). Perna, D.: "Psychotogenic Effect of Marihuana,"Journal of American Medical Association, 209: (7) 1085-1086(1969). Persaud, I. and Ellington, A.: "A Teratogenic Activity ofCannabis Resin," Lancet, 11 (7564) : 406-407 (1968).Persaud, 1. and Ellington, A.: "Cannabis in EarlyPregnancy," Lancet, II: 1306 (1968). Personal Communication To The Food and Drug Administration,Rockville, .Md., of Preliminary Experimental data-names withheldby request of the investigators, unpublished (1970). Persyko, T.: "Marihuana Psychosis," Journal of theAmerican Medical Assocation, 212 (9) : 1527 (1970). Petrzilka, T. and Sikemeier, C.: "Uber Inlialtsstoffe desHashish II," Helvitia Clinica Acta, 50: 1410-1419 (1967). Petrzilka, T. and Sikemeier, C.: "Uber Inlialsstoffe desHashish III," Helvitia Chinica Acta, 50: 2111-2113 (1967). Phillips, R. N., Turk, R. F. and Forney, R. B.: "AcuteToxicity of A' Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats and Mice,"Proceedings of Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine,136(l) :260-263 (1971). Phillips, R., Turk, R., Manno, J., Jain, N. and Forney R.:"Seasonal Variations in Cannabinolic Content of IndianaMarihuana," Journal of Forensic Sciences, 15(2) 191-200(1970). Phillips, R. N., Brown, D. J., Martz, R. C., Hubbard, J. D.and Forney, R. B.: "Subacute Toxicity of WaterSuspended(-)Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats, Toxicology and AppliedPharmacology, 19(2) : 414 (1971). Pillard, R. C.: "Marihuana," New England Journal ofMedicine, 283(6) : 294-303 (1970). Pirch, J. H., Colin. R. A., Barnes, P. R. and Barrett, E. S.:"Tolerance to EEG and Behavioral Effects of Marihuana inRats," The Pharmacologist, 13(2) : 246 (1971). Pivik, T., Zareone, V. Hollister, L. E. & Dement, W.:"The Effects of Hallucinogenic Agents on Sleep,"Paychophysiology, 6(2) : 261 (1969). Podolsky, S., Pattavina, C., and Amaral. M.: Effects ofMarihuana on Glucose Tolerance Test (G.T.T.)," Annals of theNew York Academy of Science, 191: 54-6 (1971). Porot, A: "Le Cannabisme," AnnalesMedico-Psychologique8z 1(1) : 1-24 (1942). Powelson, H. D., Personal Communication, Chief Psychiatrist,University of California, Berkeley, "Clinical Notes on theUse of Marihuana," (1970). Prince, R., Greenfield, R. and Marriott: "Ganja: TheBenevolent Alternative? Observations on Use of Cannabis andAlcohol in Jamaica," Mental Health Institute, Montreal,unpublished manuscript 1970). Reales-Orozeo, et al.: "Aspectos Generales de laIntoxicacion Por Marihuana y Sus Manifestaciones Psiquiatricas enBarranquilla," Revista de Medicina Legal de Colombia, 13:142-148 (1953). Renault, P. P., Schuster, C. R., Heinrich, R. and Freedman, D.X.:"Marihuana: Standardized Smoke Administration and DoseEffect Curves on Heart Rate in Humans," Science, 174 (4009): 589-591 (1971). Rickles, W. H., Kales, A., and Hanley, J.: "Effects ofMarihuana on Evoked Heart Rate and Skin ConductanceResponses," Presented at Society for PsychophysiologicalResearch Meeting, New Orleans (November 22, 1970). Rickles, W. H., Kales, A., and Hanley, J.:"Psychophysiology of Marihuana," Presented to LangleyPorter Nueropsychiatrie Institute, San Francisco (May 1970). Robins, L. N. and Murphy, G. E.: "Drug Use in a NormalPopulation of Young Negro Men," American Journal of PublicHealth, 57 (9) :1580-1596 (1967). Rodin, E. and Domino, E. F.: "Effects of Acute MarihuanaSmoking in the Electroencephalograms,"Electroencephalography and Clinical Ncurophysiology, 29: 321(1970). Rodin, E., Domino, E. P., and Porzak, J. P.: "TheMarihuana-Induced 'Social High'-Neurological andElectroencephalographic Concomitants," Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 213 (8) : 1300-1302 (1970). Roth, W. T., Galanter, M., Weingartner, H., Vaughan, T. B.,and Wyatt, R. J.: "The Effect of Marihuana and Syntheticdelta-9-THC on Auditory Evoked Response and Background EEG inHumans," Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology, NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland (unpublished1972). Rubin, V. and Comitas, L.: "A Study of the Effects ofChronic Ganja Smoking in Jamaica," Research Institute forthe Study of 'Man, New York, in preparation for tration and DoseEffect Curves on Heart Rate in Huthe National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. 11811 42-70-77 (1972). Sagone, L., Laurence, T. and Balcerzak, S. P.: "SmokingACause of 'Spurious' Polyeythemia," Blood: The Journal ofHematology, XXXVIII (6) : 118 (1971). Scher, J. M.: "The Marihuana Habit," Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 214 (6) : 1120 (1970). Schuster, C.R. and Renault, P. F.: Personal Communication, Department ofPsychiatry, School of Medicine University of Chicago, January1972. Schwartz, C. J.: "Toward a Medical Understanding ofMarihuana," Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal 14:591400 (1969). Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: "Marihuanaand Health," A Report to the Congress (January 1971). Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: "Marihuanaand Health," A Report to the Congress (February 1972). Shean, G. D. and Fetchtman. P.: "Purpose in Life Scoresof Student Marihuana Users," Journal of Clinical Psychology,27 (1) :112-113 (1971). Sigg, B. W.: "Le Cannabisme Chronique. Fruit (le SonsDevelopment et du Capitalisnie: Etude Socio-Econo que etpsycho-pathologique," Algiers (1963). Siler, J. P., Sheep, W. L., Bates, L. B., Clark, G. F., Cook,G. W. and Smith, W. A.: "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"The Military Surgeon, 73 (5) : 269-280 (1933). Silva, M. T. A., Carlini, E. A., Claussen, U. and Korte, F.:"Lack of Cross-Tolerance in Rate Among (-) Delta9-TransTetrahydrocannabinol (Delta 9-THC), Cannabis Extract,Mescaline and Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25),"Psychopharmacologia, 13: 332-340 (1968). Sim, V. M. and Tucker, L. A.: "Summary Report on EA 1476and EA 2233," U.S. Army Chemical Research and DevelopmentLaboratories, Special Publication 1-44 (1963). Simmons, J. L. and Winograd, B.: It's Happening: A Portrait ofthe Youth Scene Today, Santa Barbara: MarcLaird Publications(1966). Smith, D. E.: "Acute and Chronic Toxicity ofMarihuana," Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 2: 37-41 (1968). Smith, D. E. and Mehl, C.: The New Social Drug, EnglewoodCliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc. (1970), pp. 63-77. Sonnenreich, C., and Goes, J. P.: "Marihuana and MentalDisturbances," Neurobiologia, 25: 69-91 (1962). Soueif, M. I.: "Hashish Consumption in Egypt with SpecialReference to Psychological Aspects," UN Bulletin onNarcotics, 19 (2) : 1-12 (1967). Spencer, J. D.: "Cannabis Induced Psychosis,"British Journal of Addiction, 651: 369-372 (1970). Sterne, J. and Ducastaing, C.: "Les Arterites du CannabisIndica," Archives des Maladies du Coeur et des Vais8eaux,53: 143-147 (1960). Stringaris, M. G.: "Zur Klink der Hashchischpsychosen(Nach Studien in Griechenland)," Archiv fur Psychiatric andNervenkranhheiten, 100 (4) : 522-532 (1933). Suchman, E. A.:"The 'hang-Loose' Ethic and the Spirit of Drug Use,"Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 9: 146-155 (1968). Talbott, J. A. - "Pot Reactions," USARMY MedicalBulletin, 40-41 (1968). Talbot, J. A., and Teague, J. W.: "Marihuana, Psychosis:Acute Toxic Psychosis Associated With the Use of CannabisDerivatives," Journal of the American Medical Association,210 (2) :299--302 (1969). Tart, C. T.: "Marihuana Intoxication, CommonExperiences," Nature, 226 (5247) : 701-704 (1970). Tart, C.T.: "Marihuana Intoxication: Reported Effects On Sleep andDreams," Presented Association for Psychophysiological Studyof Sleep, Santa Fe (1970). Tart, C. T.: On Being Stoned, PaloAlto: Science and Behavioral Books (1971). Tennant, F. S., Preble, It., Prendergast, T. J. and Ventry,P.: "Medical Manifestations Associated With Hashish,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 216 (12) 1965-1969(1971). Thompson, G. R., Rosencrantz, 11. and Brande, M. C.:"Neurotoxicity of the Cannabinoids in Chronically TreatedRats and Monkeys," The Pharmacologist, 13 (2) : 296 (1971). Thompson, G. R., Schaeppi, U. T., Rosencrantz, H. and Brande,Al. C.: "Acute Oral Toxicity of Cannabinoids in VariousSpecies," Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 19 (2) : 413(1971). Thompson, G. R., Schaeppi, U. IT., Rosencrantz, H. N.,Hagopian, M, Mason, M. M., Fleishman, R. W., and Hamniann, C. G.:"Determine, Toxicity of delta 8 and delta 9Tetrahydrocannabinol and Marihuana Extract," Mason ResearchInstitute, Worcester, Mass., Reports IXIX to the NationalInstitute of Mental Health Contract #HSM 42-70-95 (June 1970-June1971), #HSM 42-71-79 (June 1971-Jan. 1972). Tinklenberg, J. R., Melges, F. T., Hollister, L. E., andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and Immediate Memory," Nature, 226 (5251) : 1171 1172 (June 1970). Truitt, E. B.: "Biologic Disposition ofTetrahydrocannabinols," Pharmacological Review, 23 (4) :273-278 (1971). Truitt, E., Mitchell, R., Foltz, R., Fentiman, A., Kinzer, G.,Grotta, II., and Leighty, E.: "Bioanalytical 'Studies ofCannabis Smoking," Report to the National Institute ofMental Health, Contract Number P11-43-68-1338, Battelle MemorialInstitute, Columbus, Ohio (1970). Ungerleider, J. T.: "Letter to the Editor," AmericanJournal of Psychiatry, 125: 1448 (1969). Ungerleider, J. T., Fischer, D. D., Goldsmith, R. S., Fuller,M., and Forgy, E.: "A Statistical Survey of AdverseReactions to LSD in Los Angeles County," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 125 (3) : 352-357 (1968). United Nations Economic and Social Council: "A Programmeof Studies of the Plan and Its Products, Survey of the CannabisSituation in India," U.N. Document No. E/CN.7/286, Addendum12 (March 1957). Volavka, J., Dornbush, R., Feldstein, S., Clare, G., Zaks, A.,Fink, M., and Freedman, A. M.: "Marihuana, EEG andBehavior," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:206-215 (1971). Vree, T. B., Breinier, 1). D., Van Ginneken, C. A. M. and VanRossum, J. M.: "Identification of the Methyl and PropylHomologues of CBD, THC, CBN in Hashish by a New Method ofCombined Gas Chromatography-mass Spectrometry," ActaPharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 683684 (1971). Waldman, M. M.: "Marihuana Bronchitis," Journal ofthe American Medical Association, 211: 501 (1970). Wall, M. E.: "The InVitro and InVivo Metabolism ofTetrahydrocannabinol (THC)," Annals of the New York Academyof Science, 191: 23-39 (1971). Wall, M. E., -Brine, -1). R., J-1rine, G. A. Pitt, C. G.,Emudenthal, R. 1. and Christensen, H. D.: "Isolation,Structure, and Biological Activity of Several Metabolites of A'Tetrahydrocannabinol," Journal of the American ChemicalSociety, 92 (11) : 3466-3468 (1970). Wall, Al. E., Brine, D., Perez-Reyes, Al. and Lipton, M.:"Studies on the InVitro and InVivo Metabolism of A'Tetrahydrocannabinol," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 702(1971). Waller, C. W.: "The Chemistry of Marihuana,"Proceedings of the Western Pharmacology Society, 14: 1-3 (1971). Walters, P. A., Goethals, G. W. and Pope, H. G.: "DrugUse and Life Style Among 500 College Undergraduates"Archives of General Psychiatry, 26: 92-96 (1972). Walton, R. P.: Marihuana, America's New Drug Problem,Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co. (1938). Warnock, J.: "Insanity from Hasheesh," Journal ofMental Sciences, 49: 96-110 (1903). Waskow, 1. E., Olsson, J. E., Salzman, C. and Katz, Al. M.:"Psychological Effects of Tetraliydrocannabinol,"Archives of General Psychiatry, 22 (2): 97-107 (1970). Watt, J. M.: "Dagga in South Africa," UN Bulletin onNarcotics, 13 (3) : 9-14 (1961). Watt, J. M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M. B.: The Forensic andSociological Aspects of the Dagga Problem in South Africa,"South African Medical Journal, 10: 573-579 (1936). Weil, A. T.: "Adverse Reactions to Marihuana.Classification and Suggested Treatment," New England Journalof Medicine, 282 (18) : 997-1000 (1970). Weil, A. T.: Testimony before National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse, Washington, D.C. (May 1971). Weil, A. T., and Zinberg, N. E.: "Acute Effects ofMarihuana on Speech," Nature, 222: 434-437 (1969). Weil, A.T., Zinberg, N. E. and Nelsen, J. ',M.: "Clinical andPsychological Effects of marihuana in Alan," Science, 162:1234-1242 (1968). Weiss, J. L.: Personal Communication, Staff Fellow, NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Laboratory of Clinical Science,Bethesda, Maryland, August 1, 1971. Weiss, S.: "A GeneralPicture of Charas Habit in Afghanistan," Report from KabulUniversity Medical School (July 1971). White, R. B., Goolishian, H., and Barratt, E. S.:"Dilemmas Encountered by the Marihuana Researcher,"Presented 46th Annual Conference of the Central NeuropsychiatricAssociation, Galveston (October 1970). Wikler, A.: "Clinical and Social Aspects of MarihuanaIntoxication," Archives of General Psychiatry, 23: 320-325(1970). Wikler, A., and Lloyd, B. J.: "Effect of SmokingMarihuana Cigarettes on Cortical Electrical Activity,"Federation Proceedings, 4: 141-142 (1945). William,,;, E. G., Himmelsbach, C. K., Wikler, A., Ruble, D.C., and Lloyd, B.N.: "Studies on Marihuana and PyrahexylCompound," Public Health Reports, 61 (29) 1059-1083 (1946). Winick, C.: "Use of Drugs by Jazz Musicians," SocialProblems, 7: 240-253 (1960). Wurmser, L., Levin, L., and Lewis, A.: "Chronic ParanoidSymptoms and Thought Disorders in Users of Marihuana and LSD asObserved in Psychotherapy," Bulletin, Problems on DrugDependence, 31: 6154-6177 (1969). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-17IA031-000655-B040-161http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1i.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113240 text/html 11525HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:32:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:33 GMTContent-length: 11307 Marijuana and Public Safety Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse III. Marihuana and Public Safety The significant role of the law enforcement community and thepopular press in promoting the idea that marihuana use leads toundesirable and antisocial behavior has been discussed in theReport. The purpose of this chapter is to describe the genesis ofthe, perceived problem and the theoretical basis for theseallegations. The early campaigns against marihuana use can be viewed as anextension of the temperance and moral reform movements whichswept the country during the 1920's. They were generallyspearheaded by persons who opposed the use of opiates, alcoholand tobacco on the grounds that all such substances werephysically, mentally and morally debilitating. The presumeddependence of the user on the drug, the loss of self-control andthe unhealthy preoccupation with pleasure-seeking activitiespurportedly induced by these substances were seen as contrary tothe traditional values of our society. Reiteration of these themes by practicing professionals,respected members of officialdom and the popular press ultimatelygave rise, to what Lindesmith (rev. ed., 1968: 188-189) hastermed the "evil causes evil" fallacy, and which Goode(1972) has de-scribed as follows: The impetus behind public and even expert conceptions of drugsand drug use is that a phenomenon so patently undesirable anduniversally condemned as the use of narcotics or marihuana must,inevitably, have both pathological causes as well as pathologicalconsequences. Thus, the task of science and medical research isseen as "discovering" these negative concomitants ofillicit drug use. In this way, we can all feel better aboutcondemning the phenomenon itself because our moral andideological feelings can thereby be, backed up and verified bythe Indisputable data of positive science (p. 1). This same philosophical leaning of persons who view marihuanaas a significant danger to both the individual and societycarries with it a corollary that use be prohibited and the userpunished. Perhaps the most persistent controversy with respect tomarihuana use is the degree to which it poses a danger to publicsafety. Public and professional opinion surveys have repeatedlydemonstrated the existence of a widespread belief that marihuanause leads to the commission of deviant, delinquent, criminal andviolent acts. In addition, some persons have recently expressedconcern that marihuana impairs driving skills and performanceand, in this way, also constitutes a public safety hazards. This chapter will review the evidence pertaining to theeffects of marihuana on criminal and violent behavior, deviantand aggressive sexual behavior and driving skills andperformance. Then an effort will be made to assess both thenature and strength of the purported relationships betweenmarihuana use and these behaviors. Problems in Assessing the Effects of Marihuana The degree to which marihuana constitutes a danger to publicsafety is dependent, in large measure, upon the drug'sobservable, effects on the behavior of the user. No drug,including marihuana, produces the same effect at all times, underall conditions and in all individuals. Rather, the quality (formand intensity) and the quantity (extent and frequency) of theperceived effects are determined by the complex interaction ofboth pharmacological and extrapharmacological factors. As Goode(1972) has noted: We should bear this qualification in mind when looking atthe relationship between the ingestion of a drug and anysubsequent behavior-with the latter supposedly "caused"by the effects of the drug. Drug effects vary, and, in addition,even standard effects do not automatically translate intospecific forms of human behavior (P. 18). In a paper prepared for the Commission, Tinklenberg (1971 :1-8) has enumerated some of the basic factors which should betaken into consideration in evaluating the relationship betweenmarihuana and crime. They are equally relevant, however, for theassessment of any behavioral effect presumably attributable tomarihuana, and for that reason they are summarized below. Definition and Congeners. The concentration of theprincipal active chemicals in cannabis (THC and theirmetabolites) in any given amount of marihuana varies widelyaccording to where the plant is grown, how it is cultivated,harvested and cured. These variations permit a wide range ofpharmacological potencies and unknown variations in their effectson behavior. Drug-Drug Interactions. Given the strong possibility ofintentional or inadvertent adulteration of marihuana with otherpsychoactive drugs, it may be that behavioral changes attributedto marihuana may actually derive from the adulterants or from theinteraction of THC and the adulterants (which may well beoccasioned by the deliberate rather than unknown simultaneous orsequential use, of other psychoactive drugs). Dose-Response Functions. With respect to the questionof how drugs affect behavior, it is likely that marihuanainfluences behavior in different ways and degrees, depending upondosage levels. Although it is common to infer that higher dosesof a given drug will induce more of a particular response andlower doses less, such inferences may be inaccurate in that drugeffects can show a curvilinear dose-response relationship (asseems to be the case with alcohol). Time-Action Functions. Time-action function describesthe changing effects of marihuana during the course of the drugaction. During the brief periods in which the drug effects aremost intense, there may be a more pronounced alteration inbehavior than during most of the points on the drug time-actioncontinuum. Individual Variation. Different individuals apparentlyrespond quite differently to the same dose-time factors ofmarihuana as well as other drugs. In some laboratory studies,where, high doses of marihuana induced considerable euphoria andenhanced conviviality in most subjects, a few subjects whoreceived the same dosage in the same setting experiencedparanoia, excessive agitation and aggressive tendencies. Cumulative Effects. The effects of marihuana onindividual behavior have been shown to vary according to theamount of previous experience with the drug. There is increasingevidence that chronic users respond quite differently tomarihuana than do occasional users. The cumulative extent ofprevious experience may have an important influence on subsequentbehavioral responses. Psychological and Environmental Variables. Thebehavioral response to marihuana and to other drugs is at leastpartially dependent upon such psychosocial variables as theexpectations of the user regarding its influence on his behavior.These expectations are in turn derived from. the personalities ofthe, individuals involved, recent events in their lives, and thephysical, interpersonal and social milieu in which the marihuanause occurs. The behavioral responses to marihuana use are likelyto correlate with such psychological and environmental variablesquite independently of any pharmacological effects the drug mayexert. Personality Factors. A certain number of individuals inany given population demonstrate characteristic and relativelyenduring patterns of antisocial behavior regardless of theirimmediate circumstances, possible drug use and the like. Theseindividuals, variously described as antisocial, criminal oremotionally unstable, typically manifest, from childhood on,recurrent tendencies toward deviance in many areas of life. Forsome of these people, those predisposed toward both criminalityand drug abuse, crime and drug use do coexist. However, theassumption that the drug causes crime or vice versa is notnecessarily valid. One should not automatically conclude fromthis that the use of drugs has no influence on their criminalbehavior. Drug use may possibly provide a form of reinforcementwhich may increase or decrease the likelihood of a criminal act. Crime Process Factors. Crime process factors refer tothe complexities of criminal behavior and the possible influenceof marihuana on that behavior. A multifactored perspective of theetiology of crime , including personal, social and situationalvariables, allows for the possibility that at each step in thechain of events leading to the commission of a criminal act,marihuana use may contribute to enhance or diminish thepossibility of this outcome. In short, any interpretation of the data to be presented belowwhich fails to take into account at least some of these variableswill likely result in a "post hoc, ergo propter hoc"fallacy-that is, the invalid assumption that simply because oneevent occurs later than another event (one commits a crime aftersmoking marihuana) that the latter is caused by the former(marihuana caused the crime). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-18IA031-000655-B040-198http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1j.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113254 text/html 54311HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:32:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:28 GMTContent-length: 54093 Marihuana and Violence Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Violence (The evidence to be presented here applies not only toaggression and to violence but to marihuana's relationship tocrime in general, and is therefore equally relevant to a latersection on marihuana and non-violent crime. The effects ofmarihuana on sexual behavior, including the commission of sexualoffenses will be treated in the following section on marihuanaand sexual behavior.) The popular and professional literature contains numerousunsupported and often emotionally charged accusations regardingmarihuana's contribution to violence. In at least two dozen comparatively recent eases of murder ordegenerate sex attacks, marihuana proved to be a contributingcause (Anslinger, 1937). In a recent study of thirty-seven murders in New Orleans in ayear, seventeen were traced directly to marihuana. . . . Evilmarihuana is pock-marking this nation with murders, sex attacks,suicides, and crimes in every category from bank stick-ups topetty thievery . . . (LaRoe, 1940). Marihuana, while giving the hallucinations of cocaine, addsdelusions of impending physical attack by one's best friend orclose relatives. In addition, marihuana is intrinsically andinherently crime exciting. It has led to some of the mostrevolting cases of sadistic rape and murder of modern times(Rowell and Rowell, 1939: 67). Even sex does not satisfy the abnormal urges induced bymarihuana. There is still the necessity for further excitement,more emotional release. That is when the guns are grabbed, theknives waved and the razors swung. And all that is a marihuanauser's idea of what is normal! (Williams, 1969). To add greater credibility to their undocumented assertions,some persons describe the manner in which the drug purportedlyleads to violence. In the earliest stages of intoxication the willpower isdestroyed and inhibitions and restraints are released; the moralbarricades are broken down and often debauchery and sexualityresult. Where mental instability is inherent, the behavior isgenerally violent. An egotist will enjoy delusions of grandeur,the timid individual will suffer anxiety, and the aggressive oneoften will resort to acts of violence and crime ... (Anslingerand Tompkins, 1953: 22). Smoking of the weed is habit-forming. It destroys willpower,releases restraints, and promotes insane reactions ... Robberies,thrill murders, sex crimes and other offenses result (New YorkDaily Worker, 1940, in Solomon, 1968: 288). Others simply deny these allegations or assert that there isno evidence to support the thesis of an independent causalrelationship. The fact that so many witnesses testified to the peaceable andorderly character of the excessive consumers goes far to provethat in this country experience shows that as a rule these (hemp)drugs do not tend to violent crime and violence (Indian HempDrugs Commission, 1969: 258). A fair summary of the available evidence would be that veryrarely do major (particularly violent) crimes follow upon the useof the drug, and that, in instances where they do, therelationship is an indirect one (Ausubel, 1958: 103). One likely hypothesis is that, given the accepted tendency ofmarihuana to release inhibitions, the effect of the drug willdepend on the individual and the circumstances. It might, butcertainly will not necessarily or inevitably, lead to aggressivebehavior or crime (President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice, 1967: 13). The relationship between marihuana use land the commission ofaggressive acts or violent crime such as murder, rape and assaultremains one of the most controversial issues relating to thedrug. Persons who believe that such a relationship exists oftenargue that marihuana triggers the release of inhibitions andrestraints, destroys the will power and heightens aggressivetendencies of the user, serving as a catalyst for the commissionof aggressive or violent acts. This argument raises several fundamental questions: Are theeffects presumably induced by the drug commonly experienced bymarihuana users? Are these effects, to the extent that, they dooccur, generally or frequently translated into overt behavior?And is the behavior which presumably manifests itself ordinarilyviolent or aggressive? The answers to these questions may be obtained from severalsources, including the results of laboratory experiments designedto measure certain physiological and psychological reactions andto identify observable behavioral effects; and retrospectiveself-reports of effects purportedly experienced by marihuanausers. Additional clues may be gained from examination of thecriminal records of known marihuana users and the incidence ofmarihuana. use among persons arrested for or convicted of violentcrimes. However, while these latter methods may revealstatistical associations (which could prove to be spurious uponfurther analysis), they should riot be interpreted to demonstratethe existence of a causal connection between marihuana use andthe offenses committed. THE VIOLENT AND CRIMINOGENIC EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA The empirical evidence gathered to date lends no support tothe hypothesis that marihuana heightens aggressive tendencies inthe user or that its effects significantly increase thelikelihood of inciting the user to violence or crime. However,those findings summarized below do not mean that marihuana cannotbe related to aggressive or violent behavior but merely suggestthat the effects of the drug and the behaviors in question mayoperate independently. The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) studied thepsychomotor effects of marihuana on 72 prisoners, both users andnon-users. Marihuana was administered experimentally as both anoral extract and as cigarettes. The data show that the degree ofthe drug's effect on psychomotor activities is dependent upon thecomplexity of the function and, in some cases, on the strength ofthe dose administered. Although simple reaction time and taskswere only slightly affected, more complex functions like staticequilibrium and body and hand steadiness were significantly andadversely affected by both large (5 cc.) and small (2 cc.) dosesof the drug. In contrast to the ability of amphetamines to enhance muscularperformance and to increase physical activity (Weiss and Laties,1962; Tinklenberg and Stillman, 1970), marihuana has been foundto decrease the inclination toward physical activity and toactually reduce both physical exertion and activity (Mayor'sCommittee on Marihuana, 1944; Hollister, et. a]., 1968;Hollister, 1971), thereby decreasing the probability of incitingthe user to assaultive behavior. Although marihuana has been found to reduce inhibitions insome persons, it has not been shown to exaggerate extantaggressiveness to any appreciable degree; in some instances ithas, in fact, been shown to reduce aggressiveness, and to inducetimidity, fear and passivity in the user (Bromberg) 1934,1939;Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Allentuck, 1942; Chopra, and Chopra,1942; Charen and Perelman, 1946; Carstairs, 1954; Blumer, et.al., 1967; National Institute of Mental Health, 1970, 1972). In recent years, a number of studies have been conducted inwhich marihuana users were asked to describe the effects theyexperienced while under the influence of the drug. On the whole,their findings are similar to those obtained from the results oflaboratory experiments. Halikas, Goodwin and Guze (1971) found that the majority ofthe users in their sample reported "usually" feelingrelaxed (79%) and peaceful (74%). Tart (1971) administered a questionnaire to college studentsin California, one item containing a list of 206 possible effectsof marihuana. Respondents were asked to indicate whether, withinthe last six months, they had experienced the designated effectsnever, rarely, sometimes, very often or usually. Of the 153respondents, 69% gave one of the latter three responses to theitem: "My inhibitions are lowered so that I do things I'mnormally inhibited to do." To the item: "I lose control of my actions and doantisocial things (actions that harm other people) that Inormally wouldn't do," 22% said rarely, 1% said sometimes,and the remaining 77% replied "never." With respect toother more specific effects, 23% of the users stated they"usually" felt physically relaxed, and 49% said they"very often" felt physically relaxed and did not wantto get up or move around when high on marihuana (pp. 703-704). In a study by Brotman and Suffet (1970) of 74 users in NewYork City (both students and nonstudents) no one mentioned anyhostile feelings or actions when asked to describe what happenswhen they get high on marihuana (p. 264). Goode (1970) asked 204 respondents to describe theirexperiences when high on marihuana. Table 1 illustrates theresponses of the users to effects possibly related to aggressionor crime (pp. 53-54). In a more recent, Commission-sponsored survey of 15 to 34 yearold male residents of Philadelphia, respondents were interviewedabout the extent and frequency of their marihuana use, the extentto which marihuana figured in the commission of criminal ordelinquent acts and the effects they generally experienced whileunder the influence of the drug (Goode, 1972). With respect tothe effects experienced, nearly all the marihuana users (about75% of the total sample reported that they had tried marihuana atone time or another) denied that the effects of marihuana on themcould be interpreted as criminogenic or violent in nature. Table2 below presents the subjective effects of marihuana related tocrime and violence which were reported by the 559 respondents. Table I.-CRIMINOGENIC AND AGGRESSIVE EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA (Figures in Percentages) More relaxed, peaceful, calmer; marihuana acts as a tranquilizer - -- ---------------- ------ -- --------------------- 46 Exaggeration of mood: greater subjective impact, emotionalsignificance --- ------ ----- ------------------ -_ -_ 25 Time seems slowed down, stretched out, think more time has passed ---------- ----------- ------ ---- --------------- 25 Become more withdrawn, introverted, privatistic-- - __ 22 Become tired, lazy, lethargic, don't want to move---- - 19 Feel freer, unrestrained, uninhibited --------- ---- --------- 18 Feel paranoid ----- ----------- -------- ------ --------------- -- ------- 15 Have hallucinations ---------------------- - -- -- ----------- ------- 15 Feel sleepy ------ ----------- --- ---------------------------------- 14 More uncoordinated, clumsier, motor skills impaired 9 Other people annoy me more; find fault in others ------ 8 Become more active, want to move around more -_ __ - 6 Table 2.-REPORTED EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA AS RELATED TOCRIMINAL AND VIOLENT BEHAVIOR (Figures in Percentages) Almost More Less Never all than than or Effects reported the half half almost time the the never time time Feeling of wanting to hurt someone 0 3 96 Feeling of wanting to do something violent.. * 4 95 Feel more angry 1 3 8 88 Feeling of frustration 3 4 16 78 More willing to follow others' suggestions 4 12 25 59 Care less what others think of what you do. . 16 15 10 18 Feeling of being able to do anything 6 5 13 77 Have hallucinations 9 8 16 66 Feeling of relaxation.... 50 22 10 18 Feel less angry 31 22 13 34 Feeling of drowsiness or sleepiness 22 25 25 27 * Less than 1/2 of one percent. Source: Goode, 1972: 21. The data show that the overwhelming majority of therespondents report "never or almost never" experiencingeffects which can be characterized as producing frustration,anger, or aggression, and that they usually do Dot experienceeffects which could be taken to indicate an increase insuggestibility. On the other hand, substantial proportions of therespondents reported feeling relaxed (72%), less angry (53%) anddrowsy or sleepy (47 %, ) at least half of the time. In sum, these data suggest that marihuana does not commonlyproduce effects which are likely to increase aggression or incitethe user to violence. Numerous studies designed to assess therelationship more directly demonstrate, on the whole, thatmarihuana does not play a significant role in the commission ofviolent crimes. MARIHUANA AND VIOLENT CRIME: THE EVIDENCE Over the years a number of approaches have been utilized in aneffort to assess the relationship between marihuana use andviolent crime. Perhaps the simplest approach is to compile a.list of violent offenses allegedly committed by marihuana usersand to establish, retrospectively, the role of marihuana in thecommission of these offenses. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894), for example,investigated 81 cases of violence allegedly caused by hemp drugsin in effort to determine whether or not a causal relationshipexisted. Of these 81 cases, 11 were too old to permit adequateinvestigation. In 23 of the cases examined, however, 18 showed noevidence of a connection between the crimes and the use of hempdrugs. The Commission concluded that: In respect to his relations with society, however, even theexcessive consumer of hemp drugs is ordinarily inoffensive,. Hisexcesses may indeed bring him to degraded poverty which may leadhim to dishonest practices; and occasionally, but apparently veryrarely indeed, excessive indulgence in hemp drugs may lead toviolent crime. But for all practical purposes it may be laid downthat there is little or no connection between the use of hempdrugs and crime (Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-1894,reprinted 1969: 204). Similarly, in 1938 the Foreign Policy Association publishedthe accounts of 10 marihuana crimes, including murder andassault, "culled at random from the files of the U.S. Bureauof Narcotics" (Merrill, 1938: 28). These cases werepresented in such a way as to imply that marihuana caused theoffenses. According to Grinspoon (1971: 302), they "gave thereader the distinct impression that the -user of marihuana was aviolent criminal who was given to rape, homicide, andmayhem." Bromberg (1939), however, questions the validity ofthe causal assumption. It is difficult to evaluate these statements, because of theiruncritical nature.... Among the ten patients, the second, J. O.,was described as having confessed how lie murdered a friend andput his body in a trunk while under the influence of marihuana.J. 0. was examined in this clinic (Bellevue Hospital) ; althoughlie was a psychopathic liar and possibly homosexual, there was noindication in the examination or history of the use of any drug.The investigation by the probation department failed to indicateuse of the drug marihuana. The deceased, however, was addicted toheroin (p. 9). Based on retrospective case analyses, some observers haveattempted to specify more precisely. the nature of the purportedrelationship or the situations in which aggressive behavior mayresult from marihuana use. Bromberg (1939), for example,suggested that aggressive or violent behavior may arise when anaive subject develops a panic state in response tomarihuana-induced hallucinations. Allentuck and Bowman (1942)believed that aggressive or antisocial behavior following use mayoccur as a reaction to some unpleasant external stimulus duringthe phase, of hypersensitivity and heightened psychomotoractivity. Others have suggested that antisocial conduct of anaggressive or violent nature may occur when marihuana is used, asalcohol often is, to release repressed feelings of hostility(Siler, et al., 1933; Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Allentuck andBowman, 1942; Freedman and Rockmore, 1946; Murphy, 1963), and toserve as a fortifier for aggressive or violent crimes (Ewens,1904; South Africa Interdepartmental Committee on Abuse of Dagga,1952; Ames, 1958; Watt, 1961; Blumer, et al., 1967; Miller,1968). The available evidence bearing on these issues, however,suggests that panic reactions rarely occur; that psychomotoractivity is more often reduced than enhanced following use; thataggression rarely follows use, but when it does, it generallyoccurs among individuals with histories of maladjustment,emotional instability or impulse disorders (Bromberg, 1934, 1939;Charen and Perelman, 1946; Ausubel, 1958; Bloomquist, 1968;Grinspoon, 1971; Kaplan, 1971; National Institute of MentalHealth, 1972). After a series of studies of marihuana and crime, Chopra andChopra (1939) concluded that if any relationship existed betweenmarihuana use and violent crime, it was an indirect one. Theystated that: So far as premeditated crime is concerned, especially thatof a violent nature, hemp drugs . . . may not only not lead toit, but they actually act as deterrents.... One of the, importantactions of these drugs is to quieten and stupify the individualso there is no tendency to violence. . . . The result ofcontinued and excessive use of these drugs in our opinion is tomake the individual timid rather than lead him to commit a crimeof a violent nature (p. 92). Over the years, the conclusion of the Chopras has receivedincreasing support from many quarters of the research community(Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, 1944; Maurer and Vogel, 1962;White House Conference on Narcotic Drug Abuse, 1962; Murphy,1963; President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice, 1967; National Institute of MentalHealth, 1970, 1972). In the absence of possibilities for addressing the issue moredirectly, several researchers have relied on statistical studiesand have sought to establish the overall and comparativeincidence of detected violent crimes among cannabis users. Onemethod has been to compile lists of violent crimes committedduring specific periods of time and to determine the proportionof these offenses committed by cannabis users. Lambo (1965) compiled a list of crimes occurring in three WestAfrican countries during a recent two-year period. He claimedthat users of cannabis had committed 51% of the 73 murders, 31%of the 263 cases of assault and battery and 26% of the 472 casesagainst women. Some have preferred to base their statistical studies onsamples of offenders (rather than lists of offenses) drawn fromthe arrest or conviction files of law enforcement agencies.Several researchers adopting this method are content to identifythe marihuana users in their samples and then simply report thenumber of users charged with violent crimes or the proportions ofthe total number of violent crimes perpetrated by the users. The District Attorney of New Orleans, for example, testifiedbefore the House Ways and Means Committee that of the 450 menconvicted of major crimes in 1930, 125 were identified as regularmarihuana users. Approximately one-half of the murderers andone-fifth of those charged with assault, robbery or larceny weresaid to be regular marihuana users (U.S. House ofRepresentatives, 1937: 23-24). Bromberg (1939) reviewed the records of 16,854 offenders inthe psychiatric clinic of New York County's Court of GeneralSessions during the period 1932 to 1937. Of the 67 marihuanausers identified, only six had been charged with violent crimes.He concluded that there was no causal relationship betweenmarihuana use and aggressive crime. Others go one step further and attempt to compare the users'rates of violence with those of other selected populations suchas non-marihuana using offenders, offenders using other drugs, orall of fenders in a given file. Bromberg and Rodgers (1946) studied the civilian and militarycriminal records of 8,280 convicted offenders at the UnitedStates Naval Prison in Portsmouth, Now Hampshire between January1, 1943 and July 1, 1945. Of the total number of offendersinvestigated, 40 or .0048% were identified as marihuana users (23used to excess, 10 were moderate users and seven were describedas light users). Of these 40, only two reported being moreaggressive while under the influence of marihuana than they wouldbe under normal conditions and three had been charged withviolent crimes (assault or striking an officer) while in themilitary. Comparison of the users' criminal records with those of40 randomly selected non-using prisoners revealed that thenon-user group had committed more aggressive crimes than theusers. In conclusion, the researchers stated that: There is no positive relationship between aggressive crime and marihuana usage in the Naval service; . . . . . . there is no significant causal relationship between aggressive crime in civilian life (of the naval offenders studied) and the use of marihuana . . . . Marihuana usage is but an aspect of some type of mental disorder or personality abnormality (p. 826). Maurer and Vogel (1962) have stated a similar conclusion. "It has not been our impression from contact with manyhundreds of marijuana users that these people are violentcriminals; ... While there may be occasional violent psychopathswho have used marijuana, have committed crimes of violence, andwho have, in court, explained their actions as uncontrolledviolence resulting from the use of the drug, these are exceptionsto the general run of marijuana users.... Marijuana is notpossessed of any mysterious power to force people to commit actswhich they would not otherwise perform (p. 281). Blum (1969) reviewed the data provided in 1966 by the FederalBureau of Investigation as part of its Careers in Crime Project.The data showed that marihuana users did not differ significantlyfrom either heroin users or from all offenders (drug and non-drugusers) in their rate of violent crime relative to their totalnon-drug offenses (28%, 26% and 26%, respectively). There have been several statistical studies, also usingoffender populations, designed to assess the degree to whichpersons arrested for cannabis use have previous or subsequentarrests for violent crimes. Bromberg and Rodgers (1946) found that of the 40 offenders intheir sample identified as marihuana users, 12 had been chargedwith previous offenses, three of them for assault. Gardikas (1950) reviewed the criminal records of 379 personsarrested between 1919 and 1950 for publicly using hashish. Ofthese, 117 (31%) reportedly progressed from hashish use to othercrimes, about one-third of these subsequent crimes involvingviolence or weapons. Gardikas stated that one subgroup of these,offenders accumulated 420 offenses of assault, woundings,threats, robberies, and manslaughter (p. 5). In sum, these statistical studies based on samples of violentoffenses, violent offenders or arrested marihuana law violatorsindicate that some individuals identified as marihuana users docommit violent crimes, have committed them in the past and go onto commit them in the future. Their numbers, however, are generally small, both absolutelyand relatively. These studies therefore suggest a very weak andinsignificant statistical association between marihuana use andviolent crime which may itself be completely attenuated when theproper statistical controls are applied. These studies do not establish a causal relationship betweencannabis use and violent crime; nor do they permit an affirmativeresponse to the crucial question of whether the use of marihuanaalters the progression to violent crime at a significantlygreater rate than that which might be expected from some othercriminal subgroups, more representative samples of cannabisusers, or samples drawn from the general population. They alsofail to address themselves to the external conditions andcircumstances which might serve to mitigate the observedrelationships. Several recent and more sophisticated empirical investigationshave addressed some of the critical questions left unanswered bystatistical studies of offender populations. Namely, they setabout to determine whether marihuana users in the generalpopulation commit acts of aggression or violence significantlymore frequently than do nonusers; and whether any observeddifferences between users and non-users may be more directlyattributable to extra-pharmacological (social, cultural,psychological) variables than to the use of marihuana itself orto the pharmacological action of the drug per se. In 1965, Robins and his associates (1970) conducted a surveyof 20 black men born in St. Louis between 1930 and 1934. Themarihuana users in the sample were then compared with thenonusers relative to their ratings on a "violencesyndrome" constructed by the researchers. Respondents were rated high on the violence syndrome if theyreported having participated or felt like participating in threeor more of the following items, one of which was a judgment bythe interviewer that the respondent demonstrated hostility duringthe interview: 1. Getting hurt in a fight. 2. Ever feeling like killing someone. 3. Ever hitting people when angry. 4. Being quick to lose one's temper. 5. Throwing or breaking things when angry. 6. Ever hurting someone in a fight. 7. Ever fighting with a weapon. 8. Getting mean when drinking. 9. Interviewer's observation of respondent's hostility. The researchers found that those who had used marihuana duringadolescence were more likely to score high on the violencesyndrome than were those who did not use the drug for the firsttime until adulthood; 31% of the respondents who had usedmarihuana and no other drug during adolescence exhibited three ormore of these measures, 24% of those who used marihuana only butstarted as adults scored high, 16% of the non-users wereclassified as high on the violence syndrome, and 45% of those whoused marihuana and other drugs were so classified. The researchers also found that users were significantly morelikely to report the, commission of " adult person orproperty offenses" than were nonusers; 32 % of the nonusers,48 % of the marihuana only adult starters, 56% of the marihuanaonly adolescent starters, and 77% of the multiple drug usersreported committing crimes against persons or property as adults. Based on these data, marihuana users were said to besignificantly more likely to have exhibited violent behavior thanwere nonusers. This conclusion, however, seems somewhatpremature. First, upon the application of three "pathological"controls (dropping out of school, alcoholism and involvement injuvenile delinquency), the original relationship was reduced tosome unspecified extent; the researchers reported only that thesecontrols "failed to completely wipe out" thestatistical correlation. Secondly, several of the items would notappear to be sufficiently discriminating in that large numbers ofpeople, whether drug users or not, have probably been quick tolose their temper, hit people when angry (most parents, forexample), or felt like killing someone in a moment of anger. Thesubjective nature of the last item the interviewer's observationof hostility has already been noted. Thirdly, neither the drinkers nor those who were multiple drugusers were isolated in the analysis, making it impossible todetermine whether or not the apparent relationship betweenmarihuana use and violence may have been a. function of theseother drugs rather than the marihuana. Lastly, but perhaps most importantly, the researchers foundseveral other "pathological" variables correlated withthe use of marihuana in their sample: (a) low income, (b) lowstatus jobs, (c) unemployment, (d) receiving financial aid, (e)failing to graduate from high school, (f) fathering illegitimatechildren, (g) marrying women who had been married previously orwho had children, and (h) drinking "heavily enough tocreate, social or medical problems." Because none of these variables was controlled in the dataanalysis (despite the fact that most of them have been found tobe significantly related to delinquency and crime andcharacteristic of persons involved in delinquent, criminal anddrug subcultures), it is impossible to determine whether or notany or all of these variables played a mediating role in theobserved relationship between marihuana use and antisocialbehavior in the, sample. As Goode (1972) has noted, the fact thatthe three controls which were applied did reduce therelationship, makes it likely that "additional controlswould reduce the relationship even more, indeed, reduce it tozero, if applied simultaneously" (p. 13). As such, although this study represented a significant stepforward in investigating the relationship between marihuana andcrime or violent behavior, its methodological limitationspreclude generalizations of the findings to the larger universe. In a study of drug use among lower class minority group youth,Blumer and his associates (1967) found that marihuana users weremuch less likely to commit aggressive or violent acts than werethose who used amphetamines or preferred alcohol, and that mostof the marihuana using youths deliberately shunned aggressivebehavior and adopted, instead, a "cool," non-violentstyle. The researchers did find a small group of youths (termed"the rowdy") who were oriented toward aggressiveness.Generally, these youths preferred alcohol over other drugs andwere found, for the most part, to have been raised in anaggressive and combative social milieu. The researchers pointout, however, that most marihuana users in the sample were not ofthe rowdy type, even though it is this small group which oftenforms the basis of the public and police image of the youthfulmarihuana user. In commenting on the role of marihuana in thepassage of youth from rowdy to a cool style, the authors note,that the passage from the rowdy type to a cool and mellowyoungster, as it relates to the use of drugs, involves chiefly ashift to the smoking of marijuana. . . . [The youngsters']accounts and discussions also stress that the use of marijuanaboth produces and symbolizes a "mellow" mode of conductthat is opposed to that associated with rowdy behavior. Theyplace great weight on the "socializing" effects ofmarijuana use, declaring that its use not only leads youngstersaway from violence but has the effect of changing them intosocial human beings (p. 30). In a large scale, systematic survey (questionnaire andinterview) of more than 1300 students at five West Coast collegesand universities, Blum and his associates (1969) found that 19%of the total sample had used marihuana but that 94% had usedalcohol. One, percent of the marihuana users reported fights orother criminal behavior which they attributed to the drug. Ofthose who used alcohol, 8% reported fights and 2% reportedoffenses while under the influence of this drug. The researchersmake particular note of the fact that despite the increase ofmarihuana use on these campuses since the middle and latesixties, there has been no comparable increase in assaultivecrimes. In a Commission-sponsored household survey of 15 to 34year-old male residents of West Philadelphia, Goode (1972) foundthat not one of the violent crimes, including "forcingsexual intercourse," was significantly correlated withmarihuana use. Among the five offense types showing a very weakrelationship to the use of marihuana, the only so-called violentoffense, "hurting someone in a minor way," showed theweakest association. The author notes that "the statisticaldifferences in rates of offenses between users and nonusers reston adding together a small number of weakly correlated offenses.. . . [They do not indicate] massive differences, or differencesindicating higher rates of classic, violent crimes amongusers" (p. 32a). These more rigorous studies of the relationship betweenmarihuana use and violent crime suggest that marihuana users inthe general population do not commit acts of aggression orviolence significantly more frequently than do nonusers; thatmarihuana does not heighten aggressive tendencies in most usersand may, in some cases, serve to reduce aggressiveness; and thatmuch of the observed relationship between marihuana and violenceis probably a function of social, cultural or psychologicalvariables such as multiple drug use, set and setting andinvolvement in a criminal or drug subculture. There is no reason to believe that marihuana use will cause orlead to the commission of aggressive or violent acts by the largemajority of psychologically and socially mature individuals inthe general population. OPINIONS ABOUT MARIHUANA AND AGGRESSIVENESS: THE LAWENFORCEMENT AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMUNITIES Several references have already been made to anecdotal casehistories, to the claims made and to the opinions formerly heldby a number of law enforcement authorities relative to therelationship between marihuana use and aggressive behavior orviolent crime. A few systematic efforts have been made to explorethe current opinions and attitudes of law enforcement andcriminal justice officials. Probably the first detailed survey of the opinions of policeofficers was that conducted by a Stanford University law studentin 1968. Part of this unpublished study has been summarized byKaplan (1971) and is reprinted below. Law enforcement agencies have continuously supported theexistence of a strong causal relationship between the use ofmarijuana and acts of aggression and violence. In order todetermine the nature and basis for this belief, sixteen lawenforcement and narcotics officers were interviewed. The officersselected for the interview from each pollee department were thosewho spent the largest percentage of their time actually workingwith marijuana users. When the department had several officersworking full time on narcotics, the officer In charge wasinterviewed, on the supposition that as chief officer, he wouldhave the longest and widest range of experience with marijuanausers. Of those interviewed, seven spent 100% of their time onnarcotics problems; three spent 75% to 100%; I spent about 50%;and the remaining five spent 10% to 25%. All emphasized that oftheir narcotics work, a major proportion of the time is spent onmarijuana problems. The context in which the officers observe individuals underthe influence of marijuana is an important factor in evaluatingtheir observations. Only three had done stakeout work whereconduct could be observed while under cover. The remainingthirteen officers had only encountered marijuana users in eitherarrest or questioning situations. In response to the question ofwhether they had opportunities for informal contact with peopleusing marijuana while off duty or in a social situation, theofficers uniformly answered, "no." The specific subject of this project, i.e. marijuana andaggression, was never mentioned to the officers. They were toldonly that I was interested in the marijuana question. The firstquestion which I asked was to briefly characterize, from theirper8onal experience and observations, the behavior of individualswhile under the influence of marijuana. During this originaldescription, 10 of the officers mentioned violence or aggressivebehavior as a common characteristic. The six other officersdidn't mention aggression as a distinguishing characteristic intheir original description however, in the next question, whenspecifically asked if marijuana does lead to aggressive behavior,all said that it did. Every one of the officers pointed out the wide range ofconduct which they see exhibited by those that are"high" on marijuana. They emphasized that how a personreacts depends on his particular personality. As one officercommented, "Some individuals are very happy and to themeverything is beautiful, while others are always looking for afight." Six (6) of the officers emphasized how quickly theycan see one mood change into the other-at one moment docile andpassive, at another extremely aggressive. A few of the officers commented that along with the directinfluence of marijuana, another important factor in aggressivebehavior Is the arresting situation. One officer, Lieutenant A ofthe B Police Department, who has done quite a bit of stake-outwork as well as undercover investigation, pointed out that thischange from "silly, joking, funny and talkative" moodsto apprehensive and often aggressive postures is many timesprecipitated by the realization that a law enforcement officer ispresent. Sergeant C of the D Police Department also felt the"arresting situation" was probably the primary factorin aggressive behavior reports about marijuana users. Sergeant Ealso mentioned "the approach of a known policeman" as afactor in the aggressive behavior which they see. However,Sergeant E also estimated that one fifth of the males, when under the influence of [marijuana] and whenaware that they are being arrested, will break and run or resist.This he feels is a much higher percentage than for other types ofarrests. Similarly most of the officers did maintain that evenconsidering all other factors such as arrest, the marijuana wasthe force in most cases which was responsible for the aggressionand violence. Mr. F of the G County Sheriff's Office, however, maintainedthat in the last few years, those arrested for marijuana offenseshave tended to resist arrest less often than previously. Hestated, "They now feel they don't have to fight the officersbecause of the laws-because of legalizing attempts, they feelthey don't have to fight, for they will have their day incourt." Sergeant H of the I Police Department stated that recently(within the last year) he has seen no aggressive reaction tomarijuana because of the extremely weak grades of marijuana nowavailable. He felt that the determinative factor in how a personreacts while "high" is the strength of the grasssmoked. He reported that the grass they have recently beenfinding has a very low resin content and its effects are merely"a quick stimulant followed by a depressed mood."However, in another part of the interview, when discussing thetype of personality prone to using marijuana, Sergeant Hdistinguished between those now smoking and the "oldgrasshead." These latter were, only "Spanish-Americanor criminals." Now, however, "people without criminalrecords are joining the ranks of criminals." This majorshift in the personality type now using marijuana, it would seem,would be another factor leading to Sergeant H's observation thatthe problems with aggressive reactions have decreased. While all stated their belief that marijuana does lead toaggressive behavior, it was in most cases very difficult toelicit from the officers any specific instances where theypersonally had observed an aggressive reaction to the use ofmarijuana. Four (4) officers stated that they had neverpersonally seen someone aggressive under marijuana. They all,however, had heard reports of such instances from other officers.It should be noted also, that these four officers are from smallpolice departments located chiefly in middle class residentialareas. Me officers who did cite specific examples of aggressivebehavior from their personal observations cited such conduct asindividuals who possessed marijuana fighting among themselves,cases of resisting arrest, a [man] picking a fight in a bar,beating one's wife, sexual promiscuity, stealing, recklessdriving, and carrying knives and guns. While citing this type ofexample most officers emphasized the real difficulty in tellingwhen someone is "high." Except for a few symptoms suchas red or dilated eyes, they have to make the judgment from thegeneral actions of the subject. When the subject is actingpeculiar and there is no alcohol, or they find marijuana in hispossession, then they assume he is "high." It was also difficult to limit these discussions solely tomarijuana. When asked for personal case histories, they oftenrecounted incidents of individuals who had also been using otherdrugs or alcohol in combination with marijuana. The officers tendto group all of the drugs together, and discuss them together ingeneralities applying to all. One officer, from J County,recounted as one of his -personal experience histories withaggression and marijuana, a boy who went "berserk" onChristmas day, and who finally had to be shot by the police. Onchecking newspaper accounts, it appears that LSD was alsoinvolved in the episode. The officers all indicated that they have personally seen manyaggressive reactions to the use of alcohol. Most, however, didnot feel they could compare the frequency with that of marijuana.Most deal mainly with narcotic problems and thus spend most oftheir time with marijuana problems. The alcohol problems, andspecifically the aggressive or belligerent drunk, are handled bythe "beat" cops. It was also difficult to limit the discussion to personalexperiences of the officers themselves. Many of them, when askedfor specific examples, went immediately to their desks forreports and articles issued by other law enforcement agencies.This it seems is a problem which developed because of the samplechosen to interview. Because they were usually the mostexperienced and the chief narcotics officers, most of them arecalled upon to give speeches before PTA's, church groups, schoolclasses, etc. They all, therefore, were familiar with theliterature distributed by law enforcement.... Three of the officers cited as proof of marijuana's danger arecent distribution which pointed out that the "deathpenalty" Is now imposed on marijuana offenders in Nigeria. When questioned on passive reactions to marijuana, all of theofficers could think of personal encounters with people who were"high" and who were decidedly passive and docile. Yetonly four of the officers included this trait in their originalcharacterization of behavior under marijuana. Eight of theofficers, however, in their original description of behaviorwhile "high" described some persons as"happy," "funny," or "giggly." One question asked of the officers was aimed atdifferentiating the aggressiveness (chiefly in terms of frequencyof resisting arrest) between those "high" on marijuanaand those arrested for sale or for possession. As mentionedpreviously, the officers indicated that generally they have avery difficult time distinguishing those who are"high." The officers interviewed generally work on[arresting] pushers, and dealers. Their attention is usually notdrawn to individuals because of the particular conduct they mightbe exhibiting, but rather because the individual is dealing inmarijuana. When pot parties where everyone is high have been[broken up], Sergeant 0 of D reported that the places raided haveusually been on the peaceful side. Another officer, K, on thenarcotics detail in D, felt that users are usually "veryeasy to arrest. With others, such as pushers, and sellers,however, officers have to -be more careful." Captain L of Mdisagreed, however, maintaining that those under the influencemust be watched more closely and are usually more aggressive andviolent because of a lessening of concern for the consequencesand a lack of ability to make sound judgments. Deputy Chief N ofthe 0 Police Department pointed out that In 0 at any rate, thereis a certain "show" which those arrested feel they mustput on; "it is hard to separate this show from the effectsof the marijuana," Lieutenant P of the 0 Police Departmentsaid his experience indicated that those under the influence hadto be watched closely. He has arrested people, [when they were]"high" three of four times without incident; the fifthtime, however, he felt they might go wild. In response to a question of whether they felt that somepersons smoke pot before engaging in crimes against property,such as robbery, ten of the officers replied that they didbelieve that this occurred often. Seven of these could citespecific examples of people who had been picked up for stickups,car thefts, etc. and who reported using marijuana beforehand tobolster their courage, or sharpen their senses. However, theother three of the ten had only heard of such conduct. Theremaining six officers answered that they did not think this wascommon, and had never seen any examples. . . . None (of the officers) believed however that marijuana wasresponsible for any long-term effects resulting in aggressivebehavior. The relationship between marijuana and aggression, theyfeel, is limited strictly to the period of time during which theuser is under the influence. In terms of long-range effects ofmarijuana on aggression, the reactions of the officers confirmthat, if anything, there is a negative correlation. That is,marijuana leads to nonaggressive, non-competitive, passiveconduct, when viewed in the context of chronic use. Whatever limitations and qualifications one can cite regardingthe conclusions drawn by law enforcement officers, one thingremains certain: they do believe that the use of marijuana leadsin a significant number of cases to aggressive behavior (Kaplan,1971, citing Schofield: 110-115). In seeking to present to the public as much information aboutmarihuana and its effects, from as many different sources andapproaches as possible, the Commission sponsored the design andexecution of two opinion surveys of the criminal justiceCommunity. In addition to soliciting their current opinions aboutthe relationship of marihuana to aggressive or violent behavior,and to infer from them the extent to which their professionalexperience with marihuana users may have changed over the years,the Commission sought to determine the extent to which currentopinions and attitudes of the criminal justice community reflectthe growing body of empirical evidence on the subject. To these ends, nationally representative samples ofprosecuting attorneys, judges, probation officers and courtclinicians were surveyed by mail. The questionnaires mailed tothese officials contained items relative to the relationshipbetween marihuana use and aggressive or violent behavior. Theresults of these surveys show that more than three fourths of the781 judges, probation officers and court clinicians responding toa mail survey (InTech, 1971) regarded as either questionable or" probably untrue" the statement that "mostaggressive acts or crimes of violence committed by persons whoare known users of marihuana occur when the offender is under theinfluence of marihuana. More than 60% however, regard as equallyquestionable or untrue the statement that most such aggressiveacts or crimes of violence occur when the offender is not tinderthe influence of the drug but is attempting to obtain it or themoney to buy it. Table 3 shows the percentage of each of thethree groups of respondents answering in this manner. (InTech,1971). These figures give the impression that neither judges,probation officers nor court clinicians are certain of the roleof marihuana in the commission of violent crime. Their tendencyto deny both statements suggests that at the least, therelationship, to the extent that it does exist, is a tenuous one. Table 3.-CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICIALS, BELIEFS ABOUT THERELATIONSHIP OF MARIHUANA USE TO AGGRESSIVE ACTS (Figures in Percentages) A. "Most aggressive acts or crimes of violence committedby persons who are known users of marihuana occur when theoffender is under the influence of marihuana.', Probably Probably Not sure true not true Judges 17.3 44.2 29.5 Probation officers 14.5 60.0 21.8 Clinicians 6.1 76.5 13.0 Total 15.2 51.2 26.0 B. "When the offender is not under the influence ofmarihuana but is attempting to obtain marihuana or the money tobuy it." Probably Probably Not sure true not true Judges 35.6 30.6 25.0 Probation officers 27.3 44.5 21.8 Clinicians 20.0 60.9 15.7 Total 32.1 37.0 23.2 In its survey of state prosecuting attorneys, the Commissionlikewise found a tendency for these officials to deny a causalrelationship between marihuana use and aggressive behavior; 52%of the respondents stated that they either did not believe orwere uncertain about the proposition that use of marihuana causesaggressive behavior. Of those who did believe in a causalrelationship, however, two-thirds of the respondents' beliefsstemmed front other than personal observation of aggressivebehavior exhibited by marihuana users. These opinion surveys reveal that at least these members ofthe criminal justice community have begun to reexamine theirearlier beliefs. The data suggest that, in their professionalexperience, they have not found marihuana users to be aggressiveor violent to such an extent as to elicit strong and consistentopinions about the causal relationship between marihuana use andviolence. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-19IA031-000655-B040-219http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1k.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113304 text/html 26347HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:32:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:15 GMTContent-length: 26129 Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Since the mid-1930's, Americans have, at one time or another,either acclaimed or decried marihuana as an aphrodisiac, laudedits ability to intensify and enhance enjoyment of sexualexperiences and accused it of heightening sexual aggression andinciting the commission of sexual offenses. Even today, there isno consensus among Americans regarding what they consider to bethe effects of marihuana on sexual desire, arousal andperformance. Rather, what evidence exists on the subjectcontinues to reveal the existence of diverse and ofteninconsistent beliefs and experiences. Society's concern about the effects of marihuana on sexualbehavior, however, does not generally center on the drug'sinherent ability to produce or heighten sexual arousal per se buton the relationship between sexual arousal and the likelihood ofsexual excess on the part of the user. The key question is theextent to which and the conditions under which marihuana acts asa catalyst to sexual aggression, profligacy, promiscuity andother aberrant sexual behavior. MARIHUANA AND PSYCHOSEXUAL STIMULATION The numerous medical and clinical observations, experimentalinvestigations and survey studies reviewed by the Commission showthat the belief regarding the stimulant effects of marihuana andthe use of hemp drugs to achieve sexual arousal, the improvementof sexual powers and the prolongation of coition have existed forcenturies and have be-en documented (Chopra and Chopra, 1939;Bouquet, 1950; Robinson, 1967; Grinspoon, 1971) ; The proportionof the population actually aroused sexually by marihuana,however, is difficult to assess. Relevant research findings arebased on widely divergent research procedures, differing criteriaof arousal, and variations in the amount of arousal experienced.Nonetheless, it is fair to state that marihuana producesheightened sexual interest, desire and arousal in substantialproportions of both male and female users (Bromberg, 1934;Allentuck, 1944; Johnson, 1968; Goode, 1969; Hochman and Brill,1971). It is equally accurate to state, however, that marihuanadoes not increase and in fact may decrease sexual desire orstimulation in significant proportions of users (Walton, 1938;Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Taylor, 1963; Brenner, Coles andMeagher, 1970; Goode, in press). At best, the available evidenceis inconclusive. In a study of regular marihuana users conducted by threephysicians, for example, "heightened sexual feeling"and "increased sexual arousal" while under theinfluence of the drug were reportedly experienced"usually" by one-third of the subjects (34%, and 33%,respectively) and each of these effects was experienced"occasionally" by 59% of the sample (Halikas, Goodwinand Guze, 1971). In another more recent study by physicians, "increasedsexual appetite" was reported by 60% of the chronic usersand 43% of the occasional users of marihuana. Responses to asimilar question regarding "decreased sexual appetite,"revealed that 75% of the chronic users and 70% of the occasionalusers reported that this never occurred (Hochman and Brill,1971). The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) likewise attemptedto assess the effects of marihuana on sexual interest and sexualstimulation. Its clinical studies of 72 male prisoners conductedat the Welfare Hospital in New York City revealed that"although there was an undeniable increase in overt sexinterest following the ingestion of marihuana, . . . This sexinterest seems to have been due primarily to the fact that thesemen have been imprisoned for various periods and had not hadaccess to women" (p. 130). With respect to marihuana'seffect on sexual stimulation the Committee indicated thatalthough "some evidence of eroticism" was reported (inabout 10% of the 150 instances in which marihuana wasadministered), there was no "frank expression of sexualstimulation" despite the presence of female nurses,attendants and others associated with the experiment (p. 38). More recently, Professor Goode published the results of aninformal survey of about 200 marihuana users in which he inquiredabout the relationship of marihuana to both sexual desire andsexual activity. To the question, "Do you think that beinghigh on marihuana stimulates your sex interest, or not?",38% said that their interest in sex while high was no differentin degree from their normal interest in sex; 5% stated that beinghigh on marihuana had a negative effect, i.e., that "ittended to turn them off sexually"; 13% replied that theeffect depended on either their mood, their partner or both; and44% (39% of the men and 50% of the women) reported that it"definitely increases their sexual desire" (1970: 162). Perhaps the most conclusive and consistent finding to emergefrom studies of the effects of marihuana on psychosexualstimulation is that the degree of sexual interest, desire andarousal induced by marihuana is dependent on the characteristicsof the user and the extent to which he comes to expect oranticipate such an effect. Research shows that women are morelikely to report heightened sexual desire than are men (Goode,1969) ; that young people more frequently report arousal than doolder persons (Bloomquist, 1968; Brenner, Coles and Meagher,1970) ; 2 that frequent users are more likely to report increasedsex interest than infrequent users (Goode, 1970) ; that personswho are more sexually experienced are more likely to be sexuallyaroused by marihuana than are those less sexually experienced(Brenner, Coles and Meagher, 1970; Hochman and Brill, 1971; Goodein press) and that those who expect to be sexually aroused by thedrug are more likely to be so aroused than those who do not(Goode, 1969; Fort, 1970; Grinspoon, 1971). There is nothing inherent in the drug itself which producesheightened sexual interest, desire or arousal, nor is there anyphysiological evidence to show that marihuana directly orspecifically acts on either the, sexual centers of the brain orthe sexual organs. As one observer has noted, marihuana "isnot a sexual stimulant; that is, in the, sense that it will notexcite mindless, laboratory-located animal tissue" (Goode,1969: 20). In short, marihuana is not an aphrodisiac. HOW MARIHUANA INFLUENCES SEXUAL RESPONSE It has already been stated that marihuana is not, in itself,an aphrodisiac although a substantial number of persons reportincreased sexual interest, desire and arousal following use ofthe drug. To what, then, are these effects attributable? Researchhearing on this question suggests that to the extent thatmarihuana influences these respouses, it does so indirectly byacting on the higher centers of the brain to relax inhibitionsand reduce, the usual restraints on behavior. By so doing, theuser is placed in the position of being freer to respond to hissexual needs and desires (Walton, 1938; Allentuck and Bowman,1942; Ausubel, 1958; Brown, 1961; McGothlin, 1966; Rosevear,1967; Bloomquist, 1968; Oursler, 1968; Goode, 1969; Fort, 1970).The extent to which these responses occur, however, are dependentupon individual expectation and knowledge (Fort, 1970) and thesocial situation (set and setting) in which the marihuana usetakes place (Goode, 1969). As Professor Goode has stated, Man'ssomatic responses are often influenced more by what he thinksthan by biological and chemical imperatives; in fact, it canhappen that what he thinks actually becomes his biological andchemical imperative (1969, p. 20). In addition to its effects on sexual inhibition and restraints(the extent and consequences of which will be examined later),marihuana is also reported to intensity aesthetic experiences andto enhance sensual activity. As one observer has noted, it isperhaps the principal effect of marihuana to take one moreintensely into whatever experience - ." (Trocchi, 1967:108). One observer points out, however, that most of the users ofmarihuana in this country are youths between the ages of 14 and25 and that "this age span needs no aphrodisiac to stimulateeither interest or capacity to perform" (Bloomquist, 1968:183). It is this fact (which probably explains why substantialproportions of marihuana users characterize their sexualexperiences under the influence of the drug as particularlyintense, prolonged, sensuous and pleasurable (Johnson, 1968;Goode, 1969; Brenner, Coles and Meagher, 1970; Hochman and Brill,1971; Tart, 1971; Abelson, et al., 1972). In one study of marihuana users conducted by a psychologist,65% reported a heightened sense of touch, 55% stated that"touch takes on new qualities," and 56% replied that"sexual orgasm was very often or usually more exciting thanwhen "straight"' (Tart, 1971). Of the approximately 500marihuana users surveyed by Goode, 68% (74% of the men and 62% ofthe women) reported that marihuana "Generally acted as apleasure enhancer (and) usually increased their sexualenjoyment" (Goode, in press, pp. 8-9). In still another study of marihuana users, both occasional andchronic, "increased sexual pleasure" was the secondmost common response, by the chronic users and the eighth mostcommonly reported effect by the occasional users; 83% of theformer and 50% of the latter reported that increased sexualpleasure was often or always experienced after smokingmarihuana.' Interesting too, was the finding that 85% of thechronic users and 78% of the occasional users reported neverexperiencing "decreased sexual pleasure" following useof the drug (Hochman and Brill, 1971:7). In the Commission's National Survey, respondents were asked toindicate whether or not they believed that marihuana increasessexual pleasure. Of those adults admitting they had triedmarihuana at least once (15%), 52% thought that the drug doesincrease sexual pleasure. Both adults and youth in general,however, seem to be less certain of this effect. Only aboutone-fourth of all respondents (24% of adults and 26% of youth)indicated agreement with the statement while slightly tinderone-half of those surveyed (48% of the adults and 49% of theyouth) expressed uncertainty about marihuana's ability toincrease sexual pleasure (Ableson, et al., 1972: 25-33). 3 The students were also asked to assess the degree ofimportance attached to a number of possible motivations for usingmarihuana. As might be expected from the findings regardingmarihuana and sexual enjoyment, significantly more of the usersthan the nonusers attached at least some degree of importance tomarihuana's perceived ability to enhance sexual experiences. Tothe item: "for better sexual experiences," 12% of thenon-users, 40% of the occasional users and 70% of the chronicusers felt that it was of some importance or "very"important in motivating use of the drug (Hochman and Brill,1971). The research bearing on the effects of marihuana on sexualpleasure suggests that marihuana is not usually perceived by thegeneral public to increase sexual enjoyment, that users aresignificantly more likely to believe that marihuana has thiseffect than are non-users, that those who expect to receiveincreased sexual pleasure are more likely to experience it thanthose who do not, and that frequent or regular users aresignificantly more likely to have actually experienced thiseffect than are those who use the drug less frequently. THE EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA ON OVERT SEXUAL BEHAVIOR As noted at the beginning of this discussion, society ingeneral and policy makers in particular are primarily concernedabout the extent to which and the conditions tinder whichmarihuana is likely to generate or increase, the likelihood ofsexually aberrant or aggressive behavior. Marihuana has alreadybeen shown to increase psychosexual stimulation in substantialproportions of users and to serve as a relaxer of inhibitions andrestraints. The questions as yet unresolved, however, relate to(a) the importance of sexual arousal in generating sexualactivity-particularly deviant sexual acts, and (b) the extent towhich inhibitions and restraints, which normally serve to protectthe individual and society from sexual excess and abuse, arelowered by marihuana to the point of being inoperative. The available evidence suggests that (a) although marihuanausers are more sexually active and sexually permissive than arenonusers, marihuana does not generally stimulate sexual activity,appreciably alter established patterns of sexual behavior orserve as a catalyst to sexual promiscuity; (b) the marihuana useris rarely sexually aggressive; and (c) persons arrested formarihuana law violations generally do not have previous orsubsequent criminal records for the commission of sexual offenses(Walton, 1938; Brown, 1961; White House Conference on NarcoticDrug Abuse, 1962; Blunt et al., 1969; Bremner, Coles and Meagher,1970; Goode, 1972; Goode, in press). Before summarizing the research forming, the basis of theseassertions, however, it should be noted that there, are severalcontradictory research findings with respect to (a) above. In onerecent study, for example, two Philadelphia physiciansinvestigating the effects of marihuana on adolescents and youngadults reported that the drug was directly responsible for sexualpromiscuity in 13 of their female patients. In the words of theseclinicians: This group is singled out because of the unusual degree ofsexual promiscuity, which ranged from sexual relations withseveral individuals of both sexes, and, sometimes, individuals ofboth sexes on the same evening. In histories of all of theseindividuals, we were struck by the loss of sexual inhibitionsafter short periods of marihuana smoking. Seven patients of thisgroup became pregnant (one on several occasions), and fourdeveloped venereal diseases. . . . In no instance was theresexual promiscuity prior to the beginning of marihuana smoking. .. . We take these results to indicate marihuana's effects onloosening the superego controls and altering superego ideals(Kolansky and Moore, 1971: 491). During 1970, another researcher (Goode, in press) distributedquestionnaires on drug use to between 500 and 600 undergraduatesin a large lecture course at a State University. Four measures ofsexual activity were employed: (1) engagement in premaritalintercourse, (2) the respondent's total number of differentsexual partners, (3) the age of first intercourse and (4) theaverage frequency of intercourse during the six months prior tothe study. The three indices of drug use employed were whether ornot the respondent had ever smoked marihuana, the frequency ofmarihuana use during the six months prior to the survey, and thetotal number of drugs or drug types ever used by the respondent.The researcher found that "all measures of sexual activitycorrelated significantly -and powerfully with all measures ofdrug use" (p. 12). More specifically, marihuana users werefar more likely to have engaged in premarital intercourse (72%)than were non-users (34%) ; the greater the frequency ofmarihuana use and the greater the number of drugs ever tried, theearlier was the first intercourse, the greater was the frequencyof intercourse and the greater was the number of sexual partners. As the researcher suggests, one might be tempted to concludefrom these findings that marihuana, as well as other drugs,causes early sex, frequent sex and sex with a number of differentpartners were it not for the fact that similar findings point toa relationship in the opposite direction. That is, not only weremarihuana users and drug experimenters more likely to experiencesex early in their lives, but "it is also the sexuallyprecocious who are more likely to use drugs, includingmarihuana" (p. 14). Of all respondents reporting intercourseby age 16, for example, 7% stated that they had never tried anyillegal drug, but total absence of illicit drug use was found in47% of the virgins (p. 14). Professor Goode concludes that "using marihuana or otherillegal drugs no more 'causes' sexual behavior than sexualbehavior 'causes' drug use" (p. 14). Rather, he suggests, Both sexual permissiveness and marihuana use as well as, tosome extent, experimentation with certain other illegal drugs-areindicators of the young person's involvement in and with asubculture which is tolerant toward a wide range ofnontraditional values and activities . . . Quite clearly,marihuana use grows out of a specific life style, which is, inturn, partly dependent on specific sociocultural backgroundfactors and permissive sexual behavior (branded as"promiscuous" by those who disapprove of it) is a partof this life style (pp. 14, 16). Similar to Goode's findings are those obtained from a mailsurvey of 1400 undergraduate students at UCLA (Hochman and Brill,1971). The data show that marihuana users have their first sexualexperience earlier than do non-users (50% of the users and 30% ofthe non-users had their first experience before age 18) ; havemore sexual experience than non-users; have a greater number ofsexual partners than do nonusers (twice as many users asnon-users had five or more sexual partners) ; and have moreliberal attitudes toward sex than do non-users. One of the questions asked of the students was: "In yourexperience or opinion, do you think that marihuana usage over along period results in sexual promiscuity?" Over half of thenon-users (54%) and almost three-fourths (73%) of the usersbelieved this happened rarely or not at all while 12% of thenonusers, 3% of the occasional users and 2% of the chronic usersbelieved that extended use of marihuana frequently leads tosexual promiscuity. Although the users more often suffered from venereal diseasethan did the nonusers (7% vs. 2%), there were no differencesbetween the groups in the average frequency of sexualintercourse, the number of concurrent sexual partners, the numberof pregnancies, miscarriages and illegitimacies, or the incidenceof homosexuality. A more middle-of-the-road position regarding the associationbetween use of marihuana and sexual promiscuity was revealed in aCommission sponsored mail survey of 781 judges, probationofficers and court clinicians (InTech, 1971). In an effort todevelop a profile of the regular marihuana. user, respondentswere asked: "In light of your professional experience, doyou, think all, most, some or just a, few of the people whoregularly use marihuana are sexually promiscuous?" Tabulation of the responses revealed, among all three groups,considerable uncertainty and ambivalence as manifested in thefindings that 23% of the total sample either did not answer thequestion or stated that they did not know, and that three-fifthsof those who responded (70%) would answer no more categoricallythan to say that only some" could be characterized in thismanner. The percentages of each of the three groups ofrespondents stating that all or most, some and few or none of theregular marihuana users are sexually promiscuous are shown inTable 4. The Commission has found several studies dating from 1939which support the assertions that the marihuana user is rarelysexually aggressive and that he rarely has a criminal record forthe commission of sexual offenses. A survey of the criminal records of 379 Greek offenders eithersentenced or arrested for the public use of hashish between 1919and 1950 (Gardikas, 1950) revealed no link between the use ofhashish and the commission of sexual offenses. Lambo (1965) compiled a list of crimes which occurred during arecent two-year period in three West African countries. Of the472 "offences against women" committed during theperiod of study, 26% were claimed to have been committed by usersof cannabis. In a, study conducted by the Kinsey Institute for SexResearch, 1500 incarcerated sex offenders were interviewed abouttheir sexual offenses. The researchers found that in markedcontrast to the role of alcohol in the commission of theiroffenses, particularly aggressive sex crimes, marihuana was avery insignificant factor. While the presence of alcohol wasreported in relation to 67% of all sexually aggressive actsagainst children and 39% of such aggressive acts against adultwomen, marihuana was mentioned in only eight sexual offenses outof a total of 2,022 such offenses committed by the respondents(Gebbard, Gagnon, Pomeroy and Christenson, 1967: 761-819). Two recent systematic studies of rape cases recorded by thepolice in Philadelphia (Amir, 1971) and Denver (MacDonald, 1971)gave no indication that marihuana was specifically linked tothese offenses. It should be noted, however, that the involvementof marihuana in these cases, unlike the involvement of alcohol,was not specifically explored. Table 4--JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURT CLINICIANSWHO BELIEVE THAT REGULAR MARIHUANA USERS ARE SEXUALLY PROMISCUOUS (Figures in Percentages) All or Some Few or most none Judges (N =408) 23.8 58.3 17.9 Probation Officers (N=87) 21.9 58.6 19.5 Clinicians (N = 106) 11.3 65.1 23.6 Total (N=701) 21.3 59.6 19.1 In two Commission-sponsored studies of the relationshipbetween marihuana and crime, no evidence was found to suggestthat marihuana is a significant factor in or contributor to thecommission of sexual offenses. A study of 1,776 youthfuloffenders (16 to 21 years of age) arrested for marihuana lawviolations in five New York counties between 1965 and 1969revealed that none of the offenders had either a previous orsubsequent criminal record for the commission of sexual offenses(Weitzner, et. al., 1971). In another study sponsored by the Commission, interviews with559 male residents (16 to 34 years of age) of West Philadelphia,revealed that six respondents, or about one in 100, admitted tohaving committed the offense of "forcing sexualintercourse," three having reportedly committed it more thanonce but none having been apprehended for these offenses (Goode,1972; 29a). In an effort to assess the role of marihuana in theseoffenses, respondents were asked whether or not they had used thedrug within the 24 hours preceding the commission of both theirfirst and most recent offenses. In contrast to alcohol, which wasreported to have been consumed within 24 hours prior to one-thirdof the first and most recent offenses of forcing sexualintercourse (two out of six and one out of three, respectively),none of the offenders reported smoking marihuana within 24 hoursof either the first or most recent time they committed thisoffense (Goode, 1972: 29a). Research findings which are available lend little support tothe thesis that marihuana either causes or is a significantfactor in the heightening of sexual aggression or the commissionof sexual offenses. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-20IA031-000655-B040-253http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1l.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113318 text/html 91560HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:33:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:07 GMTContent-length: 91342 Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime Much that has been said with respect to aggressive behaviorand violent crime also applies to the more general propositionthat marihuana causes or leads to (non-violent) crime anddelinquency. The popular and professional literature abounds withclaims and counter-claims. Public and professional opinionsurveys demonstrate a widespread belief in the existence of amarihuana-crime relationship but also reveal considerableuncertainty about the existence of such a relationship. The empirical evidence is somewhat more consistent. Laboratorystudies provide no evidence that marihuana produces effects whichcan be interpreted as criminogenic. Although some studies ofoffender populations purport to demonstrate a causal relationshipbetween marihuana and crime, they reveal, at the most, asignificant statistical association. Closer examination of thesedata or more sophisticated analysis, however, generally shows thepurported relationship to be spurious. The original relationshipis usually found to derive not from the chemical effects of thedrug but from the operation of social and cultural variablesunrelated to either the drug or its use. In the following pages the available evidence bearing on therelationship between marihuana. and crime will be reviewed in aneffort to determine whether marihuana itself or the use of thedrug plays a significant precipitating or contributory role inthe commission of criminal or delinquent acts. PUBLIC AND PROFESSIONAL OPINION The formulation and expression of strong opinions about therelationship of marihuana to criminal and delinquent behaviorhave persisted despite the inherent complexities of the issue,the relative absence of conclusive empirical evidence and thegeneral lack of knowledge and understanding about the effects ofthe drug. For the most part, however, neither public norprofessional opinion about marihuana and its impact on publicsafety has been explored in any systematic fashion. As aconsequence, public policy with respect to the drug has beenshaped by the most vociferous advocates of one position oranother at any given time. Probably the first official body to explore prevailing opinionabout the relationship between marihuana use and crime was theIndian Hemp Drugs Commission of 1893-1894. The Commission spentover a year in making field trips to 30 cities, in receivingevidence from almost 1,200 expert witnesses (335 of whom weremedical practitioners) and in reviewing judicial proceedings andthe case files from India's mental hospitals. The Commission'sReport, reprinted in 1969, contains the following informationgathered with respect to the relationship of marihuana use tocrime. First, the Commission found that the majority of hemp drugconsumers were moderate rather than excessive users, and that thedrug users were rarely regarded as offensive or potentiallydangerous by their neighbors (a few objected to the smell of thesmoke or the example set by the users for the neighborhoodchildren). With respect to the drug's possible long-term or chroniccriminogenic effects (producing "bad characters"), theCommission reported that two thirds of the witnesses did notbelieve that marihuana would produce, over time, a largeproportion of "bad characters" among the moderateusers. A majority felt that even excessive use was unrelated tothe production of "bad characters." When the possiblerelationship was framed more precisely in terms of cause-effectrather than statistical association, a ratio of 8 to 1 of thewitnesses held that moderate consumption of these drugs had noconnection with crime and a ratio of 4 to 1 denied a causalconnection between excessive consumption and being a "badcharacter." With respect to the more acute effects of hemp drugs, theCommission set out to determine whether criminals use the drug tofortify their courage prior to the commission of their crimes,whether the drugs were used by criminals "to stupefy theirvictims," and whether the drugs incited the user to commitunpremeditated crimes. The Commission's conclusion regarding thefirst question was that "criminals like any other consumersof these drugs go to them for that assistance when they feel theyrequire it" (p. 256). To the second question, the Commission responded that althoughsome persons had alleged the commission of "thefts ofornaments from children stupefied by sweet meats" containingmarihuana, the fact of other readily available, more effectiveand more disabling drugs, considerably more conducive tosurreptitious administration, cast doubt on the use of hemp drugsby criminals for this purpose. To the third question, the Commission said that the majorityof witnesses saw no connection between either the moderate orexcessive use of hemp drugs and the commission of unpremeditatedcrimes, including crimes of violence. The Commission thereforeconcluded that "for all practical purposes it may be laiddown that there is little or no connection between the use ofhemp drugs and crime," (p. 264). The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) also interviewed lawenforcement officers (federal, state and local police) about thepurported link between marihuana and crime. The Committeereported that: In most instances [the police officers] unhesitatinglystated that there is no proof that major crimes are associatedwith the practice of smoking marihuana. They did state that manymarihuana smokers are guilty of petty crimes, but that thecriminal career usually existed prior to the time the individualsmoked his first marihuana cigarette (Schoenfeld, 1944:14-15). Reference has already been made to the results of a small,unpublished survey of the opinions of police officers about therelationship of marihuana to aggression (Schofield, 1968), All ofthe respondents reported observing a variety of conduct exhibitedby users under the influence of marihuana and emphasized that anindividual's reaction to the drug depends on his particularpersonality and, in some instances, the strength of the dose.Some, respondents observed a recent shift in the type ofindividual or personality prone to using marihuana. In response to a question regarding the use of marihuana priorto engaging in property crimes, 10 out of the 16 officersinterviewed believed that this often occurred. Seven citedspecific examples of offenders who reported using marihuanabefore committing their offenses to bolster their courage andsharpen their senses; the views of three rested on hearsayevidence; and the remaining six officers responded that they didnot believe this was a common practice and that they had neverpersonally observed such examples. In the Commission-sponsored National Survey of arepresentative sample of more than 3,000 American youth andadults (Abelson, et al., 1972), respondents were asked toindicate their agreement or disagreement with the statement that"many crimes are committed by persons who show that 56% ofthe adults and 41% of the youth agree with the statement. Theextent of agreement, however, varies significantly according toage, education, geographic location and the marihuana-usingexperience of the respondent. Those who are early adolescents(12-13 years), over 25 years of age, have not completed highschool, live in the South or North Central regions of the countryand have no experience with marihuana are, significantly morelikely to agree with the statement than are those who are between14 and 25 years of age, are at least high school graduates, livein the Northeast or West and have had experience with marihuana.Table 5 below, shows the percentage of respondents agreeing tothe statement according to age, education, geographic locationand experience with marihuana. The survey also showed the existence of considerableuncertainty with respect to the proposition that many crimes arecommitted by persons under the influence of marihuana; 25%, ofthe youth and 17% of the adults were either unsure of itsrelative truth or failed to respond to the question (p. 69).Adults were considerably more certain, however, about therelationship between alcohol and crime (youth were not asked thequestion) ; 7% were either unsure or did not respond and 69%agreed with the statement that many crimes are committed bypersons who were under the influence of liquor (pp. 28, 31). Table 5.-PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS WHO AGREE THAT"MANY CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BY PERSONS WHO ARE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA" Percent agreeing Youth Adults Total respondents agreeing 40.7 56.0 Age (years): 12-13 54.5 14-15 35.2 16-17 31.8 18-25 35.1 26-34 48.5 35-49 59.0 50 and over 68.8 Education: Less than high school graduate 70.9 Eighth grade or less 49.5 Ninth-twelfth grades 31.8 High school graduate 56.8 College or more 39.2 Geographic location: Northeast 34.1 46.9 North-Central 42.1 54.9 South 48.5 66.8 West 34.0 52.3 Marihuana experience (ever used): Yes 8.9 24.1 No 46.1 62.0 The surveys of prosecuting attorneys, judges, probationofficers and court clinicians also revealed considerable doubtabout the existence of a causal connection between marihuana andcrime. Although the survey of prosecuting attorneys conducted bythe Commission staff asked only about aggressive behavior andviolent crime, the data showed that 52% of the respondents eitherdenied or were uncertain that marihuana causes such behavior. The Commission-sponsored survey of nationally representativesamples of judges, probation officers and court clinicians,however, posed several questions bearing on the more generalproposition that marihuana is related to crime and delinquency(InTech, 1971). Respondents were first asked whether or not theyhad witnessed an increase in the incidence of drug ordrug-related offenses in their caseloads during the past fiveyears. The large majority of all three groups (86%) respondedaffirmatively and reported that marihuana was the type of drugmost often seen in this connection (83%). However, about twothirds of the respondents reported that marihuana offenders(those arrested for using or selling marihuana) constituted lessthan 20% of their caseloads; 56% of the respondents reported thatthose arrested for non-drug offenses but incidentally found topossess marihuana comprised less than 10% of their caseloads; and73% of the respondents reported that less than 10% of theircaseloads attributed their offenses to marihuana (pp. 31, 34). To determine better the nature and direction of a possiblerelationship between marihuana use and crime, respondents wereasked to indicate which -of four statements most reflected theirown professional experience. On the whole, the respondents weremore likely to postulate a statistical association (36.6%) ratherthan a direct cause-effect relationship (26.9%) ; 18% of therespondents thought that involvement in a criminal or delinquentsubculture caused or led to the use of marihuana (in contrast tothe. more prevalent belief that marihuana use, leads to crime)and 9.1% believed there was absolutely no relationship betweenmarihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior. Theextent to which uncertainty prevails even among these practicingprofessionals is reflected in the 9.3% no response category (p.39). Table 6 shows the responses of the judges, probation officersand clinicians to each of the four propositions (InTech, 1971:Appendix 1, Section II, Question 3). The data show that judgesare significantly more, likely to believe that marihuana causesor leads to criminal and delinquent behavior and significantlyless likely to believe in either a statistical relationship or inno relationship whatsoever than either the probation officers orthe clinicians. The researchers also attempted to determine these,professionals' opinions about crimes actually committed bymarihuana users. More specifically, did the respondents thinkthat most non-drug crimes committed by persons who were knownusers of marihuana occurred when the individuals were, actuallyunder the influence of the drug or when they attempted to obtainit? Again, the responses indicated considerable uncertainty inall three, groups. One-third of the, respondents were eitherunsure or did not respond to either proposition. About twice thenumber of respondents thought that the crimes occurred while inthe attempt to obtain marihuana (31.0%) rather than while tinderthe influence of marihuana (16.8%). Table 7 shows the percentage of respondents indicating theprobable truth and probable nontruth of the two propositions(Appendix 1, Section 11, Questions 2a, 2b). The data show that half of the respondents denied thecommission of non-drug crimes while under the influence of thedrug, suggesting that marihuana itself does not have the capacityto produce criminogenic effects. About one-third of therespondents, however, believed that these crimes occur when theuser is attempting to obtain the drug, suggesting an addictionmodel; that is, that users commit crimes to support a"habit."` This interpretation is corroborated by the significantfindings that 65% of the respondents either did not know (23%) orthought that a few (21%), some (17%) or most (4.4%) of theregular users were physically addicted to marihuana Table 7.-RESPONSES OF JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURTCLINICIANS TO STATEMENTS ABOUT NON-DRUG CRIMES COMMITTED BYMARIHUANA USERS (Figures in Percentages) Most non-drug crimes committed by persons who use marihuanaoccur when the offender is- Under the in- Attempting to fluence of mari- obtain marihuana huana Prob- Prob- Prob- Prob- ably ably ably ably true not true true not true Judges 17.1 % 46.8 % 34.2 %, 30.4 %, Probation officers 21.8 47.3 30.0 37.3 Court clinicians.. .. . 10.4 65.2 16.5 60.0 Total 16.8 49.6 31.0 35.7 The National Survey of the general public (Abelson, et al.,1972) likewise showed that large segments of the population (65%of all adults and 48% of all youth) regard marihuana asaddictive. Even among the users, 40% of adults and 21% of theyouth believed marihuana to be addicting (p. 22) These findings, taken together, suggest that much of theconfusion regarding the relationship between marihuana and crimemay be predicated on public and professional misconceptions aboutthe drug's addiction potential. The Commission's National Surveyshowed that, among those persons who believed marihuana to beaddicting, 67.5% of the adults and 52.3% of the youth believedthat many crimes are committed by persons under the influence ofmarihuana. Among those who said that marihuana was not addicting,34.6% of the adults and 30.2% of the youth agreed that manycrimes are committed by marihuana users. Table 8 below shows thisrelationship (unpublished data, Abelson, et al., 1972). Table 8.-RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERSONS WHO THINK MARIHUANA ISADDICTIVE AND THOSE WHO THINK THAT MANY CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BYPERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA (Figures in Percentages) Persons who think marihuana is Addictive Not addictive Youth Adults Youth Adults Many crimes are committed under the influence of marihuana: Mostly agree.. . . 52.3 67.5 30.2 34.6 Mostly disagree 20.8 14.5 39.9 41.1 Other 2.3 3.1 4.4 2.0 Not sure/no answer 24.6 14.9 25.6 27.3 Table 6.-THE OPINIONS OF JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURTCLINICIANS REGARDING THE NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEENMARIHUANA USE AND OTHER CRIMINAL OR DELINQUENT BEHAVIOR (Figures in Percentages) Judges Probation Court Total (N=556) officers clinicians (N=781) (N=110) (N 1.15) Use of marihuana causes or leads to antisocial behavior in thesense that it leads one to commit other criminal or delinquent acts33.8 18.2 1.7 26.9 Involvement in a criminal or delinquent subculture causes orleads to the use of marihuana 18.3 20.0 14.8 18.1 There is a statistical relationship or association betweenmarihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior, but it is not a cause-effect relationship 31.1 40.0 60.0 36.6 There is absolutely no relationship between marihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior 6.7 14.5 15.7 9.1 (X2=76.895, p<.001). To summarize, these opinion surveys demonstrate that there isconsiderable uncertainty about the existence and the nature of arelationship between marihuana use and crime and that thisuncertainty exists among youth and adults, practicingprofessionals in the criminal justice community and the laypublic, marihuana users and non-users alike. The data suggest,however, that the persistent and fairly widespread belief in acause-effect relationship between marihuana and crime may, atleast in part, be predicated on the erroneous but equallyprevalent belief that marihuana is physically addicting. To theextent that the general public operates under this misconception,they may be more likely to believe that, like the heroin user,the marihuana "addict" commits crime in order tosupport his "habit" and obtain the drug. The logical extension of this belief is that marihuana users,like heroin user-,, will be considered more likely to committheir crimes in the attempt to obtain the drug than while underthe influence of the drug. Stated another way, persons whobelieve that marihuana is physically addicting would be morelikely to base the purported causal relationship betweenmarihuana and crime not on the chemical effects of the drug perse but on the user's physical need for the drug. As such, theywould be more likely to postulate that most crimes committed byusers occur not when the offender is under the influence of thedrug (which, like heroin, makes one passive, lethargic andstuporous) but when the, "addict" needs a"fix" and is desperately trying to obtain the drug orthe money to buy it. This interpretation is, indeed, supported bythe findings of the Commission-sponsored survey of judges,probation officers and court clinicians and is suggested from thefindings of the National Survey. STUDIES OF OFFENDER POPULATIONS Over the years, numerous studies have relied on offenderpopulations and zero-order statistical correlations to"demonstrate" a cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana and crime. This method of " proof byenumeration" has become probably the most common approach to"demonstrating" the purported causal relationship. As Goode (1970) has noted, however: Not even marihuana's staunchest supporter would argue thata crime has never been committed by a user while high. Yet,incredible as it seems, the burden of many proofs of marihuana'scriminal effects has been precisely the simple fact that it ispossible to locate crimes committed in conjunction with smokingmarihuana. "Proof" by enumeration is no proof at all.By examining an enumeration of crimes which were committed underthe influence of marihuana (even were this definitely known), itis impossible to determine the " cause" of the eventtaking place, in this ease the crime-or, indeed, that marihuanahas anything whatsoever to do with its commission (pp.215-216). Even if these studies are taken at face value, their findingsdo not generally support the thesis of a positive and significantstatistical association. In most instances, marihuana has notbeen found to predispose one to commit crime or to serve as aninitiator of criminal careers; nor does the use of the drugappear to alter the progression to other non-drug offenses amongthose without prior criminal records or histories ofpsychological maladjustment. Predictably, however the data do indicate a greater rate, of progression amongmarihuana-using offenders (both those arrested specifically fortheir marihuana offenses and those charged with non-drug crimes)than that which might be expected from similar, non-usingoffenders or from the general population. Because these studies do provide at least interesting insightsinto the possible nature and direction of a relationship betweenmarihuana and crime or, conversely, a non-existent relationship,several of these studies are summarized below. Bromberg, 1939. Between 1932 and 1937, Bromberg and his teamof researchers reviewed all cases eventuating in conviction byNew York's Courts of General and Special Sessions; conductedinterviews with about 17,000 drug and non-drug-using offenders;and analyzed the statistics from both courts. The report of thiswork, published in 1939, yielded the following information. Among the 16,854 offenders convicted of felonies in the courtof General Sessions, 67 (.005%) were identified as marihuanausers. Of these 67, 46 (697c) had been convicted on charges ofpossession with intent to sell; 16 (24%) were charged withburglary, robbery and grand larceny; two persons were chargedwith assault and one each was charged with petty larceny, forgeryand murder. The researcher points out that in only nine cases did the,offenders' criminal records commence with a drug charge,"indicating that there was not in those cases a closerelationship between drugs and the beginning of a career incrime" (p. 10). In a 25% random sample of offenders convicted in the Court ofSpecial Sessions (misdemeanors), 135 or 9% were charged withpossession of marihuana. Of these 135, 93 or 69% had no previousrecord, 8 had been charged previously with drug violations only,5 had mixed drug and non-drug charges and 29 (21%) had onlynon-drug arrests. In summary, the researcher stated that: As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions inthe Court of General Sessions (felonies) . . . , it can be said that drugs generally do not initiatecriminal careers. Similarly, in the Court of Special Sessions(misdemeanors), only 8% of the offenders had previous charges ofusing drugs and 3.7% had previous charges of drugs and otherpetty crimes. In the vast majority of cases . . . then, theearlier use of marihuana apparently did not predispose to crime,even that of using other drugs. . . . The expectancy of majorcrimes following the use of cannabis in New York County is small,according to these experiences (p. 10). Bromberg and Rodgers, 1946. A study of 8,280 naval and marineprisoners at the U.S. Naval Prison in Portsmouth, New Hampshire(1946) revealed that 40 or .0048% of the offenders were marihuanausers. The offenses they committed while in the service were:AWOL or AOL (32, or 80%), assault or striking an officer (3),theft (3), and narcotics violations (2). Their previous civilianoffenses included three each of assault, theft and trafficviolations and one each of gambling and narcotics violations,drunkenness, draft dodging, and violation of the Mann Act.Twenty-eight or 70% of the marihuana users had no previouscivilian criminal records (p. 825). The preponderance of psychiatric disorders in the user groupover the non-users (40 randomly selected non-using navalprisoners) led the researchers to conclude that "marihuanausage is but an aspect of some type of mental disorder orpersonality abnormality" (p. 826), a conclusion also reachedby Charen. and Perchan 1946), Ausubel (1958), Andrade (1964),Lambo (1965), Bloomquist (1968), Simmons (1969) and Grinspoon(1971). Gardikas, 1950. The researcher reviewed the criminal recordsof "379 individuals either sentenced or arrested flagrantedelicto for using hashish publically" between 1919 and 1950.More than half (55%) of these individuals were already known tolaw enforcement authorities prior to their use of hashish and anadditional 14% had no subsequent difficulties with the law exceptfor hashish and vagrancy offenses. The researcher notes, however,that the remaining 117 offenders (31% of the original sample)went on to become " confirmed criminals after their firsthashish arrest." Dividing this last subgroup of 117 into three approximatelyequal parts, Gardikas. then described the subsequent criminalityof each group. The first group was given 332 more sentencesfollowing their first sentence for using hashish; 142 (43%) wereadditional hashish offenses, a similar number were for violentcrimes or crimes involving weapons, 18 were for"insults" and two were for "high treason." In a critique of the Gardikas study, Kaplan were accumulated;mostly for hashish offenses (42%) and thefts (20%). Althoughthere were a small number of violent crimes subsequentlycommitted by this group of offenders, most sentences subsequentto their initial hashish sentence were for such relatively minoroffenses as illegal gambling, living on immoral earnings,"false statements of identity," and "fishing withdynamite,." The, third group discussed by Gardikas, comprised of those"who after having, made use of hashish becamecriminals," accumulated 332 additional sentences. Hashishoffenses were again responsible for 30% of these offenses andmost of the rest were for theft. Gardikas notes with respect tothis group that although not all of these individuals werecriminal before they used hashish, their use of hashish"turned [them] into habitual hashish smokers and habitualcriminals with a, strong propensity leading toward crime ofdishonesty and particularly theft and f rand. At least one-halfof them surely and undoubtedly are even to be characterized asdangerous idle, vagrants" (p. 203). In a critique of the Gardikas study, Kaplan (1971) has statedthat: The basic problem underlying Gardikas' paper is hisconclusion that hashish use caused his subsample of 117 arreststo become criminals. This assumes, first. that they had notengaged in crime before beginning to use hashish and, second,that it was the hashish use and not something else that turned-them toward crime. Neither of these assumptions is justified bythe data. . . . As for the first assumption . . . all we know isthat they had not been arrested or convicted for other crimesfirst. . . . The second assumption . . . is also impossible tojustify. Even if the members of the subsample had not previouslybeen criminals, it may very well be difficult to distinguish thecriminogenic effects of hashish from those of conviction andsentence to Greek jails. Even aside from any criminogenic effect of the Greek penalsystem, the figures may indicate only that once somebody has beenarrested for hashish-and probably served a term in jail aswell-lie is more likely to be picked up by the police whenfurther crimes are committed. Finally, the years from 1919through 1950 . . . were a period of enormous social dislocation[in Greece] . . . . It is obviously an almost impossible task tosort out how much of the subsequent criminality in the subsamplewas due to hashish use and how much to the social chaos thatprevailed in Greece (pp. 103-104). Andrade, 1964. The researcher retrospectively reviewed theexaminations of 120 patients sentenced between 1951 and 1960 by aBrazilian Court to Heitor Carrilho insane asylum. Sentencing inall cases was based on the allegation that cannabis was directlyresponsible for their crimes. The researcher concluded that: In the 120 patients examined, we did; not find anycriminogenic action that could be attributed to cannabis; ... Inthe majority of cases examined (83), we found patients withpsychotic disturbances. . . . In the cases in which we did notfind mental disturbances, a total of 37, the crime attributed tothem was that of carrying or selling marihuana.... In the studyof the dynamics of the crimes of all the others, we saw thatthere was a link between the crime and the illness, independentof the use of cannabis (Tinklenberg, 1971: 12). Lambo, 1965. The researcher compiled lists of crimes occurringover a, two year period in three West African nations andrecorded the number of offenders perpetrating these crimes. Hefound that approximately one-fourth of the offenders had previousconvictions. Forty-seven percent of the 863 offenders convictedfor false pretenses, 61% of the 2,880 convicted burglars and 54%of those convicted on charges of "culpable driving"were said to have histories of cannabis use. Many of these users,however, were also shown to have long histories of psychologicalmaladjustment (p. 10). The researcher suggests that "the useof cannabis enhances suggestibility in certain individuals, andthis may be a factor in the commission of crime, by these chronicabusers" (p. 11). THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MARIHUANA AND CRIME: AN EXPLANATION As indicated at the outset, enumerative studies of the crimescommitted by apprehended marihuana, law violators and non-drugoffenders identified as marihuana users cannot, by their verynature, either prove or disprove a causal connection between theuse of cannabis and the commission of crimes; nor can their ratesof crime be projected onto the larger universe of marihuanausers. As several researchers have pointed out, those individualsapprehended for marihuana offenses represent only a. tinyfraction of all marihuana users (Kaplan, 1971; Weitzner, et al.,1971) ; likewise, those in other offender samples who areidentified as marihuana users represent only a small proportionof the offender populations of which they are a part (Bromberg,1939; Bromberg and Rodgers, 1946; Kaplan, 1971). Although the data do indicate that some individuals identifiedas marihuana users are subsequently involved in crime, bothdrug-specific and non-drug offenses, they do not provide supportfor the thesis that cannabis was the determining factor in theircriminal careers. Likewise, they fail to indicate that the rateof progression to other crimes manifested by these offenders wassignificantly greater than that which might be expected in eithera non-using criminal subgroup or the general population. As Tinklenberg (1971) has stated: The important issue is that unless one has systematic dataon the proclivities toward crime of the various subgroups ofmarihuana users, one cannot answer the crucial question ofwhether the use of marihuana alters the actual rate of crimeamong these various subgroups over the criminality which would beexpected. At this time, it is unknown whether individuals withthese characteristics seek the use of marihuana or whether theuse of marihuana in any way contributes to the development ofthese traits (P. 24). By reading between the lines of these enumerative studies,however, one would be tempted to postulate that individuals withcertain psychological, social and cultural characteristics aremore likely to seek the use of marihuana, than is marihuanalikely to contribute to the development of delinquent or criminalbehavior patterns. The number of researchers pointing to individuals with longhistories of psychological maladjustment or disturbances hasalready been noted. Others have alluded to persons involved,prior to cannabis use, in criminal or delinquent subcultures(Blumer, 1967; Robins, et al., 1970; Kaplan, 1971; Weitzner, etal., 1971). Still others suggest that marihuana use is morelikely to develop among persons living in underprivilegedcommunities or within a social structure that limits achievementand advancement (Asuni, 1964; Blumer, 1967; Goode, 1972). In recent years, considerable evidence has been gathered tosuggest that the use of other drugs and association withdrug-using friends are also likely to enhance the probability ofmarihuana use (Hochman and Brill, 1971; Goode, 1972; Abelson, etal., 1972). Because many of these characteristics are likely' to beassociated with both criminal or delinquent behavior andmarihuana, use, some individuals have mistakenly concluded a.cause-effect relationship rather than a statistical correlation. The studies reviewed in the following pages axe probably themost methodologically adequate assessments of the. purportedrelationship between marihuana and crime undertaken to date. Thedata show that the seemingly significant statistical correlationoften observed between marihuana, use and crime is spurious; itis dependent not on the chemical effects of the drug but upon theoperation of several extra-pharmacological variables which havelittle or nothing to do with the use of marihuana. per se. The first of these studies (Goode, 1970) is based on a sampleof marihuana users. Because it, like the study by Robins and hiscolleagues (1967, 1970) referred to earlier, involves a selectedpopulation, the extent to which its findings can be applied tothe general population remains speculative. The second study presented, a Commission sponsored survey ofyoung male urban dwellers, is probably the most adequateassessment to date of the relationship between marihuana use andcrime. The results are based on a representative sample of thegeneral population of males, 15 to 34 years of age, the selfreports of criminal behavior have been cross-checked withPhiladelphia Police Department files; and numerous statisticalcontrols have been applied to the data. The study thereforeprovides at least tentative answers to the following questions: -Do young, male marihuana users and nonusers in the generalpopulation differ significantly in the nature and extent of theircriminal activities? -Is marihuana use, in and of itself, the principal determinantof any observed differences? -If not, what are the variableswhich explain a statistical correlation between marihuana use andcrime? Goode, 1970. Between February and September of 1967,face-to-face interviews were held with 204 marihuana usersresiding in the New York City Metropolitan Area. The sample,admittedly nonrepresentative, was drawn front membership lists ofdrug-related organizations and also included friends andacquaintances of the researcher. The sample, suspected of differing to some unknown extent froma random sample of marihuana users, can be characterized -asprimarily male (53%), young (median age 22 years), white (89.5%),single (78%), middle class urban dwellers, including students,dropouts, business people, housewives and the unemployed (p.316). All of the respondents, by virtue of their marihuana use,possession or sale, had engaged in law violative behavior, but,only nine marihuana arrests were reported. This finding indicatesthat persons who are arrested for marihuana related activitiesconstitute only a small fraction of total marihuana users. Because of their marihuana-related criminal activity, onewould expect that persons in this sample would have a higherprobability of being arrested than would the "average"person from the general population. To determine if, in fact,this might be the case, the researcher computed the rate ofarrest for his sample and compared it with the national rate ofarrest provided by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for theyear 1965. Despite the fact that the rates are not strictlycomparable (the sample rate is based on arrests ever experienced;the national rate is based on the number of arrests recorded forone year), the similarity is striking. The national rate wasgiven as 3.7 per 100; the sample rate was computed to be 3.9 per100 per year, 4.5 if one adds the marihuana arrests (p. 236). Although the arrest, rates of the users and the generalpopulation were found to be roughly similar, the types of crimescommitted by the users differed significantly from those crimesrecorded for the population as a whole. In contrast to themajority of drunkenness and disorderly conduct charges noted forthe general population, the offenses of the users most oftenresulting in arrest involved participation in politicaldemonstrations (19 out of the 55 arrests). No other singleoffense attracted more, than a few arrests (p. 2335). In addition to examining arrest rates and the types ofoffenses committed, the researcher also investigated therelationship between the amount of marihuana smoked and thecriminal behavior of the user. If it were true that marihuana didproduce a dangerous and criminogenic state in the user, thegreater would be his likelihood of committing crimes and of beingarrested. The data, however, show no relationship; excluding the"political crimes" (which were most common among theleast frequent smokers and least common among the most frequentsmokers), the "serious" crimes committed by 15respondents (non-marihuana narcotics possession, disorderlyconduct, drunkenness, burglary, theft, assault, auto theft,serving liquor to a minor and larceny) resulted in a total of 21arrests. The heavy smokers did not commit these crimessignificantly more frequently than did the light smokers. Similarly, there was no relationship found between thefrequency of use and the likelihood of arrest; three of the dailysmokers, three of those who smoked three to six times per week,three who smoked one or two times weekly, one who smoked fourtimes monthly and three who were less than monthly smokers werearrested for committing these "serious" crimes (pp.237-38). The researcher concludes that: Although these numbers are extremely small, the fact oftheir perfect dispersal is perhaps indicative of the lack of acrime-inducing effect of the drug. It is, at any rate, aproposition which ought to be tested more systematically in thefuture with more complete data. For the moment, there areindications that point to the fact that the marijuana smoker isno more criminal than the rest of the population (p. 238). Goode, 1972. The Commission-sponsored Philadelphia survey setout to resolve these issues. Goode (1972) analyzed the datacollected during August of 1971 from an interview survey of 55915-to-34-year-old residents of West Philadelphia. That part of the report devoted specifically to the analysisof the data is presented in its entirety below. The onlydeletions made were the author' references to previous studiesbearing on the issues addressed, the findings of which have beenpresented earlier in this chapter. Excerpts From MARIJUANA USE AND CRIME* PREFACE *Prepared by Professor Erich Goode for the National Commissionon Marihuana and Drug Abuse, January 15, 1972. The data on whichthis report is based were obtained from a survey conducted by theInstitute of Survey Research of Temple University. All tablesreferred to in Professor Goode's text are found at the end ofthese excerpts. 'The interview schedule was developed andexecuted and the data processed for the Commission by TempleUniversity's Institute for Survey Research, in Philadelphia. The data analyzed in this report were gathered in August 1971by the Institute for Survey Research of Temple University InPhiladelphia; the author of this report did not have a hand inany phase of the data gathering, including constructing theinterview schedule, although he is solely responsible for thedata analysis. The sample consists in toto of males age 15through 34 living in households located in a section of WestPhiladelphia. Each respondent was interviewed; a total samplesize of 559 was collected. (The refusal rate was 10%, which istypical for house-to-house surveys of this type.) The area inwhich the sample was drawn is composed mainly of twoheterogeneous populations: lower-middle and working-class, highschool educated blacks, and college-associated whites-studentsand professionals associated with [Drexel University and] theUniversity of Pennsylvania. About four respondents in ten in thissurvey are black, and just over half are white. (The number ofOrientals and Puerto Ricans or Mexicans is too small to permit ameaningful statistical analysis, so that when race is discussedin this report, only the black-white comparison will be made.)The racial composition is roughly equivalent to the censusfigures for the sample area although no attempt was made, througha weighting of cases, to "correct" any discrepancieswhich might have prevailed in population composition. Moredetailed information is available from the Institute for SurveyResearch. A quarter of the sample (23%) had never smoked marijuana; in17 cases (3%), no information on marijuana use was given by therespondent. Of the marijuana users the question asked aboutfrequency of use during the respondent's most recent year ofuse-about 1 in 10 smoked marijuana daily or more, about 1 in 5smoked approximately once or twice a week, 1 in 4 smoked once ortwice per month, on the average, and about 4 in 10 smokedmarijuana several times a year. (The study also asked how oftenthe respondent smoked marijuana in his first year of use avariable which I have not made use of in this report.) Questionswere also asked concerning the respondent's use of otherdrugs-"stimulants or uppers, such as bennies, speed, ordex," "sedatives or downers, such as sleeping pills,amytal or blues, or nembutal, or yellow jackets,""hallucinatory drugs, such as LSD, mescaline, or STP,"and "hard drugs, such as heroin, morphine, demerol, cocaine,or codeine." In addition, questions on one's friends' druguse-both marijuana and these other drugs--were asked. The commission of various offenses formed another segnient ofthe questionnaire. There were 16 of them, and ranged from thosewhich would not be considered crimes in most instances-such as"disturbing people"-to those which would be consideredfelonies, drawing long prison sentences such :as rape, armedrobbery, and assault. As would be expected], the serious offenseswere committed (or admitted to) by very, very few respondents-andthus, any comparison between users and non-users has to be mademainly on the basis of committing trivial offenses.... III. THE EFFECTS OF MARIJUANA At this point, I will introduce the data from the Philadelphiamarijuana use and crime study, specifically mandated by theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. This survey'sdata will form the bulk of the factual evidence on themarijuana-crime connection in the report which follows. The question of marijuana's relationship to crime andaggressive behavior is obviously closely related to the drug'seffects. One of the most fundamental generalizations inpsychopharmacology to be obtained from thousands of recentresearch efforts is that the same drug does not have standard andinvariant "effects," but that effects are sensitive toa number of extra-pharmacological variables, including thepersonality of the user, the social setting in which drug, usetakes place, the user's past experience with the drug, hisexpectations, and so on. Thus, it is elliptical and somewhatartificial, and incomplete, to speak of any drug's"effects," as if they occurred under any and allconditions, in all users. We should bear this qualification inmind when looking at the relationship between the ingestion of adrug and any subsequent behavior-with the latter supposedly",Caused" by the effects of the drug. Drug effectsvary, and, in addition, even standard effects do notautomatically translate into specific forms of human behavior.Even opposite forms of behavior could follow the same effects,given different individuals taking the drug, different settingsin which the drug is used, different definitions of the drug andits use and so on.... The data collected by the Philadelphia survey on thesubjective effects of marijuana dovetail precisely with those ofearlier studies. The effects agreed to by the users in the sampleare clearly inconsistent with aggressive behavior. This does notmean that marijuana cannot be related to the commission ofcriminal or aggressive acts-but it does suggest that the effectsof marijuana, per se, may have nothing to do with the commissionof crimes, especially violent crimes. Table 1 summarizes theresults from this survey's question on marijuana's effects, whichwas: "I am going to read to you some of the ways usingmarijuana may affect people. For each could you tell me whethermarijuana had this effect on you almost every time, more thanhalf the time, less than half the time, or never or almost never,when using marijuana." The effects asked about were relatedto feelings generally thought of as criminogenic either in apositive or a negative direction. Those that are generallyconsidered to be related to crimes deal with anger andfrustration, or with derangement, or with suggestibility. Thoseinversely related to the commission of crimes and aggressive actsdealt with relaxation and sleepiness. As can be readily seen from Table 1, users overwhelmingly denythat marijuana has effects on them which could be interpreted ascriminogenic or violent in nature. Nearly all respondentsspecifically denied that aggressive feelings came over themduring the marijuana intoxication. When asked whether, under theinfluence of marijuana, they had a feeling of wanting to hurtsomeone, 96% said that this occurred never or almost never. Whenasked whether they had feelings of wanting to do somethingviolent, 95% said never or almost never. Almost nine in 10 (88%)said that they never or almost never felt more angry when high.And almost eight in 10 (78%) said that they never or almost neverfelt frustrated when tinder the influence. Thus, thefrustration-anger-aggressive impulse syndrome seems to be anextremely rare phenomenon associated with the marijuanaintoxication. Likewise, the suggestibility syndrome does notappear to be characteristic, although it seems to be somewhatmore common than aggressive feelings. About six in 10 (or 59%) ofthe respondents said that they had a feeling of "being morewilling to follow other people's suggestions," never oralmost never. And about three-quarters (77%) said that they had a"feeling of being able to do anything," never or almostnever. Those sensations, however, which would be seen asinhibiting criminal and aggressive im pulses and acts weredecidedly more common, Exactly half of the respondents said thatthey felt "a feeling of relaxation" almost all thetime. About a third (31%) said that they felt less angry thanusual almost all the time. About a fifth (22%) felt drowsy andsleepy almost all the time-and another quarter (25%) felt thismore than half the time. These data suggest-but do not demonstrate-that the effects ofmarijuana per se are probably not related in any meaningful orcausal manner to aggressive or criminal acts. They give us aclue, but do not prove, that in and of itself, marijuana use doesnot "cause" the commission of criminal acts. In fact,if we were to look at the subjective effects of marijuanathemselves, they appear to point in exactly the oppositedirection-they would seem to inhibit crime, indeed, activity ofall kinds. The effect of marijuana would be more in the directionof reducing than stimulating aggressive, criminal or violentactivity. Two final qualifications would appear to be in order before Iexplore the marijuana-crime link more systematically and fully.One has to do with the length of time that the marijuanaIntoxication lasts. Two facts bear on this issue. First, eachepisode of use generally produces an intoxication which lastsroughly three or four hours, at the most. Marijuana's effectswear off about three hours or so after the user smokes the drug.Secondly, from previous studies ... as well as the survey whosedata I am analyzing In this report, it is clear that the average,or median, level of marijuana use Is roughly once a week. Thismeans that the typical marijuana user is under the influenceabout three or four hours per week, or roughly 3% or so of hiswaking hours, and under a "normal" state of mind theremaining 97%. Now, it is possible that this tiny segment of timewould influence some users in some significant way, but the factof its briefness of duration ought to be kept in mind whenreasoning about the impact of the drug on the lives of users. Thedaily user comprises roughly one marijuana user out of 10, andthe individual who is high all, or nearly all, of his wakinghours, probably constitutes about I or 2% of all marijuanasmokers. These facts cannot be ignored in our exploration of thecausal connection between the effects of marijuana and criminalactivities. And the last issue I will raise in the marijuana effects topichas to do with the truthfulness of the answers given by users. Aplausible objection to taking the word of users concerning theeffects of the drug on them would be that they areuntrustworthy-that they have a motive for lyIng, for portrayingthe drug and their experiences in a positive light. Actually,what nearly all researchers have found in an interview situationwith drug users is that they very rarely lie; in fact, theirhonesty about themselves and their activities and experiencesappears to be the rule, overwhelmingly. . . . The overall picture that we receive from . . . various studiesis that, like most interview subjects, marijuana users mayoccasionally lie or hide the truth, but their answers will, ingeneral, be truthful. This does not mean that everything they saymust be taken at face value-as with any other group ofinterviewees, anything which the researcher is capable ofchecking independently, and which we have data on, we shouldcorroborate with what we learn in the interview situation. At thesame time, we would be as fallacious in assuming that everythingthat marijuana smoker-, said to be true is suspect as if weaccepted everything they said to be true in all respects. Whatall of this means is that we must reason with caution fromself-reported data, use them whenever we must, and check themwhenever we can. IV. CRIMES UNDER THE INFLUENCE The Philadelphia survey on marijuana use and crime askedseveral questions concerning 16 different offenses. The questionsbegan as follows: "'Many people in every community commitacts which others consider offenses, delinquent acts, andviolations. Here is a list of these acts." The specificquestions dealt with whether the respondent had ever committedeach one, how often, how old lie was when the offense occurred,whether lie was caught by the police, and whether the respondenthad been drinking, or was under the influence of marijuana, 24hours or less before committing the act-as well as whether therespondent thought that using marijuana influenced him to committhe act; these questions were asked about the first as well asthe most recent such of. fense, if they occurred. The offenseswere: hurting someone in a minor way, hurting someone badly,carrying a knife. stealing a car, disturbing people, threateningto hurt someone, taking money, stealing from a store, making anobscene telephone call, forcing sexual intercourse with a woman,breaking into a house or store, damaging property, buying stolenproperty, setting off an alarm, carrying a gun, and using aweapon to steal. From these facts, it might be interesting tofind out what proportion of acts involved some drug use occurringwithin 24 hours-and whether that drug is alcohol or marijuana. Iwill explain after the data are presented what these facts canand cannot tell us. We must not be too hasty in reading too muchinto any given set of data. Table 2 presents summary information from this set ofquestions. I have presented figures for only six offenses:stealing from a store, damaging property, hurting someone in aminor way, breaking into a house or store, stealing a ear, andhurting someone badly. Some of the crimes asked about werecommitted by so few respondents (such as forcing sexualintercourse) that any statistical analysis would be completelymeaningless. Other offenses seem to be unrelated to theaggressive syndrome associated with marijuana use-such as buyingstolen property. The six I have chosen are, in any case,representative. Tile first three are relatively minor, and wouldusually be classified by the law as misdemeanors; the second twoare considerably more serious, and would often be classified asfelonies. Table 2 presents the proportion who drank alcohol, andsmoked marijuana 24 hours or fewer before the crime wascommitted; the figures in the first two columns are for the firsttime the respondent committed the offense, and the second twocolumns are for the most recent time, if it occurred more thanonce. What generalizations may we make front Table 2? First of all, committing these crimes is atypical. Not onethese six offenses was committed by a majority of the sample.Secondly the more serious the offense, the less likely it was tobe committed. Minor offenses were committed at least once bybetween four and five out of every 10 respondents, but majoroffenses had been committed at least once by something like onerespondent in 25. (And two of the offenses not in the table wererarer still; forcing sexual intercourse was admitted to by sixrespondents, or about one in 100, and using a weapon to steal wasreported by only three respondents, or one out of 200.) What about drugs and crime? Compared with not being under theinfluence, drugs tend to be atypical in the commission of crimes.For none of these categories, whether first offense or mostrecent, was being under the influence of either alcohol ormarijuana characteristic of over a quarter of all offenses, andmost are considerably below this. Most crimes here were committedwhen the offender was not under the influence of any drug,marijuana, or alcohol, when lie was in a "normal" stateof mind pharmacologically.* Secondly, in terms of absoluteincidence, alcohol is involved in the commission of crimeconsiderably more often than marijuana. Adding together all ofthe offenses committed 24 hours before each drug was used,alcohol had been used in conjunction with first offenses a totalof 47 times, and marijuana only five times-a ratio of not quiteten to one. For the most recent offenses, alcohol was involved atotal of 66 times, and marihuana 19--a ratio of about three toone. In conjunction with this point, it should be stressed that theclassic, aggressive, violent crimes traditionally andhistorically associated with the marijuana intoxication are very,very rarely committed-by anyone, high or normal, user or non-useralike. Six men in this survey admitted to forcing a woman to haveintercourse with him as a first offense, and three admitted torape more than the first time. In two out of the six first-timecases, the offender said that he had been drinking 24 hoursbefore, and in one out of the three most recent-time cases,drinking was involved as well. But in none of the six first timecases, and in none of the three recent-time cases, had anyonesmoked marijuana 24 hours before. (None of the men had beenapprehended for this offense, incidentally.) Only three of themen in the survey said that they had used a weapon to steal as afirst offense, and two admitted this offense more than the onetime-and none said that lie had either drunk or smoked 24 hoursbefore the offense. *Several facts should he born in mind when considering thisgeneralization. First of all, the survey asked about the use ofeach drug 24 hours before the offense was committed or less-andhence, the respondent was not necessarily under the influencewhen the offense was committed, although certainly manyrespondents were under the influence at that time. Secondly,anyone who uses marijuana is far more likely to becomeintoxicated with each episode of use than is true of each episodeof alcohol use. Considering the fact that the typical marijuana smoker in thisstudy had been intoxicated several hundred times for a total ofwell over a thousand hours, and therefore in a state of mindwhich, if the "causal" theory is correct, is aggressiveand criminogenic, then this almost total absence of violent andaggressive crimes committed by users should be puzzling. Thisfact indicates that the "causal" theory may beinadequate and erroneous. However, it is not possible to tell from Table 2 whether thecommission of crimes is more frequent for alcohol or marijuana ona relative basis during the period of intoxication. That is, ifanyone wanted to know whether a thousand hours of a marijuana oran alcohol intoxication was more like to result in the commissionof various crimes, this table would not convey this information.Unfortunately, this survey did not ask a question on thefrequency with which the respondents drank alcohol or, indeed,whether they drank at all so that an alcohol -marijuanacomparison cannot be more systematically made. It is entirelypossible that alcohol-related crimes are far more frequent thanmarijuana-related crimes. simply because alcohol is still, evenin this sample, probably the drug of choice among young people,and is more often used than marijuana (just as not being undertile influence of any drug is more frequently involved withcrimes than being under the influence, simply because mostpeople, most of the time, are not intoxicated). As to which drugis more "criminogenic" in the sense of what proportionof the time under the influence of marijuana vs. alcohol onecommits various crimes cannot be determined from the data fromthis study. However, in absolute terms, alcohol is considerablymore often used before crimes than marijuana. Another generalization that may be made from Table 2 is thatthe contribution of marijuana from first offense to most recentoffense grows somewhat relative to alcohol. That is, for thefirst offense, alcohol is used before it about 10 times asfrequently as is marijuana, but for most recent offense, alcoholis only three times as frequent. This probably is a reflection ofthe following two trends: (1) Marijuana smoking is considerablymore frequent today (i.e., closest in time when the most recentoffense occurred) titan a few years ago (i.e., closest in timewhen the first offense occurred), and hence, its frequencyrelative to alcohol would be greater in conjunction with anyactivity-criminal or non-criminal as well-simply because its useis more common ; (2) Marijuana smoking is more common among youngadults (the age group most closely represented by the age whenlast offense was committed) than among adolescents andpreadolescents (the age group most closely represented by the agewhen first offense was committed) and, moreover, as age rises,marijuana use rises faster than alcohol use rises, at least up,until early adulthood. . . . It is possible that, as marijuana usage increases, the numberof crimes committed under the influence of this drug may increaseas well. However, the question as to marijuana's directcontribution to the commission of crimes, especially aggressivecrimes, is ail independent issue, and one in need of exploration. V. WHO COMMITS CRIMES AND WHO DOESN'T? In this section, it is our job to explore two basic issues: Do marijuana users commit crimes and offenses any more frequently titan non-users do? Are any variables with which marijuana use is strongly related also correlated with criminality? In the next section I will deal with a third question, and onewhich is probably the most crucial one in this report: Can themarijuana-crime connection be explained mainly by the use ofmarijuana in and of itself, or is use itself dependent on thirdvariables which themselves explain the commission of offenses? As the principal measure of committing crimes, this study hasemployed the number of different types of offenses admitted to inthe 16 categories asked about. Naturally, there are many othercrimes not asked about, and, in addition, some of these crimeswould not correspond to the image most people would have of"classic" aggressive offenses-such as "disturbingpeople," or receiving stolen goods. However, as a generalindex or overall measure of criminality of different groups orcategories of individuals, this one is as good as any others thathave been employed, and is probably adequate for our purposes.(The survey, it must be noted, did not ask questions about anywhite collar crimes, which must be reckoned into an adequatemeasure of output of criminal behavior-but these crimes do notcorrespond with the public's image of aggressive crimes committedunder the influence of marijuana, and so their absence is lessrelevant than would appear at first glance.) Throughout theremainder of this report, the number of crimes and offenses willbe employed as the dependent variable-the outcome to beexplained. And throughout, I will be examining themarijuana-crime connection-as well as other relationships-insofaras it bears on file basic issue. Before the analysis proceeds, it should be pointed out that ofthe 16 offenses, not one of the violent crimes correlated withmarijuana use in any meaningful way at all, and a very weakrelationship was evidenced with only five of theoffenses-stealing from a store, buying stolen property,disturbing people, damaging property, and hurting someone in aminor way (the last of which showing the weakest association ofall). The statistical differences in rates of offenses betweenusers and non-users rest on adding together a small number ofweakly correlated offenses. When offense differences arediscussed, the reader should not hold the mistaken impressionthat they indicate massive differences, or differences indicatinga higher rate of classic, violent crimes among users. With thatwarning in mind, we may now proceed to user/non-user differencesin offenses. The first relationship to be presented, then, is whethermarijuana users as a whole commit offenses any more frequentlythan non-users as a whole. The answer is yes. I have employed twoindicators of marijuana use; one is frequency of marijuana useduring the period of most recent use (which may have been in thepast, or may be at present), and whether or not the respondenthas ever, or has never, used marijuana. Both indicators ofmarijuana use correlate very powerfully with committing offenses.For both tables, the differences are significant beyond the .001level, employing Chi-square as a test of significance, whichmeans that the differences observed could occur at random onlyone chance in a thousand. This is considered extremelysignificant. There is a regular and step-wise relationshipbetween frequency of use and committing offenses; the more that agiven respondent smokes marijuana, the greater is the likelihoodthat lie will have committed four or more offenses, and the loweris his likelihood of committing no offenses at all. Over a third(38%) of those who have never smoked marijuana said that theycommitted none of the 16 offenses asked about-but this was trueof only one respondent in eight (or 12%) of the regular smokers.At the other end, there was a 17% difference between non-usersand regular users (24% vs. 41%) in admitting to four or more ofthese offenses. Tables 3 and 4 present these data in detail. We would be remiss in our duties as sensitive and acute socialanalysts if we ended the analysis there. The simple correlationbetween marijuana use and offenses may very well mask importantand even more basic relationships buried beneath it. Marijuana iscorrelated in a simple manner with the commission of crimes,, butdoes it remain correlated when controls are applied? In otherwords, is it a spurious relationship, or one which will remainwhen crucial variables are held constant' Which-factors are alsorelated to the commission of offenses-which might actuallythemselves explain the simple marijuana-crime connection? Thereare several such variables-race, age, education, the use of otherdrugs, and the respondent's involvement in the drug subculture.Blacks are significantly less likely to use marijuana (64% of theblacks in the survey said that they had tried marijuana, but 86%of the whites said that they had done so), but slightly morelikely to admit to the commission of offenses--41% of all blackssaid that they committed four or more offenses but this was trueof only 25 ) % of all whites (see Tables 23 and 25). Does themarijuana-crime correlation hold up for blacks and whitesseparately? Age was also related to both offenses and marijuana.The oldest respondents (age 29-34) were least likely to havetried marijuana (61%), the youngest (15-20) were next least(73%), and the intermediate age groups (21-23 and 24-28) weremost likely to have tried marijuana (82% and 80%). There was alinear relationship between age and offenses, however. Theyoungest group was least likely to have committed no offenses(20%), and most likely to have committed four or more (42%) ; theoldest group was most likely to, have committed no offenses(35%), and least likely to have committed four or more (22%) (seeTables 29-31). Thus, we would want to know whether marijuana andcrime still correlate in each age group separately. The samething can be said for education (Tables 26-28), the use of drugsother than marijuana (Tables 11-16), and having friends who usedrugs (Tables 17-22)-the relationship between marijuana use andcrime could be mitigated or even transformed altogether if thesethird variables are considered. One possibility is that themarijuana-crime relationship is wiped out altogether with theapplication of these controls-that is, that the relationship iscompletely spurious. A second possibility is that themarijuana-crime connection may be specific to some groups orcategories, but not others. And the third possibility is that thesame original relationship remains basically unaltered, or evenis strengthened, by the application of these controls. Special attention ought to be paid to the drug-relatedvariables. There is a powerful and significant associationbetween the use of marijuana and the use of other drugs. Althoughrecent studies have presented evidence that this basicrelationship is probably not due to the effects of marijuana perse, but to friendships and associations made in conjunction withmarihuana use . . . , the simple relationship between marihuanaand other drugs is a statistical fact. There is, in addition, astrong and marked association with using drugs other thanmarijuana and the commission of crimes. Thus, a legitimatequestion to be explored is whether "marijuana only"users have a greater crime rate than non-users, whether thehigher rate of the commission of offenses cannot be attributedlargely or solely to using drugs other than marijuana. VI. MARIJUANA USE AND CRIME: CAUSAL OR SPURIOUS Our first clue as to the nature of the underlying relationshipbetween marijuana use and crime is obtained by examining Table 5,which documents the association between number of offenses andmarijuana use, taking into account the use of other drugs aswell. Table 5 shows that "marijuana only" marijuanausers are only very slightly more likely to commit crimes thannon-users. Tire original nine percentage point difference betweenusers and non-users in committing four or more offenses hasshrunk to only two percentage points (in fact, only onepercentage point--we are comparing 24.4% with 25.5%, and theoriginal 19 percentage point difference between users andnon-users in committing no offenses has been reduced to 13percentage points. In fact, the "marijuana only" useris far more similar to the non-user in number of offensescommitted than he is to the user of marijuana plus two or moreother drugs. The application of the control involving other drugsclearly attenuates the marijuana-crime relationship, and much ofthe user-non-user differences in offenses committed can be tracedto the fact that marijuana users are significantly more likely touse other drugs, rather than the use of marijuana per se.* *The exploration of the "escalation" hypothesis-thequestion of whether or not marijuana "leads to" the useof other more dangerous drugs-would take us far afield in thisreport. The issue is dealt with in a separate report by theauthor prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse, however. Our confidence in the lack of basic association betweenmarijuana use itself and offenses--and our ability to attributethe simple original relationship to the use of drugs other thanmarijuana-is strengthened when we examine the relationshipbetween frequency of use and offenses, holding the use of otherdrugs constant. Table 5A presents these data. Among"marijuana only" users, there is no statisticallysignificant correlation between frequency of use and thecommission of crimes--the differences are small, insignificant,and in no consistent direction. Among users of one other drug,likewise, frequency of marijuana use is extremely looselyassociated with committing offenses-the differences which areobserved are small, statistically insignificant, and point in noparticular direction. And lastly, among users of two or moreother drugs aside from marijuana, the association betweenfrequency of marijuana use and the commission of the offensesdescribed earlier is loose and not at all significant. Table 5Avery strongly indicates the validity of the "spurious"model. Closely related to the use of other drugs is a control whichshould be explored: the respondent's involvement with adrug-using subculture-with others who also use drugs. Naturally,as we saw in the last section, individuals who use marijuana tendto have friends who also use marijuana. What we would like toknow is whether the social patterns they exhibit can be traced totheir use of the drug. or to the fact that they have friends whouse drugs. Thus, we should be very interested in looking at theindividual who uses marijuana, but who does riot have drug-usingfriends, as well as the individual who does riot rise marijuana,but has drug-using friends. If interesting changes take place inthe original marijuana-crime correlation, then we haveindications that it is the individual's social relations, and nothis rise of marijuana, per se, that determine marijuana use'scorrelation with crime. Tables 6 and 7 deal with this issue; theyshould be examined in conjunction with one another. Among respondents with no marijuana-using friends (out oftheir 10 closest friends). as well as those with no drug-usingfriends at all. almost an identical relationship betweenmarijuana use and crime obtains as in the original Table 3.Marijuana users are, significantly (but not strikingly) morelikely to commit four or more offenses, and significantly lesslikely to commit none. The percentage differences in Tables 6 and7 are almost the same (even slightly more) as those in Table.3-about 25% at the "none" end vs. 19% for the originaltable, and about 18% at the "four or more" end vs. 9%for the original table (Table 3). If we were to rely only onthese segments of the table, we would be led to the, inferencethat marijuana is meaningfully related to the commission ofcrimes. However, an extraordinary thing happens to the other segmentsof the table: among those with drug-using friends, there is norelationship at all between marijuana use and committingoffenses. The differences are so small as to be statisticallyinsignificant. (And they are actually in the oppositedirection-non-users are slightly more likely to commit four ormore offenses than users are.) In other words the marijuana-crimerelationship is completely wiped out by the application ofcontrols-in this case, integration into the drug-usingsubculture. We are led overwhelmingly to the conclusion thatmarijuana users tend to be somewhat more likely to commit crimessolely because they are part of a drug-using subculture; theactual properties of marijuana appear to be completelyunassociated with criminal behavior. Anyone (whether he usesmarijuana or not) who makes friends and becomes involved withothers who use drugs-especially others who use drugs in additionto and aside from marijuana stands a higher likelihood ofcommitting offenses, simply because this segment of thepopulation tends to be more lax about obeying the law. It ismerely because marijuana users tend to associate with others whoare part of this subculture that their crime rate is somewhathigher. In other words, the marijuana-crime relationship-in termsof the causal or effects model is completely spurious. What of the marijuana-using isolate? What of those who usemarijuana but who have no friends who use drugs-either marijuanaor other drugs? How can we explain the fact that the originaldifference in offense rate between users and non-users were notwiped out among those without drug-using friends-in contrast tobeing wiped out among those who had drug-using friends? Lookingback at Tables 6 and 7, we are struck by the fact that theoffense rate of the marijuana-using group without drug-usingfriends is as high as the groups with drug using friends. Whatdoes this indicate? First of all, involvement with a drug-risingsubculture is clearly not the only determinant of a high rate ofcommitting offenses. Probably something else is at work. The factthat the offense differences wash out among those involved withthe drug subculture indicates that rise by itself (i.e., beinghigh) cannot be a factor in the original marijuana-crimerelationships difference cannot explain two things that aresimilar. The using isolate, however, is probably a (Qualitativelydifferent social being from those who either do not rise, orthose who use and have friends who also use. The isolate isprobably deviant in a variety of ways crime being one of them.The fact that he uses in spite of having no friends who use(although lie may have friends who do not use) means that he usesmost of the time alone. has not integrated his activities into asocial life or a subculture, and probably pursues some activitieswhich the dominant society would judge to be eccentric andunusual. In other words, it is possible that his involvement withcrime is related to his social isolation from a group whichpursues drug activities similar to his own, rather than his useof marijuana. However, these remarks must be regarded asspeculation, since more complete information is not available. A related process occurs when race is employed as the controlvariable. Among blacks, the original relationship remains intact;marijuana users are significantly (although not markedly) morelikely to commit four or more offenses, and less likely to commitnone, than is true of non-users. (The relationship is significantat the .004 level, using Chi-square.) However, among whites, theoriginal relationship is completely washed out; users are not atall more likely to commit offenses. Table 8 presents these data.The minor differences can be completely accounted for by randomfluctuations; the relationship is not significant at any level. When education is treated as the control variable in thisrelationship, the marijuana-crime connection follows a patternparallel to the two previous explorations-that is, it iscompletely washed out for some groups, but remains for others. InTable 9, we see that marijuana users who have at least attendedcollege, but not graduate school, are not any more likely tocommit offenses than college non-users. The percentagescommitting four or more crimes, and those committing none, arealmost identical for users and non-users alike. (The differencesare insignificant, and due to random fluctuation.) However, amongrespondents with only a high school education, the same basicrelationship produced in Table 3 is upheld: marijuana users aresignificantly more likely to have committed offenses thannon-users. However, at least two variables are compounded here,since most respondents with a college education are white. Thus,the retainment of the original marijuana-crime correlation amonghigh school education respondents, and its wash-out among collegeeducated respondents, should not come as any surprise. However,among respondents with at least some graduate school education,the original relationship asserts itself; users are more likelyto commit offenses than non-users. (The differences observed aresignificant at the .05 level; in other words, the differenceshave a one in 20 chance of occurring purely at random.) Table 9presents the marijuana-crime relationship, holding educationconstant. Using age as a control variable also produces mixed results.Among the two youngest age groups (15--20 and 21-23), thedifferences obtaining between users and nonusers arestatistically insignificant, and could have occurred by chancealone; in the youngest of these two groups, the non-user isslightly more likely to have committed four or more offenses, andin the next to youngest of these groups, the user is slightlymore so--but in both, the differences are too small to bemeaningful. In the 24-to-28-year-old group, the differencesapproach statistical significance, but they are not substantial(.07 level of significance, using Chi-square). However, among theoldest group (age 29 to 34), the same basic difference inoffenses as obtained in the original relationship holds up here;users are about twice as likely to have committed four or moreoffenses as non-users (28% vs. 13%), and less than half as likelyto have committed no offenses (21% vs. 58&). These dataappear in Table 10. VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The central effort in this report has been to determinewhether marijuana use, in and of itself, is meaningfully andcausally related to the commission of crime. Two models have beenused in the past to answer this issue: the causal model, whichholds that using marijuana, being under the influence of thedrug, actually does stimulate the will to commit antisocial acts,and the spurious model, which holds that marijuana use is merelya reflection of independent and more powerful forces, and that initself, marijuana use is unrelated to criminal and aggressivebehavior. Some small amount of research has been conducted in thepast on this issue, but no consistent findings have been turnedup; . . . It is because of these factual lacunae that theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse mandated a studyof marijuana use and crime, which culminated in the Philadelphiasurvey, as well as this report. The findings from this study strongly support the view thatmarijuana, use by itself is not related in any meaningful orsystematic fashion to criminal behavior, that marijuana useprobably does not "cause criminiality. The"spurious" model appears to be a far more accuratedescription of the marijuana-crime connection than does the"causal" model. The use of marijuana per se is probablycompletely unrelated to criminal and aggressive behavior. Thedrug does not "cause" any significant number of usersto commit crimes, or aggressive or violent behavior. The effectsof the drug seem to be, from what can be gathered from theavailable data on the question, without criminogenic causality.This does not mean that it is not possible to commit crimes,including aggressive crimes, under the influence of marijuana-butthat being high does not increase one's probability of doing so,that on an hour-for-hour, crime-for-crime basis, there areprobably no significant differences between being intoxicated onmarijuana and being "normal," not under the influenceof any drug. A wide variety of data have been brought to bear on themarijuana-crime issue. First of all, regarding the subjective self-reported effectsof marijuana, all indications are that the effects classicallydescribed as being related to aggressive behavior and thecommissions crimes-feeling angry, frustrated, wanting to -hurtsomeone, being willing to follow any and all suggestions ofothers, being deranged, wanting to do something violent-have noempirical support whatsoever; users consistently describe these"effects" as non-existent or as extremely rare andatypical, no different from normally. In fact, precisely theopposite is the case: if anything, the effects of marijuana wouldhave far more to do with reducing the criminal"impulse," whatever that might be, due to the fact thatthey tend to be in the direction of relaxation, feeling calm, ofnot wanting to move about, feeling somewhat drowsy, sleepy.Activity of any sort tends to be inhibited by the marijuanaintoxication. Secondly, the Philadelphia survey asked the respondents aboutusing marijuana and/or alcohol 24 hours or less before variouscrimes were committed. Marijuana very rarely figured into thecommission of crimes in any way. For only a tiny minority of allcrimes committed was the respondent under the influence. This wasespecially the case for serious and aggressive crimes. Alcoholwas far more likely to be used soon before criminal activity thanmarijuana. - The third type of information brought to bear on themarijuana-crime question was the self-admitted offense rate ofusers versus non-users. The total number of different types ofcrimes which respondents said that they had committed wascompared. The simple relationship between using marijuana andcommitting offenses was positive and statistically significant,and there was also a high correlation between frequency ofsmoking marijuana and committing offenses. However, a wide rangeof other variables, themselves related to both crime and tomarijuana use, were also correlated-race, education, age, the useof other drugs, and having drug-using friends. Thus, the issuebecame: is it the causal connection with these third variableswhich produces the marijuana crime simple correlation, or doesthe correlation hold up even when these factors are controlled?In other words, which is right, the causal or tile, spuriousmodel? Is marijuana use merely dependent itself on larger,broader, more potent factors-or does it exert an independentpower? Do users commit crimes more frequently than nonusersbecause they use marijuana or because they happen to be the kindsof people who, would have a higher crime rate, marijuana or nomarijuana. The evidence from these three-variable tests support the"spurious" model. The control tables show that thedifferences in crime rate between users and non-users is, in mostcases, dependent not on marijuana use per se, but on these largerfactors. The fact that the relationship disappears, or is wipedout, when some controls are applied shows that themarijuana-crime connection is dependent on sociologicalvariables, and not chemical effects. When the use of other drugswas held constant, the marijuana-crime correlation was severelyattenuated, and in some cases, washed out entirely. When thevariable of having friends who use other drugs-both marijuana aswell as stimulants, sedatives, hallucinogens and "harddrugs" was applied, the relationship disappeared among thosewith drug-using friends, but not those who had no drug-usingfriends. When race was held constant, the marijuana-crimeconnection was wiped out completely among whites, but not blacks;among white marijuana users, their crime rate was notstatistically different from non-users, but black users did havea higher crime rate than non-using blacks-similar in magnitude tothe original relationship. When education was used as a controlvariable, we saw that among college-educated respondents, themarijuana-crime correlation was nonexistent, but it remainedamong respondents with a high school education, and for those whohad attended graduate school. And lastly, age was applied as acontrol. Among the youngest groups, the marijuana-crimerelationship was attenuated, but it remained somewhat strongamong the two oldest age categories. If there were truly a causal relationship between marijuanause and crime, these disappearing correlations would not occur.The application of sociological variables cannot wash out achemical reaction in the user. The enormous variability dependenton social factors indicates that marijuana effects do notinherently produce behavior of a criminal nature. The kinds ofpeople who use the drug tend to follow Patterns of behaviorregardless of whether or not they use marijuana. By itself,marijuana, use is not a potent producer of behavior, andcertainly not criminal behavior. Individuals who commit criminalacts are those who would do so with or without the use ofmarijuana. The data from this study support-the conclusion, almostwithout qualification, that marijuana use does not cause criminalbehavior.* *A subsequent regression analysis with the six variables usedindependently as controls showed that when all six variables areapplied simultaneously, the use of marijuana in and of itselfaccounts for less than 1% of the variance in committing offenses(personal communication by the author, 24 January 1972). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-21IA031-000655-B040-282http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1m.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113330 text/html 8348HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:33:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:48 GMTContent-length: 8131 Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime The Commission's review of the available evidence bearing onthe relationship between marihuana use and criminal, aggressiveand delinquent behavior has yielded the following information. The once prevalent belief among the general public and theprofessional law enforcement, criminal justice and researchcommunities that marihuana causes crime, violence, aggression anddelinquency has moderated appreciably over the years. Recentevidence indicates that increased attention has been devoted,instead, to a possible statistical correlation rather than acause-effect relationship. At present, however, considerable confusion and uncertaintyexists among both the general and professional publics, amongyouth and adults, and among marihuana users and non-users aboutthe relationship between marihuana and criminal, aggressive ordelinquent behavior. The confusion and uncertainty stem from ageneral lack of knowledge and understanding about the effects ofthe drug, including its potential for physical addiction. Manypersons are still under the misapprehension that marihuana isaddicting and that crimes are committed in order to support adrug "habit." In general, recent changes in public and professional opinionhave corresponded with and reflected the increased use ofmarihuana, particularly within the middle class segment ofsociety; more direct observation of and professional experiencewith the marihuana user; new and more enlightened informationabout the drug and its effects; and concomitant changes in thepublic image of the user. There is no systematic empirical evidence, at least that drawnfrom the American experience, to support the thesis that the useof marihuana either inevitably or generally causes, leads to orprecipitates criminal, violent, aggressive or delinquent behaviorof a sexual or nonsexual nature. Laboratory studies of effects have revealed no evidence toshow that marihuana's chemical properties are, by themselves,capable of producing effects which can be interpreted ascriminogenic; that is, that marihuana is an independent cause ofcriminal or aggressive behavior. If anything, the effectsobserved suggest that marihuana may be more likely to neutralizecriminal behavior and to militate against the commission ofaggressive acts. The research community has recently gathered considerableevidence to show that marihuana and criminal, aggressive anddelinquent behavior are statistically and significantlycorrelated when measured together in isolation from variableswhich are related to marihuana use and other forms of antisocialbehavior. The data also show, however, that this statisticalassociation either attenuates significantly or disappearscompletely when the proper statistical controls are applied. In other words, the observed relationship between the, use ofmarihuana and criminal, violent, aggressive and delinquentbehavior is spurious. It is dependent on suchextra-pharmacological factors as the age, race and education ofthe user; the type of community in which he lives; his pasthistory of psychosocial maladjustment; and his involvement in acriminal or delinquent subculture (use of other drugs; drugbuying and selling activities; associations with friends who alsouse, buy and sell cannabis or other drugs). To reiterate what Professor Goode has so cogently stated, If there were truly a causal relationship between marihuanause and crime, these disappearing correlations would not occur.The application of sociological variables cannot wash out achemical reaction in the user (1972:52). To put it still another way, to believe that marihuana causescriminal, violent, aggressive or delinquent behavior is toconfuse the effects of the drug with the people who use it. From the perspective of marihuana's relationship to antisocialbehavior of a criminal or violent nature, the drug cannot be saidto constitute a significant threat to the public safety. If itsuse, therefore, is to be discouraged, it must be discouraged ongrounds other than its role in the commission of criminal orviolent or delinquent acts. The enormous increases in marihuana arrests over the pastseveral years are ample evidence that the police have takenseriously their role of maintaining law and order with respect tomarihuana use and that they have responded to public pressure andconcern about the increase in marihuana use. Yet, in theirexperience with the marihuana user they have been placed in theunenviable position of having to enforce a law either disregardedor discredited by large segments of the population they serve. Over and over again they have seen their efforts in thisrespect negated by the de jure or de facto modification, if notnullification, of the laws against possession by prosecutors,judges and even legislators. Their increasing frustration anddemoralization, therefore, at least with respect to the marihuanauser, is quite, understandable. These other officials, however, are likewise placed in adifficult position; for they, too, must enforce and apply thecriminal law, and they, too, must respond to public pressures andconcerns. In some instances, they have demonstrated particularresistance to criminalizing the user and subjecting him tocriminal penalties which are deemed to be unwarranted if notunwise. In the case of marihuana, recent changes in law enforcementpractices with respect to the user have, in fact, reflected theincreased use and public tolerance of marihuana. The statutorychanges now taking place at the state and local levels arefurther evidence of the trend toward greater public acceptance ofthe user. In these instances, the laws and their enforcement werealtered because they no longer performed the symbolic function ofexpressing society's disapproval of marihuana use. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-22IA031-000655-B040-317http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1n.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113346 text/html 39268HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:33:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:44 GMTContent-length: 39050 Marihuana and Driving Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Driving The United States Department of Transportation has estimatedthat in 1970, more than 111 million Americans were licenseddrivers and that there were approximately 109 million vehiclesregistered and regularly traversing America's streets andhighways. The Commission-sponsored National Survey (Abelson, etal., 1972) has revealed that approximately 21 million or 15% ofall American adults 18 years and over have tried marihuana andthat about 6.9 million adults currently use the drug. At the present time, there is no reliable estimate of theproportion of marihuana users who drive while "high,"but America's tragic experience with highway accidents andfatalities involving persons driving under the influence ofalcohol raises serious questions about the extent to whichmarihuana impairs driving skills and performance and therebyconstitutes a public safety hazard on this nation'sthoroughfares. In recent years, public safety experts, along with the medicaland scientific communities, have devoted increasing attention tothe effects of any mind-altering drug on driving, but there is asyet little evidence to inform discussion. As part of its moregeneral concern with the impact of marihuana on public safety,the Commission has reviewed the available research and hasconcluded that the evidence which presently exists is, at best,inconclusive. In view of this finding and prior to a rather brief summary ofthe knowledge we now have, the Commission feels compelled to urgethe public to consider these findings as only tentative, to adoptan extremely cautious attitude about the effects of marihuana ondriving skill and performance, and perhaps most importantly, toavoid driving at all while under the influence of anymind-altering drug or intoxicant. THE CURRENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE The literature on drugs and driving contains severalreferences to the role of drugs, including marihuana, in trafficviolations, accidents and fatalities. They differ considerably,however, in the nature and extent to which they influence oraffect driving behavior (Waller, 1965; Chetta, 1967, Commissionon Narcotic Drugs, 1968; Third Triannual Congress on TrafficAccidents, 1969; Waller, 1970; Klein, Davis and Blackbourne, 1971National Institute of Mental Health, 1972). The studies examine the relationship between marihuana anddriving and tend to be either statistical and enumerative withregard to traffic accidents or experimental with respect to thephysiological and psychological effects of marihuana use deemedto be related to driving skill and performance. All of themsuffer to one degree or another from an overabundance or dearthof extraneous variables and have, therefore, precludedgeneralization of the results and the production of conclusive,and valid findings. The difficulty in interpreting the data gathered fromstatistical or enumerative studies of traffic accidents derivesprimarily from the inability to isolate precise cause. There areno tissue, urine or blood analysis methods currently andsystematically in use outside the laboratory, similar to thoseavailable for alcohol, for determining the presence of marihuanain the bodily fluids of drivers. Statistical Studies The statistical or enumerative studies generally can becharacterized as two types. In the first type, samples ofarrested marihuana, or other drug law violators are selected andtheir traffic violations or accident rates are compared withthose in the general population. In the second type, samples aredrawn initially from lists of persons known to have committedtraffic violations or been involved in traffic accidents. Thesamples are then divided into persons who in some way areidentified as marihuana users and those who are not and theincidence of traffic violations or accidents in the two groups isthen compared.5 5 Dr. E. J. Woodhouse, a chemist, is now in the process ofdeveloping a marihuana testing method. At the present time hereports being able to detect the presence of marihuana byanalyzing urine samples (Polak, 1971). Waller (1965), compared the crash rates per unit miles ofdriving of known marihuana users with those of other drivers ofsimilar age distribution. He found that the crash risk was notincreased by the use of marihuana. A similar study yielding similar results was performed in theState of Washington (Crancer and Quiring, 1968). There were nosignificant differences in the crash rates per 100 driversbetween those who did use marihuana and those who did not. Theresearchers compared the driving records of persons arrested forillegal drug use (100 narcotics users, 123 dangerous drug usersand 79 marihuana users) with those of 687,228 licensed driversliving in the same general driving environment (King's County,Washington). Comparisons were made of the number of accidents,the number of violations and the type of violations accumulatedbetween January 1, 1961 and October 1, 1967. All three drug using groups had significantly higher accidentand violation rates than did the comparison group matched for ageand sex; the accident rate for the marihuana users was 39%higher; for the narcotics users, 29% higher; and for thedangerous drug users, 57% higher. The violation rates were 180 %higher, 149 % higher and 16% higher, respectively. Table 9 below shows the percentage of marihuana users andcounty drivers, by sex, with none and 10 or more trafficviolations and accidents between January 1, 1961 and October 1,1967. Since the majority of the users were first arrested for theirillegal drug use in 1964, the researchers compared theirviolation rates before and after that time. The data show aviolation rate of 1.78 per marihuana driver prior to 1964(January 1, 1961 to June 30, 1964) ; the rate increased to 3.44per driver between July 1, 1964 and October 1, 1967. For the sametime periods, the county group's violation rate per driverincreased from 0.4-4 to 0.53. The violation rates for both reckless and hit-and run drivingwere significantly higher for the marihuana users than for thecounty comparison group. In short, these data suggest that marihuana users are muchmore likely to have many violations and accidents and are muchless likely to have clear accident and violation records than area comparison group of drivers drawn from the same generalpopulation. Them findings are difficult to interpret moreprecisely, however, because Such variables as the number of milesdriven and overall driving experience were not taken intoaccount. Table 9.-MARIHUANA USERS AND COUNTY DRIVERS HAVING NONE ANDTEN OR MORE TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS AND ACCIDENTS, BY SEX, JANUARY 1,1961OCTOBER 1, 1967 (Figures in Percentages) Marihuana users County drivers Male Female Male Female None... 10.0 33.3 41.1 67.7 10..... 22.9 11.1 2.2 0.1 Source: Crancer and Quiring, 1968:9. A survey of 12,453 Virginia high school students was conductedduring 1970 by the Virginia Highway Safety Division (Ferguson andHoward, 1971). The objectives of the survey were to determine theextent of drug use in the Virginia high school population and toassess the number of traffic crashes which could be caused bydrug-impaired drivers. The data, show that 2.9% of the sample reported experiencing,either as a passenger or driver, at least one traffic crash inwhich drug use "could have been a causal factor." Thedata also show that the students were more likely to attributethe crashes to marihuana (54%) than to other drugs (46%). Use ofmarihuana was found to be slightly more common than was the useof other drugs among drivers involved in non-fatal collisions butwas used with equal frequency in those drivers involved in fatalcrashes (p. 31). The researchers suggest as an explanation for their findingsthe fact that marihuana. usage was greater among this population(12.3%) than was the use of other drugs (7.7%). This explanationis not completely adequate, however, in that the survey ignoresboth the possible presence of alcohol along with marihuana andother drugs, either separately or in combination. As such, itcannot be said that marihuana causes more accidents than do otherdrugs, including alcohol. Klein, Davis and Blackbourne (1971) surveyed students at fouracademic institutions in Florida in an effort to assess the roleof marihuana in traffic involvements. Respondents were dividedinto five groups of marihuana users: (a) non-users, (b) previoususers, (c) using less than four times a month, (d) using four toeight times per month, and (e) using more than eight times permonth. For each group information was obtained relative to thefrequency of alcohol and tobacco use; respondents' ability tojudge speed, time and reaction time; traffic involvements; andlicense revocations. In addition, respondents were asked theiropinion about whether or not persons under the influence ofmarihuana should be permitted to operate aircraft and variousother vehicles, including taxis and private automobiles. With respect to traffic involvements, the data show that 18%of the infrequent users and 53% of the frequent users reportedhaving been stopped by the police while under the influence ofmarihuana. The data also show that as the frequency of useincreases, so too does the number of license revocations. As Nichols (1971) has pointed out, however: Apparently no attempt was made to compare the number oftimes they were stopped while under the influence of marihuana asopposed to the number of times they were stopped while not underthe influence. Thus, the data do not give any indication ofwhether the violations were due to the effects of marihuana orwhether they were the result of poor driving habits in the firstplace (pp. 28-29). Both experimental and quasi-experimental approaches toassessing the effects of marihuana on driving suffer frommethodological shortcominogs and inconsistent results. Theprimary deficiency in the experimental investigations lies intheir inability to hold constant the numerous external variableswhich actually affect driving behavior and which, therefore,precludes valid comparisons of actual driving performance withthat simulated in a controlled but unrealistic environment. Inthe quasi-experimental studies using interviewing techniques, theaccuracy of self-reports becomes a question which must be raisedwith respect to the, effects of marihuana on driving skills andperformance. The data derived front these studies, however, suggest thatmarihuana does interfere, at least in some users, with theability to judge time, speed and distance ; with reaction time;and with the ability to control the vehicle and respond to anemergency situation (Zinberg and Well, 1969; James, 1970- Hochmanand Brill, 1971; Klein, et al., 1971). Data from a survey of 10% of the undergraduate students atUCLA (Hochman and Brill, 1971) show that one-third of allmarihuana users drive, occasionally while "high." Ofthe chronic users, 42% drive frequently while high and 10% alwaysdrive while "stoned" (p. 22). According to the researchers, "both (marihuana) users andnon-users were universally of the opinion that (marihuana)'intoxication' affected driving, but users thought, that theycompensated by being more cautious, driving more slowly, andconcentrating on the driving," (p. 22). The researchers alsoreport that as usage of marihuana becomes more chronic,"fear" and avoidance of driving while intoxicateddecreases and the ability to compensate for the drug's effectsincreases. With respect to traffic violations, the data show that 4% ofoccasional and chronic marihuana users had received traffictickets when they were intoxicated by the drug but that none hadbeen discovered to be intoxicated at the time. These findings corroborate those, from an earlier study(Zinberg and Weil, 1969) in which the researchers stated that"users appear to be able to compensate 100% for thenonspecific effects of ordinary doses of marihuana on ordinarypsychological performance" (p. 39). In another report Weil(1969) wrote that "it appears that once a person becomesaccustomed to the effects of cannabis, he, can compensate fullyfor the drug's influence on performance of tasks of ordinarycomplexity." (p. 6). Experimental Studies Controlled laboratory experiments have attempted to measurethese and other effects on driving with greater specificity.Manno and his associates (1970) found that there are significantimpairments of motor and mental performance attributable tomarihuana. In an experiment conducted by Frank and his colleagues (1971),marihuana smokers demonstrated "a marked and very consistentincrease in the amount of time required to recover from glare . .. This ranged up to four times as long with a mean peak of almosttwice as long (171%) after smoking marihuana. . . . Furthermore,this increase in glare recovery time persisted for severalhours" (p. 9) and did not seem to be dose related. These researchers did not find significant differences betweenmarihuana users and nonusers, however, in pulse, rate, timeestimation or dilation of the pupils. With respect to marihuana's effect on emotional reactions, Dr.S. E. Miller (1959) suggested that "these drugs (Includingmarihuana) have similar abilities for changing normal emotionalreactions, even causing individuals to become oblivious orindifferent to their surroundings" (p. 864). Klein and hiscolleagues (1971), however, urge against generalizing thesefindings from the laboratory situation to the complex task ofactual driving. Crancer and his coworkers (1969) conducted a study designed todetermine the effects of a "normal social marihuanahigh" on simulated driving performance among 36 experiencedmarihuana smokers and compared the effects they discovered withthose occasioned by alcohol use. The researchers found that experienced marihuana users underconditions of a "normal social marihuana high" (fromtwo cigarettes totalling 1.7 grams of THC) accumulatedsignificantly more speedometer errors than under controlconditions. No significant differences were found, however,relative to accelerator, brake, signal, steering or total errorsin simulator scores. Comparing the effects of alcohol (at a blood level of0.10%-the legal limit of intoxication) and marihuana intoxication(1.7 grams THC), the researchers concluded that moderateintoxication by marihuana was less detrimental to simulateddriving performance than was the presence of alcohol at the 0.10%blood level. The mean error scores were 84.46 for the controlgroup, 84.49 for the marihuana group and 97.44 for the alcoholgroup (p. 6). There have been several criticisms leveled at this study,however, and several researchers have cited contradictoryfindings. Frank and his associates (1971) have pointed out thefact that the subjects did not have, complete control over theirsimulated drive. Kalant (1969) noted that "it does not followautomatically that lack of effect of a drug on the simulated taskwill correlate with lack of effect on the actual task" (p.640). He also criticized the use of dissimilar doses of marihuanaand alcohol for the comparison and in this regard stated that"the finding that a heavy dose of alcohol caused moreimpairment than a mild dose of marihuana is neither surprisingnor helpful in assessing the relative effects of the two drugs inthe relative doses in which they are normally used" (p.640). Lastly, Kalant pointed out that Crancer and his colleaguesfailed to indicate if any measures were actually taken to ensureeffective absorption of the doses by the experimental subjects.This may be important, if the findings of dose dependentimpairments observed by Dagirmanjian and Boyd (1962) and Isbelland his associates (1967) are valid. Although Crancer and his fellow researchers did not feel thatthe impairments found were related to either dosage level orexperience with the drug, this latter finding is also subject toquestion in view of the earlier findings of the Mayor's Committeeon Marihuana (1944) and Weil and his colleagues (1968) that theperformance of drug-naive subject, was more impaired than wasthat of experienced marihuana users. In a more recent simulator study, attention was directed tothe effects of marihuana on risk acceptance (Dott, 1971). Theexperimental situation involved the placement of 12 experiencedmarihuana users under four conditions (non-smoking, placebo, lowdose, and high dose) in order to compare subjects' reactions tovarious passing situations, some of which required an immediateresponse to an emergency. The data show that even though more accidents occurred underthe two marihuana conditions than under the placebo (and normal)condition, the differences were not significant. Significantdifferences were found in the number of passes completed and inthe time needed to make pass decisions. Not only did themarihuana smokers complete fewer passes (174 in placebocondition, 153 in low dose condition, and 133 in the high dosecondition), but they took more time to make the pass decisionswhile under the influence of the drug. The researcher concludedthat "marihuana appears to make the subject less willing toaccept risk, and it delays elective decision reaction time.Effects were most noted in situations which did not have a highattention demanding value. . . . In those situations which wereof an emergency nature and which demanded immediate attention andresponse . . . . no drug effects were noted" (p. 28). Dott also found, in contrast to Frank and his associates(1971) that pulse rate did seem to be affected by marihuanaintoxication. Based upon a comparison with the same experiment performedyears before in relation to alcohol (Light and Kelper, 1969),Dott stated that "the effects of marihuana on drivingbehavior are more subtle and less hazardous than the effects ofalcohol." McGlothlin (1971) is presently conducting another simulatorstudy and is attempting to measure the effects of marihuana,methadone and alcohol on simulated driving, attention,information processing abilities and other measures related todriving efficiency such is peripheral vision, depth perceptionand glare recovery. At this time, five experiments have beenconducted and the researcher has stated that: concentrated and divided attention for both auditory andvisual modalities are significantly impaired by smoked marihuanacontaining 15 mg. THC.... In general, where impairment was foundfor the marihuana treatments, it appears to be equivalent to thatresulting from a blood alcohol level of about 0.01%. Frequentmarihuana users (one or two times per week) typically showed lessimpairment than those using less frequently (p. 22.). The inconclusive and controversial nature of the research todate suggests that there is enough of a potential risk involvedto both the individual and the public safety to recommendstrongly against driving while intoxicated-no matter what theintoxicant. Although marihuana does not seem to produce seriousimpairments of driving skills or performance, to say that thedrug does not at all adversely affect driving behavior or that itmay not be a factor in traffic violations or accidents is tomisrepresent the current state of knowledge. As the NationalInstitute of Mental Health (1972) has noted, "obviously,more research is needed in elucidating the role of various drugson highway accidents . . ." (p. 220). References Abelson, H.; Cohen R.; and Schrayer, D., Public AttitudesToward Marihuana, Part 1, Princeton: Response Analysis, 1972. "A Drug and Insanity," New York Daily Worker,January 28, 1940. Cited in Solomon, D., ed. The Marihuana Papers,New York: Signet Books, 1968, p. 288. Allentuck, S., "Medical Aspects: Symptoms andBehavior," in Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The MarihuanaProblem in the City of New York, Lancaster: Jacques CattellPress, 1944, pp. 35-51. Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M., "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99: 248-251, 1942. Ames, P., "A Clinical and Metabolic Study of AcuteIntoxication with Cannabis Saliva and its Role in the ModelPsychoses," Journal of Mental Sciences, 104 (437) :972-99,1958. Amir, M., Patterns in Forcible Rape, Chicago: University ofChicago Press, 1971. Andrade, 0. M "The Criminogenic Action of Cannabis(Marihuana) and Narcotics," UN Bulletin of Narcotics, 16:23-28,1964. Anslinger, H. J., "Marijuana-Assassin of Youth,"American Magazine, July 1937. Anslinger, H. J. and Tompkins, W., The Traffic in Narcotics,New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953. Asuni, T., "Socio-Psychiatric Problems of Cannabis inNigeria," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 16: 17-28, 1964.Ausubel, D. P., Drug Addiction: Physiological, Psychological, andSociological Aspects, New York: Random House, 1958. Bloomquist, E. R., Marijuana, Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press,1968. Blum, R H., and Associates, Society and Drugs, -San Francisco:Jossey-Bass, 1969. Blumer, H., et al., The World of Youthful Drug Use, Berkeley:School of Criminology, University of California, 1967. Bouquet, J., "Cannabis," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 2(4) :14-30, October 1950. Brenner, J. H.; Coles R. and Meagher, D., Drugs and Youth, NewYork: Liveright, 1970. Bromberg, W., "Marihuana: A Psychiatric Study,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 113: 4-12, 1939. Bromberg, W., "Marihuana Intoxication: A Clinical Studyof Cannabis Sativa Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 91 (2) : 23-30, 1934. Bromberg, W. and Rodgers, T. C., "Marihuana andAggressive Crime," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:825-827,1946. Brotman, R. and Suffet, F., "Marihuana Users' Views ofMarihuana Use," in Zubin, J. and Freedman, A., eds., ThePsychology of Adolescence, New York: Grime and Stratton, 1970,pp. 258-72. Brown, T. T., The Enigma of Drug Addiction, Springfield:Charles C Thomas, 1961. Carstairs, G. H., "Darn and Bhang: Cultural Factors inthe Choice of Intoxicants," Quarterly Journal of Studies onAlcohol, 15: 220-237, 1954. "The Case Against Cannabis," Pharmaceutical Journal(England), 199 (5425) :399-400,1967. Charen, S., and Perelman, L., "Personality Studies ofMarihuana Addicts," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:674-82,1946. Chetta, N. J., "Alcohol, Drugs and Driving," Journalof the Louisiana State Medical Society, 119 (9) : 344347, 1967.Commission of Narcotic Drugs, 23rd Session on Drug Abuse, October21, 1968. Chopra, R. N. and Chopra, 1. C., "Cannabis Sativa inRelation to Crime and Mental Disease in India," AmericanJournal of Medical Research, 30: 155-171, 1942. Chopra. R. N. andChopra, G. S., "The Present Position of Hemp Drug Addictionin India," Indian Medical Research Memoirs, No. 31, July1939. Crancer, A., Jr., and Quiring, T). L., "Driving Recordsof Persons Arrested for Illegal Drug Use," Report 011, Stateof Washington, Department of Motor Vehicles, May 1968. Reprintedin part in The Police Chief, 36: 41-43. February 1969. Crancer, A.. Jr.; Dille, J. M.; Delay, J. C.; Wallace, J. E.and Haykin, M. D., "Comparison of the Effects of Marihuanaand Alcohol on Simulated Driving Performance," Report 021,State of Washington, Department of Motor Vehicles, April 1969,Reprinted in Science, 164: 851-54, May 16, 1969. Dagirimaijian, R. and Boyd, E. S., "Some PharmacologicalEffects of Two Tetrahydrocannabinols," Journal ofPharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 135: 25-33, 1962. Dott, A. B., "Effect of Marihuana on Risk Acceptance inan Automobile Simulator," RR71-3, Injury Control ResearchLaboratory for the U.S. Department of Health, Education andWelfare, 1971. "Drugs and Reckless Driving," New Jersey Journal of.Pharmacy, 40 (1) : 30, 1967. Ewens, G. F. W., "Insanity Following the Use of IndianHemp," Indian Medical Gazette, 39: 401-13, 1904. Ferguson, W. S. and Howard, W. L., Marihuana and Drug Use andHighway Safety-A Survey of High School Students in Virginia,Virginia Highway Research Council, July 1971. Fort, J., "Playboy Panel: The Drug Revolution,"Playboy, 17(2) : 53-55 et. seq., February, 1970. Frank, I. M.; Hepler, R. S.; Stier, S.; Rickles, W. H. andUngerleider, J. T., "Marihuana, Tobacco and FunctionsAffecting Driving." Paper presented to annual meeting of theAmerican Psychiatric Association, Washington, D. C., May 1971. Freedman, H. L. and Rockmore, M. I., "Marihuana: Factorin Personality Evaluation and Army Maladjustment.` Journal ofClinical Psychopathology, 7: 765-82, 8: 221236,1946. Gardikas, C. G., "Hashish and Crime," Enkephalos 2-3201-211, 1950, Cited in Tinklenberg, J., "Marihuana andCrime," Paper prepared for the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse, 1972, pp. 11-12. Gebhard, P. H.; Gagnon, J. H.; Pomeroy, W. B., andChristenson, C. V., Sex Offenders: An Analysis of Types New York:Bantam, 1967. Goode, E., "Drug Use and Sexual Behavior on a CollegeCampus," American Journal of Psychiatry, in press. Goode,E., "Marijuana and Sex," Evergreen Review, 66:19-21,72-74,1969. Goode, E., The Marijuana Smokers, New York: Basic Books, 1970. Goode, E., "Marihuana Use and Crime," prepared forNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, Jannary 15,1972. Grinspoon, L., Marihuana Reconsidered, Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press, 1971. Gusfield, J., "On Legislating Morals: The SymbolicProcess of Designating Deviance," California Law Review, 56:54-73, January 1968. Halikas, J. A.; Goodwin, D. W.; and Guze, S. B.,"Marihuana Effects: A Survey of Regular Users," Journalof the American Medical Association, 217: 692-94, August, 1971. Hochman, J. S. and Brill, N. Q., "Marijuana Use andPsychosocial Adaptation," Paper presented to annual meetingof American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C., May3,1971. Hollister, L. E.; Richards, R. K.; and Gillespie, H. K., "Comparison of Tetrahydrocannabinol and Synhexyl inMan," Chemical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9: 383-391,1968. Hollister, L. E., "Marihuana in Man: Three YearsLater," Science, 172 (3978) : 21-29, April 2, 1971. Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, Marijuana, 1894. Reprinted,Silver Spring, Maryland: Thomas Jefferson Publishing Co., 1969. Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, Report an WashingtonState Studies-Drug User Accident Rate, 8 (4), August, 1968. InTech Corporation, Research on Marihuana Use as aContributing Factor in the Commission of Criminal Acts as Well asJuvenile Delinquency, Final Report, Prepared for the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, November 19,1971. Isbell, H.; Gorodetzky, C. W.; Jasinski, D.; Claussen, U.; VonSpulak, T.; and Korte, F., "Effects of (-)-delta-9.Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," Psychopharmacologia, 11(2) : 184-88, 1967. James, T., "Dagga and Driving," S. A. MedieseTydskrif, 44: 580-81, May 16, 1970. Johnson, R. D., "'Medico-Social Aspects of MarijuanaRhode Island Medical Journal, 51: 171-78, 1968. Kalant, H., "Marihuana and Simulated Driving,"Science, 166: 640, August 22, 1969. Kaplan, J., Marijuana: The New Prohibition, New York: PocketBooks, 1971. Klein, A. W.; Davis, J. H.; and Blackbourne, B. D.,"Marihuana and Automobile Crashes," Journal of Di-mgIssues, 1 (1) :18-26,1971. Kolansky, H. and Moore, W. T., "Effects of Marihuana onAdolescents and Young Adults," Journal of American MedicalAssociation, 216 (3) : 485-92, April 1971. Lambo, T. A., "Medical and Social Problems of DrugAddiction in West Africa," UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 17 (1): 3-13,1965. LaRoe, A. D., "Growth of the Marijuana Habit Among OurYouth," American Weekly, 1940. Light, W. 0. and Keiper, C. G., "Effects of ModerateBlood Alcohol Levels on Automobile Passing Behavior,"RR-69-4, Injury Control Research Laboratory, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education, and Welfare, 1969. Lindesmith, A. R., Addiction and Opiates, rev. ed., Chieago:Aldine, 1968. MacDonald, J. M., Rape, Offenders and Their Victims,Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1971. Manno, J. E.; Kiplinger, G. F.; Halne, S. E.; Bennett, I. F.;and Forney, R. B., "Comparative Effects of Smoking Marihuanaor Placebo on Human Motor and Mental Performance," ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 2 (6) :808-15,1970. Maurer, D. W. and Vogel, V. H., Narcotics and NarcoticsAddiction, Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1962. Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in NewYork City, Lancaster: Jacques Cattel Press, 1944. McGlothlin, W. H., "Cannabis: A Reference," in TheMarihuana Papers, Solomon, D., ed., New York: Signet Books, 1966,pp. 455-72. McGlothlin, W. H., Progress Report (on Marihuana and DrivingStudy), Department of Psychology, University of California at LosAngeles, August, 1971. Merrill, R. T., Marihuana, the New Dangerous Drug, OpiumResearch Committee, Foreign Policy Association, Washington, D.C.,March, 1938. Miller, D. E., "Marihuana: The Law and ItsEnforcement," Suffolk University Law Review, 3: 81-96, Fall1968. Miller, S. E., "The Physician and the Prevention of MotorVehicle Accidents," Medical Times, 87 (7) : 861-69, July1959. Murphy, H. B. M., "The Cannabis Habit: A Review of RecentPsychiatric Literature," UN Bulletin of Narcotics, 15 (1) :15-23, 1963. National Institute of Mental Health, Statement to the SelectCommittee on Crime, U.S. House of Representatives, Marijuana, H.Rept. No. 91-798, 91st Cong., 2d Sess., 1970, p. 113, National Institute of Mental Health, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education, and Welfare, Marihuana and Health: SecondAnnual Report to Congress from the Secretary, Health, Education,and Welfare, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,1972. Nichols, J. L., Drug Use and Highway Safety: A Review of theLiterature, Prepared for U.S. Department of Transportation, July1971. Oursler, W., Marijuana: The Facts, The Truth, New York: Pap _IS. Eriksson, 1968. P_olak; "Chemical Analysis: Pot Test Developed for Use onDrivers," Washington Evening Star, November 26,1971, p. 7. President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administrationof Justice, Task Force Report: Narcotics and Drug Abuse,Washing-ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967. "Report of the Third Triannual Congress on TrafficAccidents," Bulletin de Medecine Legate et de ToxicologicMcdecale, 12(4) :161-65,1969. Robins, L. N. and Murphy, G. B., "Drug Use in a NormalPopulation of Young Negro Men," American Journal of PublicHealth, 57: 1580--96, September 1967. Robins, L. N.; Darvish, H. S.; and Murphy, G. E., "TheLong-Term Outcome of Adolescent Drug Users," in Zubin, J.and Freedman, A., eds., The Psychology of Adolescence, New York:Grime and Stratton, 1970, pp. 159-78. Robinson, V., "Concerning Cannabis Indica," in Bookof Grass: An Anthology of Indian Hemp, Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog,S., eds., New York: Grove Press, 1967, pp. 135-139. Rosevear, J., Pot: A Handbook of Marihuana, New York:University Books, 1967. Rowell, E. A. and Rowell, R., On the Trail of Marihuana: TheWeed of Madness, Mountain View, California: Pacific Press, 1939. Schofield, G. W., Unpublished Survey of the views of policeofficers regarding marihuana and aggression (1968), in Kaplan,J., Marijuana: The New Prohibition, New York: Pocket Books, 1971,pp. 110-115. Schoenfeld, D. D., "The Sociological Study," inMayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in the Cityof New York, Lancaster: Cattell Press, 1944, pp. 1-25. Siler, J. P., et al., "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"The Military Surgeon, 73: 269--280,1933- Simmons, J. L., Deviants, Berkeley: Glendessary Press, 1969. Solomon, D., ed., The Marihuana Papers, New York: SignetBooks, 1966. South Africa Interdepartmental Committee on Abuse of Dagga,Report, Government Printer, 1952. Tart, C. T., On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study ofMarijuana Intoxication, Palo Alto: Science and Behavior-Books,1971. Taylor, N., Narcotics: Nature's Dangerous Gifts, rev. ed., NewYork: Dell, 1963. Tinklenberg, J., "Marihuana and Crime," Prepared forNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, October 1971. Tinklenberg, J. R. and Stillman, R. S., "Drug Use andViolence," in Daniels, D. N., et al., eds., Violence andMan's Struggle for Existence, Boston: Little, Brown and Company,1970. Trocchi, A., "Marihuana and Sex," in Book of Grass:An Anthology of Indian Hemp, Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog, S., eds.,New York: Grove Press, 1967, p. 108. U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means,Taxation of Marihuana, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., 1937. Waller, J. A., "Chronic Medical Conditions and TrafficSafety: A Review of California Experience," New EnglandJournal of Medicine, 273: 1413-20, Dec. 23, 1965. Waller, J. A., "Medical Impairment and HighwayCrashes," Police, 14 (6): 24-27, July-August, 1970. Walton,R. P., Marihuana: America's New Drug Problem, Philadelphia:Lippincott, 1938 Watt, J. M., "Dagga in South Africa," UN Bulletin onNarcotics,13 (3):9-14,1961. Weil, A. T., "Cannabis," Science, 164: 2-8,September 1969. Weil, A. T.; Zinberg, N.; and Nelsen, J. M.,"Clinical and Psychological Effects of Marihuana inMan," Science, 162: 1234-42, 1968. Weiss, B. and Laties, V. G., "Enhancement of HumanPerformance by Caffeine and Amphetamines," PharmacologicalReviews, 14: 1-37,1962. Weitzner, M.; Smith, H. B.; Gerver, I.; and Pollack, H.,"A Study of the Relationship Between Severity of Dispositionand Subsequent Criminal Behavior in a Sample of YouthfulMarijuana Offenders in New York State." Prepared for theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, 1971. White House Conference on Narcotic Drug Abuse, Proceedings,Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office 1962. Williams, G., cited in Wilson, E., "The CrazyDreamers," Colliers, June 4,1969. Zinberg, N. E. and Weil, A. T., "The Effects of Marihuanaon Human Beings," Addictions, 16 (4) : 2G-42 Winter 1969. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-23IA031-000655-B041-18http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113420 text/html 95497HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:33:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:47 GMTContent-length: 95279 Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse I. Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco History of Marihuana Legislation* This chapter traces the legislative histories of marihuana,alcohol, and tobacco. In the first section, "History of MarihuanaLegislation," the origins of the intoxicant use of cannabisin this country during the early 20th century are noted alongwith the subsequent state and federal statutes enactedprohibiting use, distribution, production and sale. Proscriptions began appearing on the books after about 1914and continued through 1971, which brings the reader to the pointsubsequently covered by the rest of this Appendix. Early colonial laws regarding alcohol are described in thebeginning of the next section, "History of AlcoholProhibition." From that point in history, the nationalmovements which spread over the next two centuries, culminatingin the enactment of National Prohibition from 1920 to 1933, aredescribed. The various state modes of control which appeared after Repealare then briefly enumerated along with a discussion of thepresent state controls over production, distribution, and sale ofintoxicating beverages. The introduction of tobacco cultivation in 1613 in the colonyof Virginia opens the third section, "History of TobaccoRegulation." The widespread use of tobacco in the latter1800's into the first half of the 20th century is traced alongwith the increasing pressure from groups fearful of tobacco'sdeleterious effects on health. Federal sumptuary regulations are outlined along, with adiscussion of the impact further federal controls might have onthe tobacco economy. History of Marihuana Legislation* *This section is drawn from the manuscript of The MarihuanaConsensus: A History of American Marihuana Prohibition, in press1972, by Professors Charles H. Whitebread, 11, and Richard J.Bonnie of the University of Virginia Law School. "Marihuana" or Indian hemp, labeled Cannabis SativaL. by Linneas in 1753, has been used for centuries in Asia andAfrica for its intoxicant properties. It was cultivated as asource of fiber in North America in the early 17th century. Yet,cannabis was not used as an intoxicant in North America until thelate 19th century, and in the United States until the early 20th. Cannabis use was prevalent in Mexico by 1898. Widelycultivated and growing wild, the drug was readily available foreating, drinking, or smoking, the latter being by far the mostcommon method of ingestion. Soldiers in Pancho Villa's army arereputed to have used the drug freely. The path of theintroduction of marihuana smoking for pleasure into the UnitedStates was not via Europe, which transmitted the fiber, oil, andmedicinal uses of hemp, but via Mexico and the West Indies. The plant and its intoxicant use in the United States in thefirst decades of the 20th century encountered a political andsocial climate which was not particularly conducive to heartygrowth. Gradually criminal prohibitions appeared on the statutebooks of nearly every state where the drug was used. Well into the thirties, however, marihuana smoking attractedlittle attention from the national policy and opinion apparatuswhich was deeply ensnared in drug matters of much wider socialimpact than the limited, regional use of this new drug. The "villain" theory of American marihuanaprohibition - attributing the drug's illegal status to theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and its longtime head, Harry J.Anslinger - has been particularly popular in recent years. Although the federal narcotics bureaucracy, with CommissionerAnslinger at the helm, was to become marihuana's leadingantagonist in the mid-thirties, a restrictive, public policytoward the drug was well-rooted locally before that time. Duringthe "local" phase of marihuana prohibition, lastingroughly from 1914 to 1931, practically every state west of theMississippi, except for two, had prohibited use of the drug fornon-medical purposes. The real story of marihuana policy in the United States beginsas a series of distinctly local tales. STATE PROHIBITION: 1914-1930 Marihuana use was a familiar phenomenon in the border towns ofTexas and New Mexico after 1910. First to note the use of thedrug were El Paso law enforcement officials who quickly secured alocal ordinance in 1914 banning sale and possession of the drug.El Paso officials and local representatives of the Customs andAgriculture Departments of the Federal Government agitated forstate and federal legislation to combat the "killerweed." After an official request by the Secretary of Agriculture, theSecretary of the Treasury issued a decision under the Food andDrug Act prohibiting importation of cannabis after 1915 for otherthan medical purposes. On the state level in Texas, legislation was slow in coming.Marihuana use was still a local problem in the 'border towns andit attracted little statewide interest. The Texas Legislatureincluded marihuana when it passed a general narcotics statute in1919, prohibiting transfer of listed narcotics except for medicalpurposes (Texas, 1919: 278). In 1923, the statute was tightenedto prohibit possession with intent to sell (Texas, 1923:156-157). The legislature's failure to prohibit simple possessionor use reflected an objection to interfering with privateconduct. The degree of public interest in narcotics and marihuana iswell-illustrated by the limited newspaper coverage. In its onlydirect reference to the 1923 marihuana legislation, the AustinTexas Statesman, which had given the legislature extensivecoverage, stated: The McMillan Senate Bill amended the anti-narcotic law soas to make unlawful the possession for the purpose of sale ofmarihuana or other drugs. Marihuana is a Mexican herb and is saidto be sold on the Texas-Mexican border (Austin TexasStatesman, 1923). Even more surprising is the fact that the El Paso Times didnot mention the McMillan bill before or after its passage. New Mexico in the same year prohibited sale, cultivation andimportation of cannabis. Mere possession was not expresslyprohibited but anyone found in possession was presumed to haveimported the marihuana illegally (New Mexico, 1923: 58-59). TheSanta Fe New Mexican, hometown newspaper of the bill's sponsorspaid scant attention, noting only that: The Santa Fe representative, however, had better luck withhis bill to prevent sale of marihuana, cannabis indica, Indianhemp or hashish as it is variously known. This bill was passedwithout any opposition. Marihuana was brought into localprominence at the penitentiary board's investigation last summerwhen a convict testified he could get marihuana cigarettesanytime he had a dollar. The drug produces intoxication whenchewed or smoked. Marihuana is the name commonly used in theSouthwest and Mexico (Santa Fe New Mexican, 1923). In addition to coming in via Mexico, marihuana was beingsmuggled in by sailors from Cuba and other points in the Indiesvia New Orleans. Dr. Frank Gomila, Commissioner of Public Safetyof New Orleans, began his campaign for federal legislation whichwould later bear fruit. He observed that the traffic was quiteorganized amounting to thousands of kilograms a year: ... [T]he custom was to keep [marihuana] In warehouses orstorerooms for further distribution. It was sold by thewholesaler to the retailer who In turn put the 'weed' through aprocess known as 'sweating.' The dried leaves and stems weresoaked in sugar water and dried on butcher's brown papers (Gomilaand Lambow, 1938: 29). According to Dr. Gomila and the newspapers, the demand in NewOrleans in the mid-twenties was so great that the"peddlers" were able to become exceptionally prosperousby dividing the market. One had exclusive jurisdiction over theblacks unloading the fruit boats, another over the lobby in acertain hotel, and so forth. It should be noted that marihuanawas also available at the local pharmacy without a prescriptionbefore 1923 in Texas and 1921 in Louisiana. After that marihuanahad to be bought on the street unless the user could successfullyforge a prescription. Different pictures emerge, of the marihuana user in El Pasoand San Antonio on the one hand and New Orleans and Galveston onthe other. In the border towns, he was a Mexican laborer,indolent to some, volatile to others. Local authorities were, byand large, unable to generate any significant public or politicalinterest, although there were no political objections to makingthe Mexican weed illegal. In the port cities, however, the marihuana user was a"dope fiend," the basest element of American society.He was a narcotics addict, a pimp, or a gambler; she was aprostitute. In New Orleans, marihuana was simply another narcoticin a city with a major narcotic problem. It was always open tosensationalism. Even before public attention was excited, however, theprevalence of marihuana use came to the attention of thePresident of the Louisiana State Board of Health, Dr. OscarDowling. On August 21, 1920, he advised the Governor of theincreasing availability of marihuana, a "powerful narcotic,causing exhilaration, intoxication, delirious hallucinations, andits subsequent action, drowsiness and stupor. . ." (Jones,1920). At the same time, Dr. Dowling wrote to the Surgeon General ofthe United States, Dr. Hugh Cummings, to advise him of theincreasing traffic in morphine, opium, and marihuana, and to seekfederal cooperation. An interesting sidelight of this request for assistance fromWashington is that four months later Dr. Dowling was to becomeembroiled in a bitter battle with the Federal Government over anorder to close his pet project, the New Orleans morphine clinics(Dowling, 1920). Ultimately he would lose, and one of theearliest attempts to deal with narcotics addiction would besuppressed for a half century (Lindesmith, 1967: 135-161). Very little, however, was done about the marihuana issue untilthe press seized upon it. In the fall of 1926, the New OrleansItem dispatched an army of reporters among the smoking andselling population. A series of articles published by the more widely circulatedMorning Tribune (both the Item and the Tribune were owned by thesame publishing company) exposed the immense profits being madeand commented upon the volatile effects of the drug upon its"addicts." It was reported that marihuana: Numbs the sense, creates wild fancies and has a hypnoticeffect upon the user, making his will easily subordinated to thatof others. What emerged from these articles, however, was not a vision ofaddicts on the streets and pushers on the docks but ratherpeddlers who lurked on playgrounds seeking to entrap young minds."Over two hundred children under fourteen are believed to beaddicted to the marihuana habit," the paper reported, and"at least 44 schools were definitely being infected"(Gomila and Lambow, 1938: 29-31). Local policy-makers wasted no time. The New Orleans PoliceDepartment immediately launched a round-up. They arrested morethan 150 persons for violation of a law which had lain dormantfor two years (Gomila and Lambow, 1938: 29-31; WCTIT, 1928). Dr. Dowling soon circulated "a warning to parents,guardians, and teachers of children against this menace"(WCTIT, 1928: 1). The Women's Christian Temperance Union jumpedon the bandwagon, focusing its attacks on the "softdrink" bars which had sprung up all over New Orleans duringProhibition: The soft drink stand and the corner drug store have takenthe place of the saloon as a social meeting place. Here is wheremarihuana and liquors can sometimes be bought (WCTU, 1928:3). Beyond these immediate effects, a more substantial impact ofthe local policy reaction in New Orleans was the formation of atightly knit coterie of New Orleans law enforcement, publichealth, and social welfare officials who would carry theircampaign to Washington, with ultimate success. The drug and the practice of smoking it spread during themid-twenties from the Gulf Coast and border town points-of-entryin two directions north and west from the border together withits ethnic identity and north and east from New Orleans with itsidentity as a narcotic and enslaver of youth. Practically every state west of the Mississippi Riverprohibited the possession or sale of marihuana during the period1915 to 1930. Most of them acted by 1930: California (1915), Iowa(1921), Nevada (1923), Washington (1923), Arkansas (1923),Nebraska, (1927), and Wyoming (1929). The Bureau of Immigration records the entry of 590,765Mexicans during this period, two-thirds of them remaining inTexas, the others settling in states in the Rocky Mountain area,most of them as farm laborers (U.S. Bureau of Immigration, 1915to 1930). Whether motivated by outright ethnic prejudice or by simplediscriminatory disinterest, the proceedings before statelegislatures resembled those in Texas in 1923. There was little,if any, public attention and no debate. Pointed references weremade to the drug's Mexican origins and sometimes to the criminalconduct which inevitably followed when Mexicans ingested the"killer weed.," The Colorado Legislature first prohibited possession,cultivation and sale of the drug in 1927, the year after the useof marihuana noticeably increased (Colorado, 1927: 309). At thattime., according to a subsequent newspaper report, the drug was" used almost exclusively . . . by the Mexican populationemployed in the beet fields" (Rocky Mountain News, 1931). Similarly, in 1929, the Montana Legislature amended itsgeneral narcotic law to marihuana, prohibiting use, sale orpossession without a prescription (Montana, 1929: 5). On sevendifferent days from June 24 to February 10, the date of thebill's passage, the Montana Standard succinctly noted theprogress of the bill through the legislature. The legislature'sattitude was characterized in the January 27 issue: There was fun in the House Health Committee during the weekwhen the marihuana bill came up for consideration. Marihuana isMexican opium, a plant used by Mexicans and cultivated for saleby Indians. "When some beet field peon takes a few rares ofthis stuff," explained Dr. Fred Fulsher of Mineral County,"he thinks he has just been elected President of Mexico sohe starts out to execute all his Political enemies. I understandthat over in Butte where the mexicans often go for the winterthey stage imaginary bullfights in the 'Bower of Roses' or put ontournaments for the favor of 'Spanish Rose' after a couple ofwhiffs of marihuana. The Silver Bow and Yellowstone delegationsboth deplore these international complications." Everybodylaughed and the bill was recommended for passage (MontanaStandard, 1929: 3). About the same time, Mexican laborers bad begun to appear inIdaho and the mayor of Boise remarked: 'The Mexican beet field workers have introduced a newproblem-the smoking in cigarettes or pipes of marihuana or grifo.its use is as demoralizing as the use of narcotics. Smoking grifois quite prevalent along the Oregon Short Line Railroad; andIdaho has no law to cope with the use and spread of thisdangerous drug (WCTU, 1928: 3). Idaho passed a law in 1927 (Idaho, 1927: 98). By 1931, the Texas Legislature finally got around toprohibiting possession of marihuana. By now alcohol prohibitionhad withdrawn any philosophical barrier to making possessionillegal. The San Antonio Light reported that: At last the state legislature has taken a definite steptoward suppression of traffic in a dangerous andinsanity-producing narcotic easily compounded of a weed(marihuana) indigenous to this section. This newspaper has urgedthe passage of prohibitory legislation and is gratified that thesolons at Austin have acted, even if tardily, in the suppressionof traffic in a drug which makes, the addict [read Mexican]frequently a dangerous or homicidal maniac (San AntonioLight, 1931). In the East, appearance of the practice was not a necessaryprerequisite for prohibition. That Maine (1913), Massachusetts(1914), Vermont (1915), and Rhode Island (1918) barred the saleof cannabis without a prescription before 1920 does not indicatethat marihuana smoking had appeared there on any significantscale. Rather, in the course of anticipating and implementing thenational anti-narcotics policy declared by the Harrison Act in1914, medical representatives on the drafting committeesrecommended the inclusion of "another narcotic" towhich addicts could resort once the other opiates becamedifficult to obtain. The New York Times in 1914 described cannabis as a"narcotic [having] practically the same effect. as morphineand cocaine," (New York Times, 1914: 6) and it noted in aneditorial that: [T]he inclusion of cannabis indica among the drugs to besold only on prescription is only common sense. Devotees ofhashish are now hardly numerous enough here to count, but theyare likely to increase as other narcotics become harder to obtain(New York Times, 1914: 8). By 1923, the New York Times referred to marihuana as thecity's "latest habit-forming drug" when reporting itsexhibition at a Women's Club meeting (New York Times, 1923: 24).Finally, in 1927, whether responding to an increase in use or tothe substitution admonition, the legislature included marihuanain its definition of "habit forming drugs" in acomprehensive narcotics bill (New York, 1927: 1695). The situation in Chicago paralleled that in New York until1927. Large Mexican communities developed in Chicago and Gary,Indiana, during the twenties and marihuana smoking became commonin these areas and among journeymen musicians as well. As in NewYork, there was little public concern. The New Orleans patterntook over around 1927, however, when the attention of local lawenforcement officials was suddenly drawn to the Mexicans andtheir "muggles." One law enforcement official reportedthat: There are about 7,000 Mexicans in Gary, 10,000 in IndianaHarbor and 8,000 in South Chicago.... The Mexicans depend on thesteel mills, railroads, and construction gangs for employment.Many are drifters when slack labor conditions prevail....[T]wenty-five percent of these Mexicans smoke marihuana. In fact,many of them make their living by raising and peddling the drug (Paul,1929: 4). A situation perceived to be so widespread was naturallyconsidered likely to infect the rest of the community. As in NewOrleans, reports started to appear that high school students weresmoking the weed (Paul, 1929: 1; Chicago Tribune, June 3, 1929). Since there was then neither state nor federal legislationprohibiting sale of marihuana, the local United States attorneydeclared war armed with an Internal Revenue statute prohibitingproduction and transfer of "a cigarette substitute" onwhich tax had not been paid. In June 1929, he raided wholesalehouses "believed to have disposed of large quantities ofmarihuana cigarettes, sold to school pupils and other youthfulthrill seekers." He arrested nine men "most of themMexicans" (Chicago Examiner, June 22, 1929). At the sametime, local officials began to use a statute which prohibitedtransfer of "any cigarette containing any substancedeleterious to health" (Chicago Examiner, June 19, 1929). The Chicago Tribune, lobbying heavily for anti-marihuanalegislation then pending before the Illinois Legislature,reported that day-to-day progress of the enforcement activity(Chicago Tribune, July and October, 1929). Every stall in thelegislature earned a banner headline such as: BAN ON HASHISH BLOCKED DESPITE RAVAGES OF DRUG In an article appearing in June, 1929, the paper noted: The number of addicts is growing alarmingly according toauthorities, because of the ease with which [marihuana] can beobtained. The habit was introduced a dozen years ago by Mexicanlaborers . . . but it has become widespread among American youthsand girls even among school children. The legislation, however, was killed. Marihuana prohibition had become widespread. In states whereeither Mexicans or the drug had appeared, its use was quicklysuppressed. Soon after being apprised of its presence, local lawmakersinvoked the criminal law. In New Orleans, Denver, and Chicago thespectre of a doped school population was the cornerstone of theprohibitory effort. And, during alcohol prohibition, paralleled by the local phaseof marihuana prohibition, it was naturally imperative to suppressa drug which frustrated alcohol users might substitute, for theircustomary intoxicant. THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUG ACT Following the ad hoc local phase of marihuana legislation inthe United States was the nationalization phase. During thisperiod marihuana became integrated at both the state and federallevels with the nation's narcotics policy which had beenmanifested forcefully in Congress' adoption of the HarrisonNarcotics Act in 1914. The Harrison Act, a taxing measure, required registration andpayment of an occupational tax by all persons who imported,produced, dealt in, sold or gave away opium, cocaine or theirderivatives. The Act required all legitimate handlers of thesenarcotics to file returns setting forth in detail their use ofthe drugs. Since the Act also provided that only legitimate users couldregister and no one but a registered user could obtain thespecified form, any transfer by an illegitimate user was aviolation of the Act. For those failing to comply with itsregistration requirements, the original Harrison Act providedpenalties of not more than $2,000 in fines or more than fiveyears imprisonment, or both. Drafted as a tax law rather than an outright criminal statute,the Act was intended to do indirectly what Congress believed itcould not do directly: regulate possession and sale of theopiates. However, because the Act essentially was arevenue-raising measure imposing a tax on transfers of narcotics,it could not effectively prohibit the possession of drugs. This indirect regulation of narcotics traffic had a number ofsignificant consequences. First, since the Act could not penalizeusers of addiction directly, there was an immediate need forcomplementary residual state legislation in order to dealeffectively with the drug problem. Second, the enforcement of the Act was as signed to theInternal Revenue Service in the Treasury Department. The firstenforcement agency for the Harrison Act was the NarcoticsDivision of the Prohibition Unit of the Internal Revenue Servicecreated in 1920 (Schmeckebier, 1929: 143). This division wasincorporated in the Prohibition Bureau which was created in 1927(Act, 1927:1381). In 1930, the enforcement of the narcotics laws was severedfrom the Bureau of Prohibition and established as the separateBureau of Narcotics in the Treasury Department (Act, 1930: 585).The existence of this separate, agency has done as much as anysingle factor to influence the course of drug regulation from1930 to 1970 (King, 1953: 736). Although the impact of the Bureau on the passage of theUniform Narcotic Drug Act and the Marihuana Tax Act will beexplained in detail in subsequent sections, it is important hereto note that the existence of a separate bureau havingresponsibility only for narcotics enforcement and for educatingthe public on drug problems inevitably led to a particularlyprosecutorial view of narcotics addiction and the use and abuseof all drugs. After the passage of the Harrison Act in 1914, there remaineda considerable lack of uniformity regarding the offensesprohibited and the penalties imposed by the several states. In 1919, the American Medical Association asked theCommissioner of Internal Revenue to call a conference, toconsider better control of traffic in narcotic drugs. Theprofession was uncertain of its obligations in the matter becausethey were faced with an amalgam of conflicting laws. The A.M.A.asked that the wholesale, retail, and manufacturing druginterests be among those attending, along with delegates from themedical profession in each state. The proposal received noofficial or unofficial response either from the Commissioner ofInternal Revenue or the Bureau of Prohibition. Nevertheless, the American Medical Association, through itsown Council on Health and Public Instruction, did hold aconference in early 1922 during which a uniform state narcoticcontrol law was presented. At the November meeting of thatconference, there were present 15 representatives of 10pharmaceutical organizations and two representatives of themedical profession. The draft of a uniform law was approved unanimously by allpresent. The American Medical Association set out to codify thedraft and to send it for approval to each of the constituentorganizations (White, August 3, 1932; Woodward, August 6, 1932).After securing approval, all the associations agreed to pursueenactment first in New York. The general lack of uniformity in anti-narcotics legislation,the weakness of state enforcement procedures, and the growinghysteria about dope fiends and criminality converged in severalrequests outside the medical community for a uniform statenarcotic law (Anslinger and Tompkins, 1953: 159). The drafting of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act must also beviewed against the background of two larger movements: (1) thetrend toward the creation and dissemination of uniform state lawsby the National Commissioners on Uniform State laws, a group towhich each state sent two representatives appointed by thegovernor; and (2) the general concern in the late 1920's andearly 1930's with interstate crime, manifested , for example, bythe creation in 1930 of the nearly autonomous Federal Bureau ofInvestigation. Because the concept of states' rights and narrowlyconstrued federal power was then so powerful, an appeal to theNational Commissioners was the inevitable recourse for thosepressing for uniform anti-narcotic regulation. DRAFTING THE UNIFORM ACT By 1924, the Commissioners had appointed Committee to draft auniform narcotic drug act At the 1925 meeting of Commissioners,the chair man of the Committee reported that he himself hadprepared a first tentative draft based on the New York Act, theWashington state legislation, the Harrison Act, and a bill thenbefore the New York Legislature. Presumably this was the ondrafted by the A.M.A. Conference after its 192 meeting. The chairman noted, however, that Dr. William Woodward, headof the A.M.A.'s Bureau of Legal Medicine and Legislation, withwhom he had only recently conferred, had made "some veryvaluable suggestions." Because the tentative draft hadalready been printed before these suggestions, he requested thatit "not be read but be re-committed to the Committee"(1925 Handbook: 977-985). This first draft included cannabis inthe list of "habit-forming drugs," although all suchdrugs could be distributed and used for medical purposes (1925Handbook: 978). A second tentative draft was presented in 1928 and again thedraft was not discussed at the conference but recommitted forfurther study. The second draft was essentially an exact copy ofthe 1927 New York Statute. It also included cannabis in the classof habit-forming drugs (1928 Handbook: 75-78,323-333). There was a lack of concern on the part of the Commissionersthemselves with the whole narcotics problem between 1924 and1928. The President of the Conference, introducing Dr. Woodward,said: In view of the importance of the act I think it would notbe amiss to listen to the Doctor for a few minutes, that he maypoint out to us why it is important. In some of the states we donot recognize the importance because it has not been called toour attention (1928 Handbook: 76-77). Nor was the Bureau of Prohibition particularly concerned atthis time with the cannabis provision. Lack of official concernand interest continued to be the Bureau's attitude toward thesecond tentative draft (Nutt, June 13,1929). Since neither the Commissioners nor federal narcoticsofficials were particularly concerned about state and localcontrol of narcotics generally and marihuana in particular, itseems clear that neither was responsible for the inclusion ofmarihuana in the category of "habit-forming drugs. Rather,it would appear that it was included in the first draft becausethat had been drawn from the 1923 Washington statute which hadlisted cannabis. Insofar as the second draft was a copy of the 1927 New YorkAct, inclusion of cannabis in this draft is not unusual. Few, ifany, of the persons involved in the drafting were concerned aboutmarihuana smoking or even aware of its use. Two third drafts were submitted, the first in 1929 and thesecond in 1930. The initial one closely resembled the secondtentative draft, and once again it included cannabis in thecategory of "habit-forming drugs.` Again, the growth,distribution, and possession of cannabis was prohibited exceptfor medical purposes. The nascent Congressional interest in marihuana in 1929 andthe Bureau of Prohibition's subsequent resistance to amending,and thereby endangering, the Harrison and Export and Import Acts,caused the Bureau to take full notice of this 1929 third draft.Like its predecessors, however, the initial third draft wasrecommitted for further study (1929 Handbook : 43, 332-346). The second third tentative draft, submitted in 1930, was thefirst to remove cannabis from the definition of"habit-forming drugs" and to include only asupplemental provision for dealing with the drug (1930 Handbook:485,97). When the Conference of Commissioners met to consider thesecond third tentative draft, Judge Deering, the Chairman of theCommittee on the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, recommended itsrecommission for further study because the Committee had not yethad an opportunity to consult the newly created Bureau ofNarcotics. At the time of this conference, August 14, 1930, no one hadyet been appointed Commissioner of the Bureau, although Harry J.Anslinger was Acting Commissioner (1930 Handbook: 126-127). TheSenate confirmed Anslinger's appointment as Commissioner onDecember 18, 1930. The Bureau of Narcotics their became actively involved in thedrafting process. Commissioner Anslinger was pressing forinclusion of the cannabis provision. He stated that he felt thelimited medical use for cannabis was far outweighed by the needto control potential cannabis addiction (Anslinger, July28,1930). Dr. Woodward and the pharmaceutical industry advocatedoptional inclusion of marihuana on the one hand, and federalnarcotics representatives urged not only inclusion butelimination of medical use, on the other. The fourth tentative draft retained the optional cannabisprovision. At a session before the convening of the fullConference of Commissioners from September 9-12, 1931,Commissioner Anslinger and A. L. Tennyson of the Bureau met withJudge Deering to discuss the Bureau's feelings about the fourthtentative draft. At this time Commissioner Anslinger stated that the Bureaufelt strongly that inclusion of cannabis in the state law oughtto be mandatory. Moreover, the Bureau urged that the onlysuccessful way to deal with the marihuana drug traffic, becauseof its domestic nature and the easy availability of the weed, wasto prohibit the cultivation of the plant altogether and to findsome substitute for the limited medical use (Tennyson, September16, 1931). However, the fourth tentative draft presented to theConference of Commissioners included the optional marihuanaprovision. And, the Conference tentatively approved the fourthtentative draft and directed the Committee to prepare a finaldraft (1931 Handbook: 127-128, 390-402). The American Medical Association played a key role in thedrafting process prior to 1931. Their efforts had been largelyresponsible for consideration of the Uniform Drug Act in thefirst place. From the beginning in 1925, Dr. William Woodward,the Director of the A.M.A.'s Bureau of Legal Medicine andLegislation, actively assisted in the drafting of the Act andwidely circulated the drafts to interested persons for theircomments. It appears, however, that Dr. Woodward's personal style andthe preeminent position of the American Medical Association inthe drafting process were resented by the two remaining interestgroups-the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and the retail andwholesale pharmaceutical associations. The Bureau had beencommenting on drafts only after they had been drawn by the A.M.A.and did not feel it was playing an active role in the draftingprocess. The pharmaceutical industry felt that their interestswere considered only peripherally and that they had been excludedfrom the heart of tire, drafting process. As a result of the dissent, a conference of interested partieswas scheduled before the final draft was to be presented to theConference of Commissioners. Present at this preliminary conference on September 15, 1932,were representatives of the Drug Committee the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics, the Department of State, the Public Health Service,the American Medical Association, and delegates from the drugindustry and other medically related industries andorganizations. The final version of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Actwas hammered out at this session. The Bureau was central to thedrafting process and Commissioner Anslinger made a major effortto involve the drug manufacturers and the wholesale and retaildrug trade in it to protect the Act from possible subsequentpolitical disagreement (Anslinger, August 1, 1932): Finally, theconference agreed on a draft to be presented to the NationalConference. The manufacturers of drug products were strongly opposed tothe inclusion of cannabis under any criminal regulatory scheme.Representatives of the industry opposed a mandatory cannabisprovision. The final conclusion reached by all the partiespresent was: After considerable comment, it was decided to eliminateSection 12 (Cannabis) and leave it to the Conference ofCommissioners as to whether it should be included under thegeneral provisions of the Act (Report of PreliminaryConference, 1932: 23). The Bureau was no longer insisting on the mandatory inclusionof in absolute marihuana prohibition; it did not want to risk theopposition of the drug industry to the, entire Act. The fifth tentative draft did, however, include a significantchange in form which would have important consequences in thedecades to come. Although the marihuana provision remainedsupplemental to the main body of the Act, any state wishing toregulate the sale and possession of marihuana was instructed,simply, to add cannabis to the definition of "narcoticdrugs." All the, other provisions of the, Act would theirapply to marihuana as well as to the opiates and cocaine. TheCommissioners adopted this form as it had been prepared at theSeptember 15, 1932, preliminary Conference. The only recorded opposition to the adoption of the finaldraft came from some Commissioners who objected to tying theUniform State Law to the terms of the federal Harrison Act. Thislast obstacle was over-come by the argument that a number ofstates already had passed such legislation so that the states'rights problem need not stand in the way. The Act was adopted 26to 3 (1932 Handbook: 107). ENACTMENT OF THE UNIFORM ACT BY THE STATES After final acceptance of the Uniform Act, the Bureau set towork at once to secure state enactment-including an adequatemarihuana provision. A comprehensive campaign was undertaken inthe press, in legislative chambers, and in any other forum togain public support for the Uniform Act. In addition, perceiving the absence of public awareness ofmarihuana and needing to encourage positive action to overcomethe drug's optional status, the Bureau also sought to arousepublic interest in marihuana through "an educationalcampaign describing the drug, its identifications and its evileffects" (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1937 : 59). That there was little general knowledge about cannabis isillustrated by the fact that as late as 1934, it was necessary toshow marihuana to the New York police so that they couldrecognize it growing or in dried, smokable form (New York Times1934: 6). The Bureau's district supervisors and local agents werecampaigning actively in the legislatures before which the Act waspending. A press campaign was conducted across the country togain the support of civic groups and other interested parties.Mr. Anslinger sought editorial support in newspapers (Anslinger,October 22, 1936) and assisted in the, drafting of articles forpopular magazines (Anslinger, December 23, 1936). To mobilize theBar, Bureau officials wrote an article for law journalsexplaining the need for the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act (Anslinger,1932: 52; Tennyson, 1932: 55). Despite these efforts, it appears that the Uniform Act had arough time in state legislatures during its early life. By April26, 1933, only two states had enacted it in full. As late asMarch 1935, only 10 states had enacted the Uniform Law. A number of significant objections had emerged in the statelegislatures considering the passage of the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct. First among these was the potential cost to the state ofenforcing the Act. Second, there was concern over the number ofregistrants who would have to be licensed due to the belief thatthe Uniform Act would require special licensing of doctors,dentists, and veterinarians. Third, the limit on the amount ofexempt preparations which could be sold caused a great deal oftechnical difficulty with the Act. Fourth, many criticized theright of the court to revoke or suspend the license to practicemedicine or pharmacy. And finally, there seemed to be widespreadmisunderstanding of the record-keeping requirements of the Act. Although these objections were largely administrative, theynevertheless posed what appeared to be serious stumbling blocksto the successful passage of the Uniform Law in all the states. The combination of public apathy and administrative resistancenecessitated a new approach in generating public interest.Beginning in late 1934, Commissioner Anslinger gradually shiftedthe focus of the FBN's educational campaign away from theliability of federal law enforcement agencies to deal effectivelywith the local drug problems to the need to cope with the newdrug menace-marihuana. The clearest reflection of the, change in Bureau policy isfound in two official statements of Commissioner Anslinger, onemade in 1933 and the other in 1936. One 1933 statement explains the need for a Uniform NarcoticDrug Law and emphasizes United States international obligations,the need for more effective coordination in law enforcement, andthe impact the law will have on the dangers of morphine, cocaine,and opium addiction (FBN Paper, July 1933). In the laterstatement, however, more than half of the time is devoted to adiscussion of the "worst evil of all" the marihuanaproblem. To aid the new approach's objective, Commissioner Anslingermade speeches and contributed articles to journals. The mostinfluential of his efforts was "Marihuana Assassin ofYouth" which appeared in the widely circulated AmericanMagazine in July 1937 (Anslinger and Cooper,1937). The FBN files contain more than 50 letters addressed to theCommissioner which say: "Your article was the first time Iever heard of marihuana." Among the most effective proponents of the Uniform Act was theHearst newspaper chain. These papers began editorializing infavor of enactment within days after the Act had been approved in1932. The Hearst chain was not alone. A Birmingham, Alabama, paperon August 22, 1935, emphasized the need to control marihuana as areason for adopting the Act (Birmingham Age Herald, August 22,1935). A Washington Post columnist in September, 1934, devotedthree quarters of his article to marihuana with quotes fromAnslinger and Stanley urging adoption of the Uniform Act(Washington Post, September 29, 1934). Other large-city newspapers such as the Cleveland Plain,Dealer and the St. Louis Star Times kept a steady, ifintermittent, stream of anti-marihuana articles flowing in the,period just before the passage of the Uniform Act in those areas.In Missouri, especially, local concern generated by the extensivecoverage in the Star Times speedily pushed the legislature toadopt the Uniform Act. Often it has been supposed on the basis of this increasedcoverage that the use of marihuana increased around 1935. Sincethere was some larger design involved, however, a firm conclusionis unwarranted. At the same time, it is possible that use, didspread after the publicity campaigns, especially among the young. Judging from the tremendous expansion in coverage by the NewYork Times beginning in 1935, the evidence supplied by theLaGuardia Commission in its 1944 Report and the, leap inenforcement activity, marihuana, finally came to New York City inthe 1930's, though then probably on a smaller scale than inDenver land the, border towns of Texas. Apart from the press, another influential participant in themarihuana campaign, especially after the Repeal of Prohibition,was the Women's Christian Temperance Union. Although the WCTU haddistributed a pamphlet on marihuana as early as 1927, theirpublication, the Union Signal, does not reflect any significantinterest either in the Uniform Act or marihuana, until 1934.Before that year the "narcotic" receiving the mostattention was nicotine. Beginning in 1936, however, the UnionSignal had a direct line to the FBN national office, and fromthen on every issue contained material on marihuana (WCTU boundvolumes, yearly). The World Narcotic Defense Association and its head, RichmondP. Hopson, were also involved in the drive for state enactment.They were continually in postal contact with almost every statelegislator in the country (WNDA, 1937). The most well-financedgroup in the campaign, the Association underwrote nationalbroadcasts and distributed a lengthy pamphlet on marihuana, in1936. The General Federation of Women's Clubs also contributedenergetically. The Federation educated its membership about theneed for the Uniform Act and about the evils of marihuana inparticular. The Chairman of the Federation's department oflegislation noted: The situation concerning club women particularly is theaccessibility of the frightening degenerating marihuana weed,which is rolled in cigarettes ... and has been playing such havocwith young high school boys and girls (WCTU, 1936: 285). The state and local clubs immediately began to unite locallegislators and to conduct educational campaigns for parents,teachers and children (WCTU, 1937: 36; Wood, January 13, 1936).An FBN agent appeared at a New York meeting of the localFederation with two marihuana plants. They were exhibited at alocal flower show: Marihuana Plant exhibit at Flower Show of Katrina Trask Garden Club Tomorrow, 3 P.M. on at the Casino This plant is the cause of a dread menacewhich in being fought by the State Department of Health. Public Invited to Show-25 cents (Saratogian,1936: 5) Other groups such as the YWCA , the National PTA and theNational Councils of Catholic Men and Women were all in touchwith the Bureau and were made, aware of the Bureau's dual aims of"influencing and creating public opinion in favor of thepassage of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act and awakening theparents of the country to the increasing danger of the use ofmarihuana." (Anslinger, March 28, 1935). However, arousing public opinion alone was not the ultimategoal of the campaign. The FBN was interested in the enactment ofthe Uniform Act along with prohibitory marihuana legislation inall the states. By early 1935, only 10 states had adopted the Uniform Act.And, three of these states had not included marihuana (Anslinger,March 1, 1935). The Bureau embarked upon its marihuana strategyin 1935, the turning point in state enactment. Whether or notpublic interest actually existed, public opinion-makersinfluenced legislative opinion and created a "feltneed" for legislation. Within the next year, 18 more states adopted the Act and everyone of them which did not have previous legislation includedmarihuana (Anslinger, January 13, 1936; WCTU, 1937: 75). ENACTMENT OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT Despite the public opinion campaign conducted in the early1930's the general public was largely unaware of the drug, itsuse, or its alleged effects; only regional interest was aroused. A change seems to have occurred after 1935. The increasednational awareness played a significant role in the decision ofthe Treasury Department to seek federal legislation. On April 14,1937, the "Secretary of the Treasury, on behalf of theCommissioner of Narcotics," submitted the"administration proposal to Congress to impose an excise andtransfer tax on dealings in marihuana" (Schaller, 1970: 70). The scheme of the Marihuana Tax Act was threefold: arequirement that all manufacturers, importers, dealers, andpractitioners register and pay a special occupational tax; arequirement that all transactions be accomplished through use ofwritten order forms; and the imposition of a tax on all transfersin the amount of $1 per ounce for transfer to registered personsand a prohibitive $100 per ounce for transfers to unregisteredpersons. The key departure of the marihuana tax scheme from that of theHarrison Act is the notion of the prohibitive tax. Under theHarrison Act, a person not required to register, that is, anon-medical user, could not legitimately buy or possessnarcotics. To the dissenters in the Supreme Court decisionsupholding the Act, this clearly demonstrated that Congress'motive was to prohibit conduct rather than to raise revenue. The seemingly bizarre legal formulation of this tax measurewas precipitated by the recognized need for the FederalGovernment to take action forbidden to it under prevailingconstitutional doctrine. Hearings on the proposed marihuana taxation were held beforethe House Ways and Means Committee. During five mornings oftestimony by FBN officials, government witnesses, and industryrepresentatives, the Bureau presented the following four-foldargument: (1) marihuana was a disastrous drug; (2) its use wasincreasing alarmingly and had generated public hysteria; (3)state legislation was incapable of meeting the threat posed bythe drug, thus, federal action was required; and (4) thegovernment might best act through separate legislation ratherthan through an amendment to the Harrison Act. No definite scientific study of the effects of marihuana waspresented to substantiate the position that marihuana was adangerous drug. No synthesis of available scientific informationwas submitted nor was there any statement by the Public HealthService. Neither of the government's own public health experts,Assistant Surgeon General, Dr. Walter Treadway, and Dr. LawrenceKolb, testified, nor did Drs. Walter Bromberg or J. F. Siler whohad recently published scientific articles on the effects ofcannabis in humans (Siler, et. al., 1933: 269-280; Bromberg,1934). Instead, the scientific aspects were presented by a lawenforcement agency, the FBN: Despite the fact that medical men and scientists havedisagreed upon the properties of marihuana, and some are inclinedto minimize the harmfulness of this drug, the records offer ampleevidence that it has a disastrous effect upon many of its users.Recently we have received many reports showing crimes of violencecommitted by persons while under the influence of marihuana. The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the drug renderit highly dangerous to the mind and body upon which it operatesto destroy the will, cause one to lose the power of connectedthought, producing imaginary delectable situations and graduallyweakening the physical powers. Its use frequently leads toinsanity. I have a statement here, giving an outline of casesreported to the Bureau or in the press, wherein the use ofmarihuana is connected with revolting crimes (U.S. Congress,1937: 30). Instead of having one of the few researchers who had done anysignificant research into the effects of cannabis on humans, theBureau chose a Temple University pharmacologist, Dr. James Munch,whose experience was confined to experimentation of the effectsof cannabis on dogs. The second component of the Bureau's case was the contentionthat marihuana use had spread alarmingly in recent years,provoking a public outcry. To demonstrate this, the Bureausubmitted, for the record, the Gomila article cited earlier, anda 1936 letter from the city editor of the Alamoosa Daily Courier(U.S. Congress, 1937: 32-37). The letter described an attack by aMexican-American, allegedly under the influence of marihuana, ona girl of his region.: I wish I could show you what a small marihuana cigarettecan do to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents.That's why our problem is so great; the greatest percentage ofour population is composed of Spanish speaking persons most ofwhom are low mentally, because of social and racial conditions (Baskette,September 4, 1936). The third component of the Bureau's case was that even thoughevery state now had marihuana legislation, local authoritiescould not cope with the marihuana menace. To support thisproposition editorial pleas from the Washington newspapers wereoffered along with Bureau testimony that officials of severalstates had requested federal help. Senator Brown asked Commissioner Anslinger "to make clearthe need for Federal legislation." He continued: You say the states have asked you to do that. I presume itis because of the freedom of interstate traffic that the statesrequire the legislation. Anslinger agreed: [W]e have had requests from the states to step in becausethey claimed it was not growing in that state, but that it wascoming in from another state (U.S. Congress, 1937:16). Nothing was presented to support that statement; no lettersfrom local authorities and no investigative reports by FBN agentsdescribing the trafficking apparatus. The congressmen and senators participating in the hearingsaccepted the Bureau's argument. In fact, Senator Brown, Chairmanof the subcommittee which considered the legislation in theSenate, and Chairman Doughton of the Ways and Means Committee,had been thoroughly briefed by the Bureau in advance of thehearings. There was no probing of the Government witnesses. Infact, the Government made its case in the House in one session,and the next three sessions were devoted to countering thetechnical objections of the oilseed, birdseed, and hempindustries (U.S. Congress, 1937:59-65 67-86 . On the last morning of scheduled hearings, Dr. William C.Woodward appeared on behalf of the AMA to oppose the bill. Dr.Woodward objected to H.R. 6385 because he believed that itsultimate effect would be to so restrict medical use by red tapethat any medical use would be impossible. He admitted that therewere currently few therapeutic applications but he observed thatthe bill inhibited further research which might bear fruit. Hewent even further to imply that the bill was designed with thisobjective in mind. He noted that if federal legislation wasconsidered necessary, it could be achieved without sacrificingmedical usage by simply amending the Harrison Act. Dr. Woodward's most pointed attack was directed against theassumption that federal legislation was needed to control themarihuana habit. He argued that existing state legislation wasmore than sufficient if properly enforced and that if lack ofcoordination was the problem, that was the FBN's fault. Noting that the FBN already had the authority to "arrangefor the exchange of information concerning the use and abuse ofnarcotic drugs in [the] states and for cooperation in theinstitution and prosecution of suits . . .," he assertedthat the Bureau had not done its job: If there is at the present time any weakness in our statelaws relating to cannabis or to marihuana, a fair share of theblame, if not all of it, rests on the Secretary of the Treasuryand his assistants who have had this duty imposed upon them for 6and more years (U.S. Congress, 1937: 93). Dr. Woodward also contended that the law would be a uselessexpense to the medical profession and unenforcible. He noted:"Since marihuana grows so freely, and every landowner was apotential producer, whether wittingly or unwittingly, fullenforcement would require inspection of the entire land area ofthe country, a task which would be unseemly for the FederalGovernment to undertake" (U.S. Congress, 1937: 94-95). Finally, Dr. Woodward wondered why, if federal legislation wasconsidered necessary, the Congress did not simply amend theHarrison Act. To the Bureau's argument that such a course wouldbe unconstitutional, he inquired how Treasury's counsel couldargue that the present bill was constitutional since thetechnique was identical. Dr. Woodward's own view was that theamendment of the Harrison Act would be constitutional and thatsuch a course would dispel the professional objections which heraised (U.S. Congress, 1937:97). After accusing Dr. Woodward of obstructionism, evasiveness,and bad faith, the Committee did not even thank him for histestimony (U.S. Congress, 1937: 121). When the Senate FinanceCommittee conducted hearings on the bill, now styled H.R. 6906,two months later, Dr. Woodward submitted instead a short letterwhich stated the AMA's reasons for opposing the bill (U.S.Congress, 1937: 33-34). Both Committees reported the bill favorably despite Woodward'sobjections. The Ways and Means Report stated: Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed andall power of directing and controlling thought is lost.Inhibitions are released. As a result of these effects, itappeared from testimony produced at the hearings that manyviolent crimes have been and are being committed by persons underthe influence of the drug Not only is marihuana used by hardenedcriminals to steel them to commit violent crimes, but it is alsobeing placed in the hands of high-school children in the form ofmarihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Cases were citedat the hearings of school children who have been driven to crimeand insanity through the use of the drug. Its continued useresults many times in impotency and insanity (U.S. Congress,1937: 1-2). The Marihuana Tax Act passed the House of Representatives verylate in the afternoon of a long session on June 14, 1937; theonly opposition came from congressmen who had no idea whatmarihuana was and desired further information before voting(Congressional Record, 1937: 5575, 5689). Instead of a detailedanalysis they received a statement of one of the members of theWays and Means Committee, which repeated uncritically the luridcriminal acts attributed to marihuana users at the hearings.After less than two pages of debate, the Act passed without aroll call (Congressional Record, 1937: 5575). TIGHTENING THE LAW After the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act, the FBN began witha four-pronged enforcement policy: Control of cultivation of the plant for legitimate purposes and eradication of wild growth; Pacification of marihuana-sensationalism in the press; Education of the federal judiciary toward strict application of the law; and Allocation of federal enforcement resources toward major trafficking rather than petty possession offenses. The scope of the plant's growth, the transportability of theseeds, the dormancy of the seeds, and the lack of a highlyefficient herbicide militated against a comprehensive eradicationprogram. The cost of such a program would have been substantialeven if success were assured. No active effort was undertaken toconduct an acre-by-acre survey of the United States. The eradication "program" became simply a matter ofreaction to routine information-letters from farmers who hadidentified the plant and discoveries of acreage by lawenforcement agents. As the Bureau's interest in marihuana subsided during the1940's, so did the effort to eradicate the wild growth. In fact,the Federal Government encouraged the cultivation of hemp duringthe war, even though an inactive strain had not been developed,because sources of sisal rope had been severed by Japan'soccupation of the Philippines. All over the United States, theweed remained plentiful and largely undetected. After passage of the Act, Commissioner Anslinger directed hisagents to discourage local officials from playing up any allegedinvolvement of marihuana with crime to the press. On April 11,1938, the Commissioner told his New York District Supervisorthat: Our present policy is to discourage undue emphasis onmarihuana for the reason that in some sections of the countryrecently press reports have been so exaggerated that interest inthe subject has become almost hysterical and we are thereforetrying to mold public opinion along more conservative and sanerlines (Anslinger, April 11, 1938). Immediately following passage of the Act, the FBN alsodirected an "educational" effort toward the federaljudiciary to emphasize the need for severe sentences formarihuana offenders. The Bureau also concentrated on the stiflingof suppliers, large interstate traffickers, and smugglers. Smallpossession cases were to be left to local authorities. Several factors, however, served to frustrate this policy.First, marihuana traffic was highly disorganized and there was nonational or regional network as such (New York City, 1945).Second, use was still concentrated geographically andsocioeconomically and was not a major enterprise. Finally, duringthe war years, the Bureau abandoned responsibility for mostmarihuana law enforcement to the states, where the disorganizedtraffic and regional use could be most effectively controlled.The FBN chose instead to concentrate on the opiates. After the relative quiet of the war years there was apparentlya significant increase in narcotic drug abuse in the late, 1940'sand the public began to be concerned with the spread of narcoticaddiction, particularly among young persons. Congressional furorwas aroused by the assertion that the use of marihuana inevitablyled to the use of these harder drugs, particularly heroin. The new legislation came in two waves. In 1951, Congresspassed the Boggs Act (Boggs Act, November 2, 1951: 767) whichincreased penalties for all drug violators. For the first time infederal drug legislation marihuana and the narcotic drugs werelumped together, since the Act provided uniform penalties for theNarcotic Drugs Import and Export Act (Boggs Act, November 2,1951: 767) and the Marihuana Tax Act (21 USC 1964). The statesfollowed the federal lead. Then, in 1956, Congress passed theNarcotic Control Act, escalating the penalties still further.Once again the states responded in kind. The hearings before the Subcommittee of the House Ways andMeans Committee and the floor debate indicate that the Boggs Actwas motivated by a. perceived increase in narcotic use in theperiod 1948 to 1951 (Kefauver Committee Hearings, 1951: 240-241;New York Times, 1951). Representative Boggs, speaking during the Congressional debateon his bill, enunciated a concern which was reflected in manyother quarters. After noting that there had been a 24% increasein arrests for narcotic violations between 1949 and 1950 and a70% increase between 1948 and 1950, Representative Boggs stated: The most shocking part about these figures is the fact thatthere has been an alarming increase in drug addiction amongyounger persons. In the first six months of 1946, the average ageof addicted persons committed . . . at Lexington, Kentucky, was37.5 years. Only three patients were under the age of 21. Duringthe first six months of 1950, only four years later, the averagehad dropped to 26.7 years and 766 patients were under the age of21... (Congressional Record, 1951: 8197). Representative Boggs and others supported the mandatoryminimum sentences for drug peddlers because they felt that somefederal judges had been lax in enforcing the narcotic laws(Congressional Record, 1951: 8197, 8207, 821 1). Public opinionwas overwhelming that harsh sentences, including the deathpenalty for peddling narcotics to minors, would strangle the drugmonster then stalking the American youth (Kefauver CommitteeHearings, 1951: 430-431). The Boggs Act was directed in large part at the federaljudiciary since a key provision removed judicial discretion insentencing by providing that upon conviction for a second orsubsequent offense the imposition or execution of the sentencecould not be suspended nor probation granted. There had been no concerted lobbying effort by the judicialcommunity during the legislative process; however, James V.Bennett, Director of the U.S. Bureau of Prisons, aroused thejudges in the Fifth U.S. Circuit District into eventuallyrecommending the amendment of the law to remove provisions formandatory minimum sentences (Yew Orleans Statesman, May 28, 1954;New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 28, 1954). Even while the Boggs Act was still pending in Congress, theBureau of Narcotics encouraged the states to modify theirexisting narcotic and marihuana legislation to enact"penalties similar to those provided in the Boggs Bill[which] would be of material assistance in the fight against thenarcotic traffic" (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1950: 6). Seventeen states and the territory of Alaska responded bypassing "little Boggs Acts" by 1953 and 11 other statesincreased their penalties by 1956. Two of the latter group, Ohioand Louisiana, enacted penalty provisions which weresubstantially more severe than those passed previously in anyjurisdiction (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1956: 28). The Ohio law, approved June 16,1955, provided a 20 to 40 yearsentence for the sale of narcotic drugs. The Louisiana measure,adopted the following year, provided severe prison sentenceswithout parole, probation, or suspension for the illegal sale,possession, or administration of a narcotic drug. The sentencesranged from a five-year minimum to a 99-year maximum (FederalBureau of Narcotics, 1951: 8). Underlying the inclusion of marihuana in the scheme ofincreased penalties was the progression theory. In the Boggshearings many witnesses testified to the link between marihuanause and ultimate heroin addiction. Commissioner Anslinger, forexample, testified: The danger is this: Over 50 percent of these young addictsstarted on marihuana smoking. They started there and graduated toheroin; they took the needle when the thrill of marihuana wasgone (Boggs Act Hearings, 1951: 206). Representative Boggs himself summed up the stepping-stonethesis in House floor debate: Our younger people usually start on the road which leads todrug addiction by smoking marihuana. They then graduate intonarcotic drugs-cocaine, morphine, and heroin. When these youngerpersons become addicted to the drugs, heroin, for example, whichcosts from $8 to $15 per day, they very often must embark oncareers of crime ... and prostitution ... in order to buy thesupply which they need (Congressional Record, 1951:8197-8198). The stepping-stone theory thus supplanted the older hypotheseswhich had linked marihuana to addiction, insanity and violentcrime. In a paper filed as an exhibit to the hearings on the BoggsAct, Dr. Harris Isbell, Director of Research at the Public HealthService Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, stated that marihuanawas not physically addictive, although he paid lip service to thepsychological dependence hypothesis (Boggs Act Hearings, 1951:147-148). Acknowledging the possibility of "temporarypsychosis" in "predisposed individuals," Isbellotherwise disputed the crime and insanity thesis. Before theKefauver Committee in the Senate he testified that: [M]arihuana smokers generally are mildly intoxicated,giggle, laugh, bother no one, and have a good time. They do notstagger or fall, and ordinarily will not attempt to harm anyone. It has not been proved that smoking marihuana leads tocrimes of violence or to crimes of a sexual nature. Smokingmarihuana has no unpleasant after-effects, no dependence isdeveloped on the drug, and the practice can easily be stopped atany time. In fact, it is probably easier to stop smokingmarihuana cigarettes than tobacco cigarettes (KefauverCommittee Hearings, 1951: 119). Some observers felt that the narcotics problem had disappearedalmost entirely from the national scene after the Boggs Act waspassed. Nevertheless, state and federal law enforcementauthorities, armed with data suggesting that the strengthening ofthe drug laws had at least halted the increase in drug use,pressed for further increases in penalties in order to root outthe drug menace entirely (Federal Bureau of Narcotics. 1956: 28).Without extended debate or widened public interest, Congresspassed the Narcotic Control Drug Act in 1956 (Daniel CommitteeHearings, 1955: 57). There was less attention paid to marihuana duringCongressional debate in 1956 than had been the case in 1951. But,the established precedent of classifying marihuana with hardnarcotics continued and resulted in a proliferation of marihuanaoffenses and a, further increase in penalties based on the theorythat the end of the American narcotics experience could therebybe assured. However, efficacy of still higher penalties was not uniformlyaccepted among law enforcement officials; the Deputy Commissionerof the FBN suggested that more severe penalties might press grandjuries not to indict and the petty juries not to convict in drugcases. Others rejected this view and felt strongly that moresevere penalties were imperative if society was to be rid of itspresent peddlers and if new entrants into the narcotics businesswere to be deterred (Good, July 31, 1954). Among congressmen considering the Bill, there was no dissentfrom the proposition that harsher penalties were the means toeliminate the illicit use and sale of all drugs (CongressionalRecord. 1956: 10689). In addition to facilitating enforcement of narcotics lawsthrough a number of ancillary provisions, the Narcotics ControlAct of 1956 established the following penalties: Possession Minimum sentence First offense 2 years Second offense 5 years Third and subsequent offense 10 years Fine $20,000 Sale Minimum sentence First offense 5 years Second offense 10 years Sale to minor by adult 10 years Parole or probation were made unavailable to all except firstoffenders in the possession category (26 TTSC, 1964). The Act also created a new offense by prohibiting illegalimportation of marihuana. Simple possession was by statutesufficient to convict the possessor of knowingly receivingillegally imported marihuana (21 USC, 1964). Few legislators recognized that marihuana was in any waydifferent from the physically addictive narcotics. The HouseSubcommittee on Narcotics, which produced what became theessentials of the 1956 Act, had inserted a footnote to the majorheading "Narcotics" which stated in fine print that theterm narcotics included marihuana (U.S. Code Cong. and Ad. News,1956: 3294). Only once during the Congressional debates on theHouse and Senate versions of the Bill was the subject ofmarihuana as a separate substance even raised. Moreover, in a statement reflecting the general acceptance ofthe stepping-stone concept, Senator Daniel, Chairman of theSenate Subcommittee that investigated the drug problem, describedmarihuana: That is a drug which starts most addicts In the use ofdrugs, Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some ofthe worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to thehabit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then tothe final destruction of the persons addicted (U.S. CodeCong. & Ad. News, 1956: 3294). By the fifties, marihuana had been fully integrated into thenarcotics legislation of every state in the Union and of thenational government. Possession of the drug, even for one's ownuse, was a felony everywhere, and the user was subject to longperiods of incarceration as punishment for his indulgence. 1960-1970: NEW LEGISLATIVE APPROACH From the mid-fifties to the mid-sixties, federal activity inmarihuana and narcotic law enforcement was relatively stable. Thenumber of offenders apprehended and convicted in both areasremained constant (U.S. Courts, 1956-1964). However, in the early and mid-sixties a new phenomenon wasoccurring. Drug abuse began to spread. It no longer confineditself to the ghettos and certain socioeconomic and ethnicgroups; the new users were the sons and daughters of the middleclass. It began striking home at the average American and becamea national, major issue of concern (Rosevear, 1967: 117-131; U.S.Bureau of Narcotics, 1966: 40). The new middle class use of marihuana induced significantmedical inquiry into the nature of the drug and spurred a newlegislative approach. One commentator stated: Nobody cared when it was a ghetto problem. Marihuana-well,it was used by jazz musicians or the lower class, so you didn'tcare if they got 2 to 20 years. But when a nice, middle-classgirl or boy in college gets busted for the same thing, then thewhole community sits up and takes notice. And that's the name ofthe game today. The problem has begun to come home to roost-inall strata of society, in suburbia, in middle-class homes, in thecolleges. Suddenly, the punitive, vindictive approach wastouching all classes of society. And now the most exciting thingthat's really happening is the change in attitude by the people.Now we have a willingness to examine the problem as to whetherit's an experimentation, or an illness rather than 'an evil' (NewYork Times, Feb. 5, 1970: 14). Congress initially acted by passage of the Drug Abuse ControlAmendments of 1965 (Public Law 89-74,1965). This legislationestablished a Bureau of Drug Abuse Control within the Food andDrug Administration and created criminal, misdemeanor penaltiesfor the illegal manufacture and sale of depressant and stimulantdrugs and hallucinogens. The dramatic increase in the use of marihuana and other drugsduring the latter 1960's was a matter of high public visibility.In response, President Johnson offered Reorganization Plan No. 1of 1968 (H. Doe. No. 249,1968). This reorganization was effectiveon April 8, 1968 and placed the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (ofTreasury) and the Bureau of Drug Abuse Control (of FDA) in theDepartment of Justice and designated it the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs. What had been obvious with the passage of the 1965 DrugAmendments became glaring with this reorganization, that is, thetremendous disparity in penalties for violations involvingdangerous drugs as opposed to narcotics and marihuana. As aresult of increased medical and scientific inquiry, LSD andseveral other drugs 'were acknowledged as being more powerfulhallucinogens than marihuana. To compound the disparity, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), themajor active ingredient in marihuana, was placed under controlswhereby someone in unauthorized possession of THC was subject tono penalty, but someone in possession of marihuana was subject toa minimum mandatory penalty of two years imprisonment (FederalRegister, 1968: 14880). Congress then changed the possessionpenalty, tinder the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, to amisdemeanor and increased the penalties for sale or manufactureof LSD and the other controlled drugs to up to five years (PublicLaw 90-639, 1968). Nevertheless, a great disparity regarding penalties for thesesubstances still existed. The atmosphere for change was ripe.Adding pressure to the situation was the criminalization ofincreasing numbers of young persons whose sole crime waspossession of marihuana for their own use. In late 1968, the newly formed Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs drafted legislation which would nationalizecontrol of the drugs under the Bureau's jurisdiction. Theproposed law vested on the commerce clause rather than on thetaxing powers. The change in authority was prophetic because the Learydecision, which was handed down by the Supreme Court on May 19,1969, held that the order form procedure necessary to meet therequirements of the Marihuana Tax Laws, forced an individual toincriminate himself in violation of the Fifth Amendment (Leary v.U.S., 1969). Ostensibly, this decision left BNDD with nomarihuana possession law and was another factor in evidence ofthe need for a revision of the law. This new bill , H.R. 13742, covered the regulation of narcoticdrugs, "dangerous drugs" and marihuana. It wastransmitted by President Nixon on July 14, 1969. Emerging from this legislation was an overall balanced schemeof criminal penalties. Minimum mandatory offenses wereessentially abolished and the offense of possession of acontrolled substance for one's own use was made a misdemeanor.Further, in first-offense, simple possession cases, the court wasgiven the discretion to place a defendant on probation, for up toone year. If, at the end of the probation period, the defendantbad not violated any of the conditions of the probation, hisconviction could be expunged. The same misdemeanor penalty and opportunity for firstoffender treatment was provided for the distribution of a smallamount of marihuana for either: (1) no remuneration; or (2) thecost of the drug. This provision was included in recognition of the large numberof such transactions which take place among youth and inrecognition of a phenomenon which surfaced as a substantialchallenge to the traditional picture of the national marihuanatrade. Legislators had formerly stereotyped the"seller" as the vicious criminal pushing his wares forhigh profit and felt that extraordinarily harsh penalties werejustified for sellers (Narcotics Legislation Hearings, 1969: 4). But several studies showed that the structure of marihuanatraffic bore little or no relation to the traditional stereotype.One survey of 204 users found that 44% had sold to friends atleast once. Many casual users sold to leave themselves enoughprofit to cover the amount of their own use (Goode, 1969: 7).Under the new Act, they would not be punished as distributors. The new legislation also made a distinction between marihuanaand narcotic drugs. Marihuana was placed in a category withhallucinogenic drugs and their difference from narcotics wasemphasized by the difference in penalties as follows: Maximum sentences Marihuana and other non-narcotic controlled substances Narcotics lst offense 2nd offense lst offense 2nd offense Simple possession:* Years 1 2 1 2 Dollars 5,000 10,000 5,000 10,000 Unlawful distribution, possession with intent to distribute, manufacture, importation or exportation: Years 5 10 15 30 Dollars 15,000 30,000 25,000 50,000 * Distribution of small amounts of marihuana for noremuneration is treated the same as simple possession. The bill was passed by Congress (and signed into law byPresident Nixon) on October 27, 1970, as the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. In conjunction with this new federal law, a uniform state actwas drafted by the National Conference of Commissioners onUniform State Laws and approved by them as the Uniform ControlledSubstances Act at their annual conference August 1-7, 1970. The following statement in the preface of the Act explains itspurpose: This Uniform Act was drafted to achieve uniformity between thelaws of the several states and those of the Federal Government.it has been designed to complement the new federal narcotic anddangerous drug legislation and Provide and interlocking trellisof Federal and state law to enable government at all levels tocontrol more effectively the drug abuse problem. The Uniform Act does not recommend penalties except withrespect to possession for one's own use. For such offenses, theConference recommended that it be treated as a misdemeanor. To date, 26 states and three territories have adopted the Actin its entirety or in a varied form. Currently, 10 to 15 statesare considering it. The most recent chapter in the legal history of marihuanaappears in other pages of this Appendix. The appointment of theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse and the issuanceof its Report are themselves significant events from anhistorical point of view. References Act of June 14,1930, Ch. 488,46 Stat. 585. Act to Create a Bureau of Customs and a Bureau of Prohibitionin the Department of the Treasury, Ch. 348, 44 Stat. 1381 (1927). Anslinger, H. J., letter to Dr. Woodward (July 28,1930). "The Reason for Uniform State Narcotic Legislation,"Georgetown Law Journal, 21: 52 (1932). letter to Judge Deering (August 1, 1932). letter to Reverend John J. Burke (March 1, 1935). letter toMiss Agnes Regan, Executive Secretary of the National Council ofCatholic Women (March 28, 1935). letter to Mrs. Roberta Lawson, President of General Federation ofWomen's Clubs (January 13, 1936). letter to Frank Allen of the Cleveland Plain Dealer (October 22,1936). letter to F. J. Reynolds, Director, Readers Research Bureau, P.F. Collier and Son Corporation (December 23,1936). letter to Williams (April 11, 1938). and Cooper, C. R.: "Marihuana: Assassin of Youth,"American Magazine, 18-19 (July, 1937). and Tompkins, W.: The Traffic in Narcotics, New York: Funk andWagnalls Co. (1953), P. 159. Austin Texas Statesman (Austin, Texas), June, 1923. Baskette, Floyd K., letter to Federal Bureau of Narcotics(September 4,1936). Birmingham Age-Herald (Birmingham, Alabama), August 22, 1935. Boggs Act, Chapter 666, 65 Stat. 767 (November 2, 1951). Boggs Act Hearings, "Hearings on H.R. 3490 before theSubcommittee on Narcotics of the House Committee on Ways andMeans," 82nd Cong., 1st Sess., 147-148 (1951). Bromberg, Walter, "Marihuana Intoxication: A ClinicalStudy of Cannabis Sativa. Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry (91) 1934. Chicago Examiner (Chicago, Illinois), June 19, 1929. June22,1929. Chicago Tribune (Chicago, Illinois), June 3, 1929. July 1,1929. October 17,1929. Colorado, "Colorado Laws." Chapter 95, 309 (1927). Congressional Record, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., 5575, 5689-5692(1937). 82nd Cong., 1st Sess., 8197-8198, 8207, 8211 (1951). 102:10689 (1956). Daniel Committee Hearings, "Hearings on Illicit NarcoticsTraffic Before the Subcommittee on Improvements In the FederalCriminal Code of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary,"84th Cong., 1st Sess., 57 (1955). Dowling, Dr., letter to Acting Surgeon General Periz (December3, 1920). Federal Bureau of Narcotics,: "The Need for UniformNarcotic Drug Act-White Paper" (July, 1933). : "Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs," 59(1937). "Traffic in Opium," 6 (1950). 8 (1951). 28 (1956). Federal Register, 33: 14880 (October 4, 1968). Gomila, F. R. and Lambow, M.C.: Marihuana: America's New DrugProblems, Philadelphia: Lippincott (1938), pp. 29-31. Good, 0. S., letter to H. J. Anslinger (July 31, 1954). Goode,E.: "The Marihuana Market,": Colum. P., 12: 7 (Winter,1969). 1925 Handbook of the National Conference of Commissioners onUniform State Laws and Proceedings, pp. 977-985 (1925). 1928 pp. 75-78. 323-3-33 (1928). 1929 pp. 43, 332--340 (1929). 1930 pp. 97, 126-427, 485 (1930). 1931 pp. 127-128, 390-402 (1931). 1932 P. 107 (1932). House Document No. 249, Transmitted to 90th Cong., 1st Sess.(February, 1968). House Report No. 91-1444 (Part 1) 91st Cong., 2d Sess.(September 10, 1970). Idaho, "Idaho State Laws," p. 98 (1927). Jones, letter in U.S. Surgeon General's files to R. P. Smith(August 21, 1920). Kefauver Committee Hearings, "Hearings Before the SpecialSenate Committee to Investigate Organized Crime in InterstateCommerce," 82d Cong., Ist Sess., pt. 14, exhibit 1,119,240-241, 430-431 (1951). King: "The Narcotic Bureau and the Harrison Act,"Yale Law Journal, 62: 736, 737-739 (1953). Leary v. United States, 395 U.S., 6, 89 S. Ct. 1532 (1969). Lindesmith, A. R.: The Addict and the Law, Bloomington:Indiana University Press (1967), pp, 135-161. Los Angeles Daily News (Los Angeles, California), June 18,1951. Montana, "Montana Laws," Chapter 6, p. 5 (1929). Montana Standard (Butte-Anaconda, Montana), January 22, 1929,p. 3, col. 6. Narcotics Legislation Hearings, "Hearings Before theSubcommittee to Investigate Juvenile Delinquency of the SenateCommittee on the Judiciary," 91st Cong., 1st Sess., 267, 4(1969). New Mexico, "New Mexico Laws," Chapter 42, Sections1-2, pp. 58-59 (1923). New Orleans Statesman (New Orleans, Louisiana), May 28, 1954. New Orleans Times-Picayune (New Orleans, Louisiana), May28,1954. New York, "New York Laws," Chapter 363, p. 1695(1927). New York City Mayor's Committee on Marihuana: TheMarihuana Problem in the City of New York, Lancaster: JacquesCattell. Press (1945), p. 12. New York State Senate: "Joint Legislative Committee toInvestigate the Laws In Relation to the Distribution and Sale ofNarcotic Drugs," Final Report, Doe. No. 35 (1918), as quotedby Terry & Pellens, The Opium Problem (1928), p. 834. New York Times (New York, New York), July 30, 1914, pp. 6,8,col. 12. January 11, 1923, p. 24, col. 1. September 16,1934, p. 6, col. 3. June 19,1951, p. 25, col, 1. February 5,1970, p. 14. Nutt, Colonel L. C., Deputy Commissioner, Bureau ofProhibition, letter to Walter Clephane, Chairman, Section onSocial Welfare, Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws(June 13, 1929). Paul, A. E., Memorandum from Chief, Chicago Station, Food, Drug and Insecticide Administration, U.S. Department ofAgriculture, to Chief, Central District, pp. 1, 4 (June 27,1929). Public Law 89-74, H.R. 2 (July 15, 1965). Public Law 90-639, H.R. 14096 (October 24, 1968). "Report of Preliminary Conference on Fifth Tentative.Draft of the Uniform State Narcotic Law," pp. 9-10, 23(September, 1932). Rocky Mountain News (Denver, Colorado), September 27, 1931. Rosevear, J.: Pot: A Handbook of Marihuana, New Hyde Park:University Book (1967), pp. 117-131. San Antonio Light (San Antonio, Texas), May 4, 1931,editorial. Santa Fe New Mexican (Santa Fe, New Mexico), January 31, 1923. Saratogian (Saratoga, New York), September 9, 1936, P. 5. Schaller, Michael: "The Federal Prohibition ofMarihuana," Journal of Social History, 4: pp. 61-78 (1970).Schmeckebler: "The Bureau of Prohibition," in BrookingsInstitute for Government Research Service Monograph (57) :143(1929). Siler, J. S., et al., "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"Military Surgeon, 73: 269-280 (1933). Tennyson, A. L.: "Consideration of a Uniform StateNarcotic Law by the National Conference of Commissioners ofUniform State Laws at Atlantic City, New Jersey, September 9-12,1931," memorandum for file dated September 16,1931. _: "Uniform State Narcotic Law," Federal BureauAssociation Journal 1: 55 (1932). Terry, C. and Pellens, M.: The Opium Problem (1928), p. 834. Texas, "General Laws," Chapter 150, p. 278 (1919). Texas, "Special Session Laws," Chapter 61, pp.156-157 (1923). U.S. Bureau of Immigration: "Commissioner General ofImmigration Annual Report" (1915-1930). U.S. Bureau of Narcotics: "Traffic in Opium," 2: 40(1966). 21 U.S. -Code, 174 (1964). 26 U.S. Code, 4741-4776, 7237 (1964). U.S. Code Cong. and Ad. News, 3294 (1956). U.S. Congress, "Hearings Before the House Committee onWays and Means on H.R. 6385," 75th Cong., 1st Sess.,Washington (1937), 6, 30, 32-37, 59-65, 67-86, 92, 93-95, 97,121. -, "Hearings Before the Senate Finance Committee on H.R.6906," 75th Cong., 1st Sess., Washington (1937), 16, 33-34. "Report of the Committee on Ways and Means on H.R.6385," 75th Cong., Ist Sess., Washington (1937), 1-2. U.S. Courts, "Disposition of Defendants Charged with theViolation of Narcotic Drug Laws," Administrative Office,Division of Information Systems (1956-1964). Washington Post(Washington, D.C.), September 29,1934. White, Dr. William, letter to Surgeon General Treadway (August3, 1932). Women',, Christian Temperance Union: Marihuana, Evanston: WCTUPublishing House (1928), pp. 1, 3. "Union Signal" (Evanston, Illinois), 1936, p. 285. January 30, 1937, pp. 36, 75. (yearly bound volumes). Wood, Will S., letter to Mrs. Roberta Lawson, President ofGeneral Federation of Women's Clubs (January 13, 1936). Woodward, William, letter to Dr. S. L. Hilton (August 6,1932). World Narcotic Defense Association, letter to legislators(February,1937). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-24IA031-000655-B041-58http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc2a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113438 text/html 90671HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:34:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:26 GMTContent-length: 90453 History of Alcohol Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse History of Alcohol Prohibition* *This section is based in large part on a paper preparedfor the Commission by Jane Lang McGrew, an attorney fromWashington, D.C. In 1920, the national policy of Prohibition began. The 18thAmendment to the Constitution had been officially ratified: It sought, by law, to make the whole Nation into enforcedteetotalers and to put an end to all evils associated withdrinking. It sought to eradicate a taste deeply rooted in thehabits and customs of a large part of the population throughoutlawing the business that ministered to its satisfaction(Hu, 1950: 48). 1650-1750: THE FIRST HUNDRED YEARS In fact, it started earlier. "Ministers shall not givethemselves to excess in drinkinge, or riott, or spending theirtyme idellye day or night," ruled the Virginia ColonialAssembly in 1629 (Cherrington, 1920:16). Massachusetts ordered that no person shall remain in anytavern "longer than necessary occasions" in 1637, whilePlymouth Colony in 1633 prohibited the sale of spirits "morethan 2 pence worth to anyone but strangers just arrived"(Cherrington, 1920: 18). This sampling of the earliest colonial laws is representativeof the attempt, continued since those times, to control excessiveconsumption. Excessive drinking, it was considered, producedbehavior unseemly in some, such as ministers, and dangerous inothers, such as Indians. But drinking per se was not frowned upon. Indeed, when thePuritans set sail to Massachusetts, they had taken care to carrywith them 42 tons of beer (in contrast with 14 tons of water) and10,000 gallons of wine (Lee, 1963: 15). The regulation of liquor consumption was a matter ofconsiderable concern in certain colonies. Thus, for a time,Massachusetts went so far as to prohibit the drinking of healthsin 1638 (Lee, 1963: 19). The law was soon abandoned for reasonsobvious, albeit unrecorded. It rapidly became clear, however,that liquor laws could do more and perhaps better, than controlconsumption: they could provide a source of revenue. By the turnof the 18th century, the regulatory impulse was concentrated onfines, excise taxes and license fees. Fines were imposed for drunken behavior, unlawful sales to adrunken tippler or to Indians, and for selling without a license.Court records indicate that these laws were enforced withreasonable regularity (Krout 1967: 29-30). Licenses often carriedtheir own fees, and excise taxes were levied upon distilledspirits as well as beer and fermented drink in many cases. Until the 18th century, however, there was no attempt toprohibit the manufacture, importation, sale, or consumption ofalcoholic beverages. Quite the contrary, at least oneindividual-in some cases a reluctant individual-was required inmany towns to run the local inn or public house for visitors andtravelers. Although colonial statutes made it clear that tipplers andidlers were unwelcome, the diary of a colonial traveler, SarahKemble Knight, suggests that such laws were unsuccessful incontaining the ribaldry which took place in many such houses.Madam Knight complained: I could get no sleep, because of the Clamor of some of theTown Tope-ers in the next room.... I heartily fretted &wish't 'am tongue tyed.... They kept calling for Tother Gill, Wchwhile they were swallowing, was some Intermission, But presently,like Oyle to fire, encreased the flame (Miller, Johnson,eds., 1963: 430-431). Persons other than Madam Knight were to become more outspokenabout their concern for the use of spirits. The, most significantpremonition was the Colony of Georgia's action in 1735 when thefirst prohibitory statute against the importation of "ardentspirits" was enacted. At the same time, however, theconsumption of beer was encouraged (Grant, 1932: 1). The time fortemperance had not yet arrived. 1750-1825: TEMPERANCE STIRRINGS As the evils of intemperance began to attract the attention ofthe ministry, John Wesley denounced the sin of distilling -anddeclared for its Prohibition in 1773 (Cherrington, 1920: 37-38). On his heels came the publication of a pamphlet entitled"The Mighty Destroyer Displayed and Some Account of theDreadful Havoc Made by the Mistaken Use, As Well As the Abuse, ofDistilled Spiritous Liquors," by Anthony Benezet, a memberof the Society of Friends, advising against the use of any drink"which is liable to steal away a man's senses and render himfoolish, irrascible, uncontrollable, and dangerous"(Cherrington, 1920: 38). Nevertheless, typical of the century's ambivalence, the firstmaster at Harvard was fired when it was found that Harvardstudents had been left "wanting beer betwixt brewings a weekand a week and a half together" (Lee, 1963: 16). Concern for the effect of liquor upon the public weal wasexpressed by John Adams who noted in his diary on February 29,1760, that the taverns were "becoming the eternal haunt ofloose, disorderly people . . ." (Cherrington, 1920: 37).Worst of all he continued: ... These houses are become the nurseries of ourlegislators. An artful man, who has neither sense nor sentiments,may, by gaining a little sway among the rabble of the town,multiply taverns and dram shops and thereby secure the votes oftaverner and retailer and of all; and the multiplication oftaverns will make many, who may be induced to flip and rum, tovote for any man whatever (Dobyns, 1940: 215). The health argument in behalf of temperance was first made byNathaniel Ames, in the 1752 edition of his Almanack, who wrotethat Strong Waters were formerly used only by the Direction ofPhysicians; but now Mechanicks and low-li'd Labourers drink Rumlike Fountain-Water, and they can infinitely better endure itthan the idle. unactive and sedentary Part of Mankind, but DEATHis in the bottom of the cup of every one (Lee, 1963: 22). Dr. Benjamin Rush shared his concern, publishing in 1785 hisnow famous "Inquiry into the Effects of Ardent Spirits Uponthe Human Body and Mind." Enumerating the diseases of thebody and mind which plague the drinker of distilled liquors, Dr.Rush outlined the symptoms, including "unusual garrulity,unusual silence, captiousness ... an insipid simpering ...profane swearing ... certain immodest actions" and"certain extravagant acts which indicate a temporary fit ofmadness" (Rush, 1943: 323, 325-326). Although the rumblings of the temperance movement were thusperceptible in the late 18th century, there is no evidence thatits effects were felt. In 1766, it is recorded that the repeal ofthe Stamp Act was greeted in Providence, Rhode Island with"32 of the most loyal, patriotic and constitutionaltoasts" (Lee, 1963: 18). Notwithstanding this evidence ofdevotion to His Majesty. it was often thereafter the tavern whichprovided the meeting places for the most defiant revolutionaries. Subsequently, when the colonial period disappeared into thepost-Revolutionary era, Alexander Hamilton adopted the ideaearlier effected by the individual colonies, to tax distilledliquors for revenue purposes. In 1791 , the tax was enacted aspart of the Revenue Act. The following year, the Second Congressof the United States added license fees for distilleries andtaxes on liquors distilled from imported materials. Incensed by this federal action, farmers in WesternPennsylvania mobbed revenue collectors and armed to resist thisintrusion by the new Federal Government. It required 15,000militia to bring the so-called Whiskey Rebellion to an end(Peterson, 1969: 119-120). Such was the first indication that theliquor industry in the United States would be a force with whichthe government would have to reckon. Toward the end of the 18th century, a temperance movement, assuch, became discernible. The Methodist Church took a staunchposition against the sale or imbibing of ardent spirits"unless in cases of extreme necessity." Five yearslater, in 1789, even the exception was excised (Cherrington,1920: 50). A similar platform was adopted by the PresbyterianSynod of Pennsylvania and by the Yearly Meeting of Friends of NewEngland (Cherrington, 1920: 51, 58). On a non-clerical level, the movement began to organize.Although there is some dispute as to the identity of the originaltemperance society, it appears that as early as 1778, there wasan organization calling itself the Free African Society whichexcluded men of drinking habits, followed soon thereafter by theOrganization of Brethren, and the Litchfield, ConnecticutAssociation of "the most respectable farmers" inConnecticut determined to discourage the use of spirits(Cherrington, 1920: 49, 58). The turn of the century saw the vitalization of the temperancespirit. Religious leaders, including Cotton Mather, Dr. LymanBeecher, John Wesley and Reverend Andrew Elliott inveighedagainst the consumption of liquors. Temperance activity figuredprominently in the concerns of the Presbyterian, Methodist,Universalist, Baptist, and Friends churches. "Had. the temperance reform in America awaited for anon-church or a non-Christian leadership," theorizes onehistorian, ... the temperance revolution of the past century would yetremain to be accomplished.... Every successful temperancemovement of the last century has been merely the instrument-themachinery and equipment through which the fundamental principlesof the Christian religion have expressed themselves in terms oflife and action (Cherrington, 1920:92). Whatever the Christian input , however, it is also apparentthat a desire to reform was aroused in the country, very muchlike that which was to be experienced a century later during theProgressive Movement. Thus, Massachusetts Society for theSuppression of Intemperance of 1813, damned not only rum, but allof the "kindred vices, profaneness and gambling" andbeseeched members to "discourage... by ... example andinfluence, every kind of..... immorality" (Lee, 1963: 23).Mingling with the potential temperance leaders during this periodwere the future spokesmen of abolitionism, feminism, andutopianism. In the meantime, the industry was able to report triumphantlythat the federal taxes on distilling and importing spirits wererepealed in 1802. From 1813 until 1817, the retailers' anddistillers' licenses bore a federal tax, but beginning in 1818the industry enjoyed a tax-free era which was to last until 1862.Thomas Jefferson rejoiced-"as a moralist"-explainingthat: It is an error to view a tax on that liquor as merely a taxon the rich. It is a prohibition of its use in the middling classof our citizens, and a condemnation of them to the poison ofwhisky, which is desolating their houses. No nation is drunkenwhere wine is cheap; and none sober, where the only antidote isthe bane of whisky (Peterson, 1969: 122-123). Future prohibitionists would likewise castigate the governmentfor drawing its revenues from the liquor industry andparticipating in the profits of evil thereby. 1825-1870: THE PLEDGE Temperance was not always equated with teetotalism. Beer andusually wine were initially exempt from denunciation in bothsermons and treatises. There developed in the mid-19th century,however, the conviction that all brews, be they "ardentspirits," beer, ale, or wine, were anathema. The, new temper of the movement was epitomized by the travelsof Father Theobald Matthew of Ireland who toured the UnitedStates from 1849 to 1851, administering the pledge of totalabstinence to some 600,000 persons in 25 states. A White Housedinner and a Senate reception stamped official approval upon hissojourns (Furnas, 1968: 80). Thus did temperance drift into a newphase, with its ardent spokesman, Congressman Gerrit Smith,crying that: I would that no person were able to drink intoxicatingliquors without immediately becoming a drunkard. For, who, thenwould . . . drink the poison that always kills, or jump into thefire that always burns? (Furnas, 1968: 15). It was in this atmosphere that the first prohibitionexperiments were undertaken on a statewide basis. "Until theliquor traffic is abolished . . . all efforts at moral reformmust languish," judged one of the earliest prohibitionists. In "Grappling with the Monster," T. S. Arthurstated, "The CURSE is upon us, and there is but one CURE:Total Abstinence, by the help of God, for the Individual, andProhibition for the State" (Furnas, 1968: 15). In 1847, the first such cure was enacted for the state ofMaine (Cherrington, 1920: 134). (Actually, the first Prohibitionlaw went into effect in 1843 in the territory of Oregon. This wasrepealed five years later.) A wave of prohibition statutes followed. Delaware, on theheels of Maine, passed its first prohibition law only to have itdeclared unconstitutional the following year. Similar laws wereenacted in Ohio, Illinois, Rhode Island, Minnesota,Massachusetts, Connecticut, Pennsylvania and New York during thenext few years. They met with varying fates, including veto bythe governors, repeal by the legislatures and invalidation by thestate supreme courts. The evaluations by several historians of these early trialswere to he heard again in the 20th century: the enactments lackedsupport from a large portion of the population, makingenforcement exceedingly difficult. Ultimately, all but one of thestates repealed the prohibition statutes of the 19th century(Grant, 1932: 5; Peterson, 1969: 123). Notwithstanding this record, prohibitionists took heart."This thing is of God," cried Lyman Beecher from thepulpit. "That glorious Maine law was a square and grand blowright between the horns of the Devil" (Furnas, 1968: 167).Temperance societies, established in all but three states by 1832and destined to proliferate, began to consolidate as well. The American Temperance Society, later to become the AmericanTemperance Union, was organized in 1826. It quickly begatauxiliaries, so that by 1835, 8,000 locals existed (Cherrington,1920: 92-93). As the years passed, they witnessed the founding of moretemperance, organizations of a general and national characterthan during any other period in the United States' history. TheWashingtonian movement, organized in the City of Baltimore in1840, was followed by the Martha Washington movement in 1841. The Sons of Temperance came into existence in 1842, at, thesame time the Order of Rechabites was organized, and theCongressional Temperance Society of 1833 was revived on the basisof total abstinence. They took heart at their early state,successes and fought against the defeats of repeal. In the meantime, however, the United States government, whichhad heaped honors upon Father Matthew, concluded a treaty withKing Kamehameha III of Hawaii in 1850 permitting the introductionand sale of liquor on his island. As further evidence of the national dichotomy, Chicagoans inthe 1850's fought virulently against the enforcement of Sundayclosing laws. To protest, an armed mob burst into the businessdistrict of the city, to be met by police. Fortunately, the mobwas dispersed before the mayor found it necessary to use thecannon he had hurriedly planted around City Hall (Peterson, 1969:120). It was the time when patent medicines, 40 proof and more,began to develop their clientele. And although the Demon Rummight threaten their health and life, Lydia Pinkham's Compoundoffered a cure for any and all ails and aches. By the time of the Civil War, both the assimilative andcoercive traditions of the temperance movement had crystallized:that is, temperance proponents were determined to save the weakand to destroy the recalcitrant (Gusfield, 1963: 69-70). Thehardening of positions was accompanied by the development ofpolitical consciousness in the movement and recognition ofpolitical objectives. These processes were only temporarilyblunted by the Civil War in the 1860's and the diversion ofinterest to the abolitionist cause. Part of the heritage of the Civil War was the tax on liquorand beer imposed in 1862. Rates were increased several timesbetween 1863 and 1868, so that the tax imposed at the rate of 20cents per gallon rose to $2 per gallon. An interesting phenomenon was noted by the Federal Government:as the rates increased, the revenue did not. In fact, the numberof gallons reported actually declined. As the decade went on,attempts were made to enforce the tax laws and in 1868, $25,000was actually appropriated to detect violators. Fraud continuedalmost unabated. Stockpiling of liquor was popular to hedgeagainst future, increases, for they were not applicable to liquoron hand. The infamous Whiskey Ring was active in these days and was notfinally broken up until 1875, when, in a peak of nerve, membersestablished a corruption fund in the District of Columbia to haltthe prosecution of 321 persons charged with violations of therevenue laws. Before then, however, Congress apparently hadsecond thoughts about the implications of the revenue collectionsand reduced the tax from the high of $2 per gallon to 50 cents in1869. The happy result was to see a rise in collections from$13.5 million in 1868, to $45 million in 1869, and $55 millionthe following year. Taking further precautions, the governmentstipulated that new stamps be developed to precludecounterfeiting and tampering (History of the Alcohol 14-20;Cherrington, 1920: 156162). Congress did not escape unscathed by criticism and reaction.It came from both sides of the temperance issue. Temperanceadvocates such as Senator Wilson of Massachusetts and SenatorPomeroy of Kansas decried the fact that federal revenues would bedrawn from the liquor industry. At the same, time, however, the industry revolted, leading tomass tax evasion schemes and devices and the organization oftheir first industry lobby, the United States BrewersAssociation. The Association rapidly launched a, legislativecampaign and succeeded in 1863 in reducing the tax rate of beerfrom $1 to 60 cents (Cherrington, 1920:157). By 1870, the Civil War dust had cleared and the temperancebattle lines were drawn, already tested by the skirmishes of the1840's and 1850's. The most interesting feature of their warstrategy was soon to become apparent: women and children werewelcomed at the battlements. 1870-1913: TOWARD A NATIONAL CONSCIENCE A series of "isms" was aroused in this era:feminism, unionism, socialism, and progressivism. Prohibitionabsorbed elements of them all, and vice versa. The feminist movement originated early in the 1800's. Untilthe 1870's, however, feminine involvement in the temperanceeffort was largely peripheral. The Women's Crusade of 1873 andthe organization of the Women's Christian Temperance Union in1874 marked the formal entrance of women into the temperancemovement. The WCTU was devotedly headed by Frances E. Willard, a ladyequally committed to the principle of equality of the sexes.Temperance was to bridge the gap, she believed: Drink and tobacco are the great separatists [sic] betweenmen and women. Once they used these things together, but woman'sevolution has carried her beyond them; man will climb to the samelevel . . . but meanwhile ... the fact that he permits himselffleshly indulgence that he would deprecate in her, makes theirplanes different, giving her an instinct of revulsion (Furnas,1968: 281). Although the WCTU was organized initially around thetemperance issue, it was not long before Miss Willard'sleadership expanded its conscience. A statement of principles was adopted in its early years: We believe in a living wage; in an 8-hour day; in courts ofconciliation and arbitration, in justice as opposed to greed ingain; in "Peace on Earth and Good Will to Men"(Gusfield, 1963: 76). Within three years of its inception, the WCTU reported thatits concerns included "a better Indian policy" and"wiser civil service reform" (Gusfield, 1963: 77).There were those in the Union who felt that their interestsshould be limited to temperance. But, forecasting the mood ofProgressivism, Miss Willard steered the organization along thebroader lines to social reform. The WCTU was responsible for part of the early campaign toeducate the public about temperance. Children were recruited tosing praises of "the true and the brave" who signed theabstinence pledge. They were assisted in this effort byMcGuffey's Readers which denounced the licensing of liquor storesand saloons: Licensed-to do thy neighbor harm, Licensed-to kindle hire and strife, Licensed-to nerve the robber's arm, Licensed-to whet the murderer's knife, Licensed-like spider for a fly, To spread thy nets for man, thy prey, To mock his struggles, crush his soul, Then cast his worthless form away (Lee, 1963: 34-35). Whiskey makes "the happy miserable" and impoverishesthe rich, the, McGuffey books concluded. And the word spread. By1902, the temperance campaign had permeated the public schoolsystems: every state but Arizona had introduced compulsorytemperance education. Their texts teemed with both facts andmisinformation such as "Alcohol sometimes causes the coatsof the blood vessels to grow thin. They are then liable at anytime to cause death by bursting." (Sinclair, 1962: 43). The WCTU was not carrying the burden of reform alone, however.In 1869, the National Prohibition Party was born. Three yearslater, the first party ticket was put forth in the presidentialcampaign of 1872, headed by John Black, who received 5,607 votesfor President. Success at the polls ultimately peaked in 1892when John Dedwell, the Prohibition presidential candidate,received a total of 270,710 votes. Thereafter, its partisansdeclined in number, having failed to break voters away from theirtraditional affiliations (Cherrington, 1920: 165-169). As a rule, the WCTU eschewed partisanship. Their objectiveswere far broader and more practical than those contemplated bythe Prohibition Party. Only once it supported the ProhibitionParty in the notorious election of 1884. The election of 1884 carried a variety of implications forfuture candidates on the temperance issue. In New York Cityalone, 1,007 primaries and conventions reportedly were held bythe various parties. Of these, over 60% took place in saloons(Peterson, 1969: 123), recalling to mind the complaint of JohnAdams a century before (Cherrington, 1920: 37; Dobyns, 1940:215). The meeting places were indicative of the fact that at thistime neither party could afford to adopt a dry plank in itsplatform, for New York would be a pivotal state in the racebetween Republican James G. Blaine and Democrat Grover Cleveland. Blaine campaigned hard, trying to overcome the defection ofseveral thousand dry Republicans to the Prohibition Party.Speaking in behalf of Blaine at a New York City rally,Presbyterian minister Samuel Burchard denounced the Democrats asthe party of "Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion." Needlessto say, the Catholic vote, as well as the wet vote, quicklyswelled the Democratic totals. Blaine, having thus alienated bothwets and drys, lost the state--and the election-by a tiny margin(Furnas, 1968: 273; Lee, 1963: 29-30). In case the lesson that temperance was an issue to be reckonedwith in national politics was lost on the parties after 1884, theevents of the decade culminating in the birth of the Anti-SaloonLeague in 1895, dramatized the point. A second wave of stateprohibition laws was experienced between 1880 and 1890. Theresults of much of the legislation during those years were lessthan satisfying to temperance advocates, however; only six statesemerged with state-wide prohibition by statute or constitutionalamendment. Numerous other states had enacted local option, whichpermitted towns to go dry if they so chose by referendum. Withoutstate or federal insulation from wet communities, however, theso-called dry towns were scarcely temperance models. In the wake of these state legislative actions, South Carolinaintroduced a state dispensary system in order to eliminate themotive of private gain from the liquor business. Politicalscandals which quickly developed tended to discredit it, however,if indeed it had enjoyed much support from any corner(Cherrington, 1920: 250-251). With this discomfiting history behind it, the Anti-SaloonLeague arose to the challenge, while Carrie Nation independentlythrust her way into the public eye. The League was to develop theart of lobbying or "pressure political" to its mostdramatic heights. Scarcely more than 10 years after organization,it was described as "the most dangerous political movementthat this country has ever known" by the National ModelLicense League, a wet (and harassed) association. A more rationalviewpoint was expressed by the president of the New York StateBrewers Association in 1913: We are not dealing with a theory which is the delusion ofthe fanatic alone, but with a real condition which is in thehands of a well organized force, led by aggressive, experienced,and untiring leaders (Odegard, 1928: 23). The focus of the League's indictments included not simplyalcohol, but the saloon itself, as the purveyor of spirits. Themyriad League publications denounced the saloon for "annuallysending thousands of our youths to destruction, for corruptingpolitics, dissipating workmen's wages, leading astray 60,000girls each year into lives of immorality and banishing childrenfrom school" (Odegard, 1928: 40-59). "Liquor is responsible for 19% of the divorces, 25% ofthe poverty, 25% of the insanity, 37% of the pauperism, 45% ofchild desertion, and 50% of the crime in this country,"the League determined. "And this," it concluded, " is a very conservative estimate" (Odegard,1928: 60). League posters appeared everywhere depicting the saloon-keeperas a profiteer who feasted on death and enslavement. Othersscreamed out the dire consequences of alcohol. "Alcoholinflames the passions, thus making the temptation to sex-sinunusually strong," advertised one (Sinclair, 1962: 51). It was the League which geared up the campaign, but it was notalone. As the Progressive spirit caught the national interest inthe early 19th century, the movement for reform embraced thecause of temperance. The temperance movement assumed an aura ofevangelism, combining the concept of America's mission with thevision of Messianism. Through the combination of temperance andprogressivism, it was believed that the Kingdom of God couldactually come to the United States. In an article in Appleton's Magazine in 1908, the ReverendCharles F. Aked articulated the aspirations of the reformers: We are spending our lives, many of us, in the effort tomake the world a little better and brighter for those that shallcome after us.... we want to open out life and liberty to all thesons of men. We want to make possible for all of life in thewhole, the good and the beautiful ... and the common sale ofintoxicating liquor renders our work a thousand times moredifficult ... (Timberlake, 1063: 34-38). Others were more mundane. Scientists began accumulatingevidence of the effect of quantities of alcohol on the nervoussystem and general physical condition. The myth that alcoholconsumption improved muscular power was exploded. Therelationship between mental psychoses and alcohol was documented,and thus did the condemnation of alcohol as a poison assumescientific support. Finally, in 1915, whiskey and brandy werediscreetly removed from the list of authoritative medicinal drugscontained in the United States Pharmacopoeia (Timberlake, 1963:47). Who were the people fueling the movement? Largely middleclass, rural, Anglo-Saxon and Protestant comprised the temperancemovement and they confronted the urban and industrial communitieshead-on. "The Anglo-Saxon stock is the best improved,hardiest and fittest.... [I]f we are to preserve this nation andthe Anglo-Saxon type we must abolish [saloons]," proclaimedone temperance publication (Gusfield, 1963: 100). Calling itself"The Protestant church in action" (Sinclair, 1962:108), the Anti-Saloon League concentrated single-mindedly andevangelically on the cause of temperance and refrained fromdabbling in other reforms (Gusfield, 1963: 108). Nevertheless, the Episcopal and Lutheran churches neveraligned themselves with the AntiSaloon League, while Jewish andCatholic groups generally opposed their objective. The convictionshared by Anti-Saloon Leaguers expressed by Reverend FrancisAscott McBride was: "The League was born of God" (Lee,1963: 35). Thus one had to be for or against the movement; therewas no half-way commitment. When the sides were lined up initially, industrialists andunion leaders alike preferred to keep God on their side. From thecompany's point of view, the saloon was often responsible forindustrial injuries and absenteeism. Some believed that thedrinking man demanded higher wages than his sober counterparts.Furthermore, union locals tended to congregate in saloon meetinghalls maintained for that purpose and, it was sometimessuspected, for the plottings of anarchistic conspirators (Furnas,1968: 310). Accordingly, it was not long before industry moved from anacquiescent position to an active role in the temperancemovement. Various methods were adopted to encourage sobriety,including lectures, literature and job preferences forteetotalers. Businessmen opined that sobriety expandedproductivity, increased bank deposits, improved collections andstimulated the retail trade (Timberlake, 1963: 67-79). At the same time, the prospect of diverting patronage of theliquor industry to other products tantalized some industries.Thus the Welch Grape Juice Company advertised: Get the Welch Habit-It's one that won't get you!(Timberlake, 1963: 77). Opinion was not unanimous, of course. Businessmen, includingbankers, whose interests were tied to the liquor industry couldill afford to be beneficent toward temperance. Others, includingthe DuPonts, Rockefellers, Kresges, and Wanamakers spent freelyto cover the League's annual campaign costs of $2.5 million(Odegard, 1928: 126). As surely as liquor was the enemy of the home, it was alsoproclaimed the enemy of the working man. "The great sinkholefor the workers' wages is the saloon," wrote the editors ofone League publication, The California Liberator. "When thatabomination is destroyed, labor is freed from its greatestcurse" (Odegard, 1928: 53). The logic appealed to the unionleadership. According to one official of the American Federationof Labor: No force in our country has been as effective in thepromotion of temperance among working people as the organizedlabor movement. The labor movement has achieved more for thecause of temperance than all the temperance societies combined... (Timberlake, 1963: 83). Since similar credit has been claimed for the League, theProtestant church, and business interests, it is difficult toapportion the plaudits. Subsequent events suggest that the laborinterests failed to live up to this claim, however. Notwithstanding Terrence V. Powerderly's early speech against"the strong right hand of labor itself . . . that carrieswith it the rum which drowns reason," his own Knights ofLabor repealed their constitutional provision which deniedmembership to anyone connected with the liquor trade (Timberlake,1963: 85-86). As the reports of the National Commission on Enforcement ofthe Prohibition Laws (known as the "WickershamCommission") were later to record, it was particularly theworkers who resented the paternal legislation which they believedwas directed at them and their habits (National Commission on LawObservance, 1931: 345). In addition, there were. those whose livelihoods would bedirectly affected-indeed, effaced-by the success of the campaign:brewery workers, bartenders, glass workers, waiters, andmusicians among others. Thus, even though the Socialist Party resolved in 1908 that "anyexcessive indulgence in intoxicating liquors by members of theworking class is a serious obstacle to the triumph of our causesince it impairs the vigor of the fighters in political andeconomic struggle" (Timberlake, 1963: 98), theindustrial urban centers of the country continued to harbor andstimulate antagonism towards the temperance movement. The identification of the saloon and its offerings with theurban, immigrant working class further enraged Prohibitionists.As one sociologist observed, "The saloon appeared as thesymbol of a culture which was alien to the ascetic character ofAmerican values . . ." (Gusfield, 1963: 100). Thus,Americanism became a central issue in the temperance movement. One temperance spokesman, cited in Barker's "The SaloonProblem," vented these sentiments: The influx of foreigners into our urban centers, many ofwhom have liquor habits [sic], is a menace to good government. .. . [T] he foreign born population is largely under the socialand political control of the saloon. If the cities keep up theirrapid growth they will soon have the balance of political powerin the nation and become storm centers of political life (Timberlake,1963: 118). 1913-1933: NATIONAL PROHIBITION -- PROLOGUE AND FINISH The distrust of the immigrant population became morepronounced as the economic, political, and social power of thecities developed. It was given a strong impetus by theanti-German tremors which shook the country in a mood ofanticipation before World War 1. The United States Brewers Association misread the prevailingtemper and associated itself with the German-American Alliance tooppose the temperance advocates and defend German kultur in theUnited States. As the United States came closer to war, the antipathy whichdeveloped against the Central Powers was directed with equalforce against brewers and tipplers (Furnas, 1968: 334-35) : Pro-Germanism is the only froth from the German's beersaloon. Our German Socialist Party and the German AmericanAlliance are the spawn of the saloon. . . . Prohibition is theinfallible submarine chaser (Sinclair, 1962:122). The war gave the prohibition cause new ammunition. Literaturedepicted brewers and licensed retailers as treacherously stabbingAmerican soldiers in the back. Raw materials and labor were beingdiverted from the war effort to an industry which debilitated thenation's capacity to defend itself. It was urged that wartimeprohibition would stop the waste of grain and molasses and wouldremove a handicap on workers' efficiency. "Liquor is a menace to patriotism because it puts beerbefore country," preached Prohibitionist Wayne Wheeler(Odegard, 1928: 72). The fact that names Pabst, Schlitz, andBlatz broadcast their national origin only did further injury totheir interests. In this atmosphere the Wartime Prohibition Act was passed in1918. It followed a series of federal laws such as the WilsonOriginal Packages Act and the Webb-Kenyon Act, attempts toprotect dry states from their wet neighbors. The Wilson Original Packages Act was passed on August 8, 1890,and provided that all intoxicating beverages shipped interstatewould be subject to the laws of the destination state uponarrival. No mechanism for federal enforcement was provided. The Webb-Kenyon Act, enacted March 1, 1913, was intended toreinforce the 1890 Act by providing that it was a violation offederal law to ship an intoxicating beverage interstate with theintent that it be used or sold in any manner in violation of thelaws of the destination state. The lack of federal enforcementrendered the statute virtually meaningless. The Reed Amendment, enacted four years later, provided a fineof $1,000 for transporting liquor into a dry state with nogreater effect. None of the earlier acts met with substantial success incurbing the flow of liquor into purportedly dry regions, but theydid mark a change in federal policy. Formerly liquor laws weredesigned solely to produce federal revenue; Congress now tookcognizance of the role it could play in the regulation ofconsumption. The role was actually forced upon a reluctant Congress atfirst. Indeed, the government had passed up numerous prioropportunities to involve itself in the temperance movement assuch. The particular part it was to play was forecast by the Sonsof Temperance who, in 1856, declared themselves for nationalconstitutional prohibition. Twenty years later, Congressman Henry Blair of New Hampshireintroduced a prohibition amendment to the Constitution for thefirst time in Congress. As a senator, he introduced another suchresolution in 1885, along with Senator Preston Plum of Kansas.After consideration by the Senate Committee on Education, thebill was reported out favorably and placed on the Senate Calendarin 1886. Nevertheless, no action resulted (Cherrington, 1920: 317). In the meantime, states continued the struggle between thewets and the drys, with great success for the temperanceadvocates. By 1913, nine states were under stateside prohibition.In 31 other states, local option laws were in effect. By reasonof these and other variants of regulatory schemes, more than 50%of the United States population was then under prohibition. The national constitutional campaign was resumed as such in1913 when the Anti-Saloon League went on record at its 15thNational Convention in favor of immediate prosecution of theobjective of constitutional amendment. The National Temperance Council, founded at the same time,coordinated the activities of numerous temperance organizationswith the same object. In 1913, the demands of the League wereformally presented to Congress by the Committee of 1,000. The measure was then introduced in the House by CongressmanThompson and in the Senate by Senator Sheppard. The followingyear, the first joint resolution failed to secure the necessarytwo thirds majority for submitting a constitutional amendment tothe states. A second resolution was submitted in 1915 andfavorably considered by the Judiciary Committees of both houses,but neither ever came to a vote. Ultimately, in 1917, the resolution to prohibit themanufacture, sale, transportation or importation of alcoholicbeverages in the United States was approved by Congress and sentto the states for ratification (Cherrington, 1920: 317-330). It took only one year and eight days for the 18th Amendment tosecure the necessary ratification. On January 8, 1918,Mississippi proudly became the first state to ratify, and onJanuary 16, 1919, Nebraska completed the job as the 36th state(Lee, 1963: 42). By the end of February 1919, there remained onlythree hold-outs: New Jersey, Connecticut, and Rhode Island(Cherrington, 1920: 330). October 28, 1919, was the day that Congress enacted theNational Prohibition Act-more often known as the VolsteadAct-with the intent to give effect to the new constitutionalamendment. Officially, the liquor drought was to begin on January17, 1920. The celebrants of the occasion were concentrated in themembership of the Anti-Saloon League, which could rightly claimthat its consummate skill in pressure politics had maneuvered thecountry into its dry state. The early experience of the Prohibition era gave thegovernment a taste of what was to come. In the three monthsbefore the 18th Amendment became effective, liquor worth half amillion dollars was stolen from Government warehouses. Bymidsummer of 1920, federal courts in Chicago were overwhelmedwith some 600 pending liquor violation trials (Sinclair, 1962:176-177). Within three years, 30 prohibition agents were killedin service. Other statistics demonstrated the increasing volume of thebootleg trade. In 1921, 95,933 illicit distilleries, stills,still works and fermentors were seized. in 1925, the total jumpedto 172,537 and up to 282,122 in 1930. In connection with theseseizures, 34,175 persons were arrested in 1921; by 1925, thenumber had risen to 62,747 and to a high in 1928 of 75,307(Internal Revenue, Service, 1921, 1966, 1970: 95, 6, 73).Concurrently, convictions for liquor offenses in federal courtsrose from 35,000 in 1923 to 61,383 in 1932. The law could not quell the continuing demand for alcoholicproducts. Thus, where legal enterprises could no longer supplythe demand, an illicit traffic developed, from the point ofmanufacture to consumption. The institution of the speakeasyreplaced the institution of the saloon. Estimates of the numberof speakeasies throughout the United States ranged from 200,000to 500,000 (Lee, 1963: 68). Writers of this period point out that the law was circumventedby various means. Although there may have been legitimate,medicinal purposes for whiskey, the practice of obtaining amedical prescription for the illegal substance was abused. It isestimated that doctors earned $40 million in 1928 by writingprescriptions for whiskey. The legal system was equally evasive; the courts convictedabout seven percent of those charged with liquor violations(Sinclair, 1962: 193-195; Dobyns, 1940: 292). The exception forsacramental wine from protection under the Volstead Act alsoinvited abuse. In 1925, the Department of Research and Educationof the Federal Council of the Churches of Christ reported that: The withdrawal of wine on permit from bonded warehouses forsacramental purposes amounted in round figures to 2,139,000gallons in the fiscal year 1922; 2,503,500 gallons in 1923; and2,944,700 gallons in 1924. There is no way of knowing what thelegitimate consumption of fermented sacramental wine is but it isclear that the legitimate demand does not increase 800,000gallons in two years (Dobyns, 1940: 297). The smuggling trade was revived with new vigor and newincentives. Rum-runners, often under foreign flags, broughtliquor into the country from Belgium and Holland. In 1923, therewere 134 seizures of such vessels. The following year, 236 wereapprehended (History of the Alcohol . . . 928). With fewer risks,liquor was readily smuggled across the Canadian border. One wayor the other, the Department of Commerce estimated that, as of1924, liquor valued at approximately $40 million was entering theUnited States annually (Sinclair, 1962: 198). The manufacture of "near-beer" and industrialalcohol provided other opportunities for diversion from licitchannels, while the salvage of the California grape industry wassection 29 of the Volstead Act (27 U.S.C.  46) which authorizedthe home production of fermented fruit juices. Although thesection was allegedly inserted to save the vinegar industry andthe hard cider of America's farmers, it was welcomed by homewinemakers as well. In the spirit of cooperation, the grapegrowers even produced a type of grape jelly suggestively called"Vine-go" which, with the addition of water, could makea strong wine within two months (Sinclair, 1962: 206). One of the great ironies of the prohibition era was the fact,noted by the Wickersham Commission, that women happily took todrink during the experimental decade, and, what is more, did soin public. As the counterpart of the WCTU, the Women'sOrganization for National Prohibition Reform was founded, statingin its declaration of principles that Prohibition was "wrongin principle" and "disastrous in consequences in thehypocrisy, the corruption, the tragic loss of life and theappalling increase of crime which has attended the abortiveattempt to enforce it" (Dobyns, 1940: 107). Drinking at an earlier age was also noted, particularly duringthe first few years of Prohibition. The superintendents of eightstate mental hospitals reported a larger percentage of youngpatients during Prohibition (1919-1926) than formerly. One of thehospitals noted: "During the past year (1926), an unusuallylarge group of patients who are of high school age were admittedfor alcoholic psychosis" (Brown, 1932:176). In determining the age at which an alcoholic forms hisdrinking habit, it was noted: "The 1920-1923 group wereyounger than the other groups when the drink habit wasformed" (Pollock, 1942: 113). AVERAGE AGE AT FORMATION OF DRINK HABIT Period Males Females 1914 21.4 27.9 1920-23 20.6 25.8 1936-37 23.9 31.7 To be sure, the Volstead Act was enforced in the United Stateswherever it had popular support. In the rural South and Westprohibition was effective and in some cases still is. Thefailures of prohibition enforcement were spotlighted in the bigcities where the law was flagrantly defied and in the smallertowns, populated by miners and industrial workers, where the lawwas simply ignored (National Commission on Law Observance, 1931:345). Notwithstanding the weak enforcement of the Volstead Act, somebelieve that it was only the coming of the Depression with itsdemand for increased employment and tax revenues which finallykilled the experiment (Gusfield, 1963: 127). Others observe thatProhibition was a by-product of the stress and excesses of warand could not have survived in peacetime even under optimaleconomic conditions (Sinclair, 1962: 23-24). Finally, there arethose who accuse the selfishly motivated businessmen of theUnited States for repeal which they allegedly brought aboutthrough the same high-pressure tactics so successfully employedby the partisans of temperance in the preceding decades (Dobyns,1940: 5-130 passim). Despite mixed motivations, the repeal movement was financedand driven by the Association Against the Prohibition Amendment(AAPA). The members declared that "the principal business andobjective of the Association shall be to educate its members asto the fundamental provisions, objects and purposes of theConstitution of the United States" (Dobyns, 1940: 5). Theyworked for the election of Congressmen who agreed to submit thequestion of repeal to a vote of the people in each state. Theywere successful fund-raisers and by January 1, 1931, had almost$3 million in cash in the bank (Dobyns, 1940: 9). The sources of the funds included a number of converts fromthe dry cause. In 1928, the DuPont family abandoned the drys,followed in 1932 by John D. Rockefeller and S. S. Kresge(Gusfield, 1963: 128). Their conversion was effected under thestrong influence of the income tax. Doggedly, Pierre S. DuPontcirculated a brochure concluding that "the British liquorpolicy applied in the United States would permit the totalabolition of the income tax both personal and corporate"(Dobyns, 1940: 22). Concern for the effects of the prohibition laws was notlimited to the private, wealthy sector. In 1928, a dry-wetconfrontation emerged in the presidential election between AlfredE. Smith, a Catholic New Yorker, and Herbert Hoover. Hooversolemnly praised the "great social and economicexperiment" and tightened his grip on the dry vote. Notwithstanding the popular image of Smith as a staunch wet,his platform tried to avoid any outright repeal sentiment. Heasked instead for an amendment of the Volstead Act which wouldprovide a "scientific definition of the alcoholic content ofan intoxicating beverage." This would enable each state tointerpret and apply the federal standard within its borders. Inaddition, he favored what was to be known as the "statestore" system of manufacturing and dispensing alcoholicbeverages (Lee, 1963: 212). In retrospect, it is difficult to ascertain whether it was thereligious campaign or the dry campaign which defeated Al Smith.H. L. Mencken may have written accurately that "if [AlSmith] loses, it will be because those who fear the Popeoutnumber those who are tired of the Anti-Saloon League"('Sinclair, 1962: 303). Nevertheless, Prohibition survived the1928 election, as did Hoover's campaign pledge to establish acommission to investigate the conditions under Prohibition. Headof the Commission was George W. Wickersham, former AttorneyGeneral under Taft. Although the Commission's purpose was setforth as an examination of the problems of enforcement, it soondecided to undertake much broader policy considerations. The Commission's report, published in 1931, included opinionsurveys, statistics on the number of deaths connected withenforcement efforts, testimony by consultants and experts, and ananalysis of the organization, personnel and methods ofprohibition enforcement. On the basis of the five volume report,the Wickersham Commission ironically concluded in its summarythat: There have been more sustained pressures to enforce thislaw than on the whole has been true of any other federal statute,although this pressure in the last four or five years has metwith increasing resistance as the sentiment against prohibitionhas developed . . . . That a main source of difficulty is in theattitude of at least a very large number of respectable citizensin most of our large cities and in several states, is made moreclear when the enforcement of the national prohibition act iscompared with the enforcement of the laws as to narcotics. Thereis an enormous margin of profit in breaking the latter. The meansof detecting transportation are more easily evaded than in thecase of liquor. Yet there are no difficulties in the case ofnarcotics beyond those involved in the nature of the trafficbecause the laws against them are supported everywhere by ageneral and determined public sentiment (Sinclair, 1962:367-368). Notwithstanding this dire analysis, 10 out of the 11commissioners signed a summary of conclusions of the report whichstated that the Commission as a whole opposed the repeal of the18th Amendment, the entry of the Federal or state governmentsinto liquor business, or even the modification of nationalprohibition to permit the sale of light wines and beer (Sinclair,1962: 364). Walter Lippmann commented, "What was done was to evade adirect and explicit official confession that Federal prohibitionis a hopeless failure" (Sinclair, 1962: 365). Whether or notLippmann correctly read the Commission's intentions, there wasclearly a gap between the input and the outcome of the report. It is difficult to assess the relative numbers of the wet anddry partisans during the last few years of national prohibition.In terms of strength, however, the wets surely had the edge whichless than two decades before had belonged to the drys. The newwet strength showed up at the National Convention of theDemocratic party held in Chicago in 1932, where Mayor Cermak ofthat city filled the galleries with his supporters. And, thoughFranklin D. Roosevelt had wooed the dry vote for some time, henow came forward on a platform which favored the outright repealof the 18th Amendment. Accepting his nomination, he stated: I congratulate this convention for having had the courage,fearlessly to write into its declaration of principles what anoverwhelming majority here assembled really thinks about the 18thAmendment. This convention wants repeal. Your candidate wantsrepeal. And I am confident that the United States of Americawants repeal (Dobyns, 1940: 160). While dry leaders looked on with disgust, Roosevelt waselected president and Congress turned a somersault. The repealamendment was introduced February 14, 1933, by Sen. Blaine ofWisconsin and approved two days later by the Senate 63 to 23. TheHouse followed four days later, voting 289 to 121 to send theamendment on to the States (Lee, 1963: 231). It required approvalby 36 states. Michigan was the first state to ratify it; 39states voted, on the amendment during 1933, with 37 approving itsratification and two-North and South Carolina-voting against itsratification. The final ratification was accomplished on November7,1933, when Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Utah gave theirapproval. Congress officially adopted the 21st Amendment to theConstitution on December 5, 1933. Within three weeks of taking office, President Rooseveltwitnessed the first sales of 3.2 beer, following a redefinitionby statute of the terms "intoxicating liquors." Themore popular, higher alcohol-content beer was relegalized byCongress under the Cullen-Harrison Act. Sale of beer became legalon April 7, 1933, in the District of Columbia and the 20 stateswhere state laws did not prohibit its sale. During the next fouryears the remaining states changed their laws to permit its sale,with Alabama and Kansas in 1937, as the last to join the legalsale ranks. The job of total repeal was accomplished with the help of thedetermined AAPA during the succeeding year. Their lawyersassisted the states in preparing bills for conventions andrelease of various forms of political propaganda, therebyenacting a serious satire on the 1919 campaign launched by theAnti-Saloon League. Notwithstanding their high and enduringconstitutional principles, on December 31, 1933, with repeal areality, the AAPA ceased to exist and sent its files to theLibrary of Congress. "Having attained its objective . . .the Association resisted the temptation to linger on as a'sentinel of American liberty' '', the New York Times observed inthe organization's obituary (Dobyns, 1940: 132). PROHIBITION IN PERSPECTIVE During 13 years, what did Prohibition accomplish? There is nosingle compilation of Prohibition statistics which would enableus to determine the degree of success which Prohibition enjoyedduring its lifetime. In discussing the relative successes and failures ofProhibition, most observers conclude that the undertaking failed."Prohibition destroyed the manufacturing and distributiveagencies through which the demand for liquor had been legallysupplied. But the demand remained" (Hu, 1950: 51). In its Report on the Enforcement of the Prohibition Laws ofthe United States, the Wickersham Commission concluded that thecountry had prohibition in law but not in fact. They reported: There was general prevalence of drinking in homes, clubsand hotels.... Throughout the country people of wealth,businessmen and professional men and their families, and thehigher paid workingmen and their families, are drinking in largenumbers in open flouting of the law. And neither Congress nor thestates set up adequate machinery or appropriated sufficient fundsfor the enforcement of the prohibitory legislation. Federal andstate legislation, as a matter of fact, strove to satisfy sothat, as it was aptly said, the drys had their prohibition lawand the wets had their liquor (Hu, 1950: 52). Although some view the theory of prohibition as reasonable, itis generally conceded that the realities of manufacture anddistribution make it unworkable, for in one form or another,alcohol can be easily produced by farmers, high school chemistrystudents, and ordinary citizens. Prohibition has been attempted many times in various parts ofthe world; except for some Moslem areas, attempted legislativecontrols have not proven adequate. In spite of many sincere anddetermined efforts, no country in Europe or the Americas has yetsucceeded in eliminating the use of alcohol by society bylegislative fiat (H.E.W., 1968: 41). Those who had been accustomed to using alcoholic beveragessought other sources of supply "in disregard of thelegislative mandate. In the presence of high pecuniary returnsthere [was] a strong tendency for supply to meet demand in spiteof prohibition" (Hu, 1950: 51). Consumption. Although it is impossible to make anaccurate determination of the consumption of alcoholic beveragesunder Prohibition-since there are no statistics compiledregarding the output and sale of the outlaw industry-estimateshave been made by those examining the economic results ofProhibition as well as by the Bureau of Prohibition of the U.S.Department of Justice. The Bureau placed the consumption ofalcoholic beverages at 73,831,172 gallons, or 0.6 gallon percapita in fiscal year 1930 as contrasted with 166,983,681 gallonsor 1.7 gallons per capita in 1914. In terms of pure alcohol, the Bureau concluded that per capitaconsumption in 1930 was 35% of the 1914 rate of legalconsumption. These estimates have been criticized as being fartoo low (Tillitt, 1932: 35). The figures published by the Department of Commerce in theStatistical Abstract of the United States reflect a differentpicture. The average annual per capita consumption of hard liquorfrom 1910-1914, inclusive, was 1.46 proof gallons. "This5-year period was before the rise of abnormal conditionscoincident to the World War and may be taken as fairly indicativeof the normal rate of drinking that - prevailed in thePre-Prohibition 'era" (Rosenbloom, 1935: 51). The per capita rate for the Prohibition years is computed tobe 1.63 proof gallons. This is 11.64% higher than thePre-Prohibition rate (Tillitt, 1932: 35). Based on these figuresone observer concluded: "And so the drinking which was, intheory, to have been decreased to the vanishing point byProhibition has, in fact, increased" (Tillitt, 1932: 36). Others disagree with the implications of these unverifiedstatistics noting that persons of limited means, formerly unableto patronize the expensive speakeasies, once again had cheapaccess to alcohol following repeal and thereby increasedconsumption (Harrison & Laine, 1936: 1). Popular opinion is equally inconclusive; a survey conducted bythe American Institute of Public Opinion in 1936 asked whetherconditions (drinking customs, consumption, etc.) were betterworse or without significant change since Repeal 36% indicated aworsening and 31% could see no appreciable change (Harrison &Laine, 1936: 2). Perhaps indicative of a gradual process ofadjustment, however, the results of later Gallup polls suggest agradual decline in the use of alcohol. Of a national sample, 67%indicated they used alcohol in 1945, in contrast to 60% in 1950and 55% in 1958 (Gusfield, 1963: 135). Alcoholic Psychoses. There was a notable decrease inalcoholic psychoses and in deaths due to alcoholism immediatelypreceding the enactment of Prohibition and a gradual increase inalcoholic psychosis and in deaths from alcoholism in the generalpopulation since 1920. "These facts appear to indicate that since 1920,Prohibition [was] increasingly impotent as a means of preventingexcessive use of alcohol to an extent productive of seriousmental disorders and untimely death. 1920 marks the end of thedecline and the beginning of the rise in the trends of alcoholicmental diseases and of deaths from alcoholism in the generalpopulation" (Brown, 1932: 88). The increase in mental disorders and deaths from alcoholismafter 1920, however, also coincides with the heavy consumptionperiod-early 1900's-which would have resulted in an increase inalcoholism some years later. The following table reflects the decrease prior to 1920 andthe subsequent gradual increase in percentage of alcoholicpsychosis among new admissions to 56 hospitals in 25 states aswell as among admissions to New York civil state hospitals(Brown, 1932: 76-77; Malzburg, 1949: 294) : 56 Hospitals Year All new admissions New admissions with alcoholic psychoses NY State - civil hospital percent admission with alcoholic psychoses. Number Percent 1910 17,439 1,486 8.5 ... 1911 17,299 1,366 7.9  1912 17,570 1,567 8.9 ... 1913 17,525 1,633 9.3 9.3 1914 19,134 1,573 8.2 7.4 1915 18,875 1,331 7.1 5.7 1916 17,929 1,370 7.6 6.1 1917 20,041 1,576 7.9 8.2 1918 19,741 1,021 5.2 5.2 1919 19,737 841 4.3 4.1 1920 19,579 485 2.5 2.0 1921 20,368 567 2.8 2.8 1922 20,741 798 3.8 3.2 1923 20,316 861 4.2 4.0 1924 19,818 896 4.9 5.4 1925 20,857 1,017 4. 9 5.8 1926 20,911 997 4.8 5.9 1927 21,982 1,268 5.8 7.0 1928 23,293 1,257 5.4 6.0 1929 23,242 1,380 5.9 6.2 1930 24,100 1,251 5.2 6.0 Deaths from Alcoholism. In New York City, from 1900through 1909, there was an average of 526 deaths annuallyattributable to alcoholism. From 1910 through 1917, the averagenumber was 619. It plummeted to 183 for the years 1918 through1922. Thereafter, the figure rose, averaging a new high of 639for the years 1923 through 1927 (Rice, ed., 1930: 122). Total deaths from alcoholism in the United States show acomparable trend, with the gradual increase resuming somewhatearlier, about 1922 (Brown, 1932: 61, 77; Feldman, 1927: 397;U.S. Department of Commerce, 1924: 55). Year Deaths from all causes rate per 100,000 Deaths from alcoholism rate per 100,000 1910 1,496.1 5.4 1911 1,418.1 4.9 1912 1,388.8 5.3 1913 1,409.6 5.9 1914 1,364.6 4.9 1915 1,355.0 4.4 1916 1,404.3 5.8 1917 1,425.5 5.2 1918 1,809.1 2.7 1919 1,287.4 1.6 1920 1,306.0 1.0 1921 1,163.9 1.8 1922 1,181.7 2.6 1923 1,230.1 3.2 1924 1,183.5 3.2 1925 1,182.3 3.6 1926 1,222.7 3.9 1927 1,141.9 4.0 1928 1,204.1 4.0 1929 1,192.3 3.7 The highest death rates from alcoholism occurred during thedecade prior to Prohibition as did the highest death rates fromcirrhosis of the liver. These statistics should be qualified bythe observations of Dr. Charles Morris, Chief Medical Examinerfor New York City: "In making out death certificates(which are basic to Census Reports) private or family physicianscommonly avoid entry of alcoholism as a cause of death wheneverpossible. This practice was more prevalent under the National DryLaw than it was in preprohibition time" (Tillitt, 1932:114-115). Even if reliable, per se, such statistics may be unrelated tothe consumption of alcoholic beverages in any given year. Anotherwriter of this period noted: "The relation of fatalalcoholic diseases to consumption of alcohol must be oneextending over a long period of years and the actual duration ofthe critical period can hardly be estimated" (Jellinek,1942: 48-1). According to one sociologist, rates of alcoholismand related mental and physical diseases reflect past drinkinghabits, developed ten to 15 years earlier (Gusfield, 1963: 119). A shorter "lead time" is suggested by a mentalhygiene statistician who attributes the temporary reduction inalcoholic psychoses "to the legal restriction of the saleand use of alcoholic beverages, made effective by the support ofpublic opinion which during the war period had discountenancedself-indulgence, of all sorts" (Brown, 1932: 88). He adds,however, that the notable increase in alcoholic psychoses anddeaths from alcoholism towards the end of the prohibition era(1927-1932) indicated that: ... since 1920, prohibition has become increasinglyimpotent as a means of preventing excessive use of alcohol to anextent productive of serious mental disorders and untimely deaths(Brown, 1932: 88). The highly limited statistical label of death from alcoholismhas been noted elsewhere: The trend of death from alcoholism reflects hardly anythingelse than progress in the treatment of the so-called diseases ofchronic alcoholism. Nevertheless, statistics of death fromalcoholism have been used by both Drys and Wets to prove thatProhibition or repeal has greatly improved the rate of death fromalcoholism. . . . Death from alcoholism is simply not an index ofthe prevalence of inebriety. Death from alcoholism could fall tozero in response to medical progress, while at the same time therate of inebriety might rise many fold (Jellinek, 1947: 39). Arrests Arrests for drunkenness also provide a sourceof information about the extent of drinking in the United States.It must be noted, however, that statistics of this sort vary withlocal police policies. For example, during a six-year period inthe 1930's, the arrests for drunkenness were from 14 to 31 timeshigher in Philadelphia than in New York (Kolb, 1941: 608). Nevertheless, gross statistics drawn from 383 cities indicatethat arrests for drunkenness per 10,000 population reached a highof 192 in 1916 and fell to 71 in 1920. From this level, they rosesteadily again to reach 157 in 1928 (Warburton, 1932: 102). Ofcourse, arrests prior to Prohibition may not bear the samerelation to the use of alcohol as they did subsequently,Warburton theorizes: . . . [U]nder Prohibition, especially during the earlyyears, police were more strict in making arrests, and . . . alarger proportion than formerly of persons appearing on thestreets under the influence of liquor are arrested. Also, sincethe sale of liquor is illegal and cannot be obtained in publicsaloons, and when the police are more strict in arrestingintoxicated persons, it is reasonable to suppose that drinking isless public and that fewer drunken persons appear on the streetsrelative to the quantity of liquor consumed (Warburton, 1932:103). Nevertheless, the cyclical trend suggested by these figurescoincides with statistics on alcoholism (Brown, 1932: 61, 71,77). Whatever their independent validity, however, they correlateearth the theory of one author that: [T] he l8th Amendment could not have been passed withoutthe support of the psychologically tolerant, made temporarilyintolerant by the stress of war. But when the moderates desertedthe drys in the time of peace, the hard core of the movement wasrevealed (Sinclair, 1962: 23--24). Without the support of the moderates, the author theorizes,Prohibition was to become itself a symbol of excess, unsupportedby the vast majority of the population. Outcome. What, then, did Prohibition accomplish? To a greatextent it eliminated the saloon from American life. While barsand taverns reopened joyfully following repeal, they ceased to bethe centers of systematic political corruption and debaucherywhich they had once been. Part of this may be attributable to thegreater sophistication of the electorate and politics generally.Part, no doubt, is owing to the fact that women were welcome ascustomers in the new cocktail lounges, having shown themselves tobe eager patrons of the speakeasies. And finally, the change in the character of the saloon waseffected by public determination that it should be changed. Thisattitude was expressed in the post-repeal statutes concerned withthe physical appearance of the saloon and the character ofpersons authorized to operate them. Prohibition did make the nation conscious that corruption ofthe law and of the populace may be the consequence of a law whichis not reflective of the morals and mores of the time. It playedout some of the deepest social class resentments, culminating inthe realization that the behavioral standards of some could notbe impressed -upon others. It demonstrated that the fervor of warand the cult of patriotism may be abused-and abuse the country inreturn. Repeal reimposed the burden of regulation upon the states.They were required to develop a system of control directed at theparticular objectives they wished to achieve. The post-repeal erawas to prove an exercise not only in states' rights but instates' responsibilities. 1933-1971: AFTER THE DELUGE On December 4, 1933, the day before final ratification of therepeal amendment, the President established the Federal AlcoholControl Administration, pursuant to Executive Order No. 6474.FACA was to have the power to grant or revoke permits to engagein the alcoholic beverage industry-not the brewing industry-aswell as the power to control plant capacity and production; itwas also to engage in consumer protection through regulationsdesigned to prevent misbranding and false advertising ofalcoholic beverages. In addition, FACA prohibited the ownershipof retail outlets by manufacturers and wholesalers (Harrison& Laine, 1936: 24-29). This scheme fell under the Schecter Poultry decision by theSupreme Court. The Treasury, Federal Trade, Commission and Foodand Drug Administration then moved in. A new alcohol controlagency was proposed, leading to a dispute as to whether it shouldbe independent or part of the Treasury. Joseph H. Choate, Jr., first head of the FACA, testified that: The Treasury has not been an organization whose duty it wasto study and understand the liquor business, the interest of thepublic in that business, or the method by which that businessought to be carried on in order to subserve the interests of boththe public and state governments. It has been a creature of oneidea, that one idea being, quite properly, to get revenue and getit as fast and as copiously as it could (Harrison &Laine, 1936: 33). The Department of the Treasury agreed with Choate's analysis. Nevertheless, this testimony was disregarded and the FederalAlcohol Administration was created as a division of Treasury in1935. This arrangement was superseded in 1936 when the Liquor TaxAdministration Act established FACA as an independent agency ofthe government. Soon thereafter it was reorganized, once again asan arm of the Department of Treasury, and even its separateidentity was abolished as of June 30, 1940. Today, the Treasuryretains full authority to administer all federal liquor laws. The current federal laws regulating trade in intoxicatingbeverages may be classified in the following categories: (1) Revenue: Taxes are imposed on rectifiers, brewers,manufacturers of stills, dealers; wholesale and retail stamps arerequired on distilled spirits (26 USC, 1971a). (2) Criminal Penalties: Criminal penalties are provided forunauthorized production, sale or possession, transportation intostates prohibiting sale, C.O.D. shipments and unlabeled shipments(26 USC, 1971b; 18 USC, 1971). (3) Interstate Transportation: Interstate shipments ofalcoholic beverages are subject to the laws of the receivingstate (27 USC, 1971a). (4) Permits: Importers, manufacturers and sellers ofintoxicating beverages must have permits (27 USC, 1971b). (5) Unfair Practices: Exclusive sales arrangements, tying,bribery and false advertising or labeling are prohibited (27 USC,1971b). The intent of the Federal Government to reserve all decisionsregarding regulation of consumption is quite clear from federalstatutes presently in force. The states have reacted with avariety of regulatory schemes controlling to varying degrees theseller, the buyer, the place, time and opportunity for sale and,through revenue measures, the cost. In 18 states, the state store or state monopoly system hasentirely displaced the private wholesale or retail sale ofintoxicating beverages. Other states permit the sale of liquor,wine and beer through private, licensed outlets. The license system may be implemented by different, means.Administration may be solely by the state, or control may beshared by the counties or municipalities. Local control may be exercised to a greater or lesser degree.For example, in the 1930's, immediately after repeal,Massachusetts and New Mexico permitted local boards to grantretail licenses only after investigation and approval ofapplicants by the state board. During the same period, otherstates, predominantly in the South, gave local authoritiessupplemental powers to issue licenses while requiring concurrentstate licenses as well. In some jurisdictions, the local license had to be obtainedfirst, and the state license could be granted thereafter. InIllinois, however, the state commission's power was curtailed byrequiring that a state license be granted once the local licensewas secured. And although the state was given the power to revokeits license, it was given no power to inspect places of sale todetermine grounds for revocation (Harrison & Laine, 1936:50-53). The license system has been suspect by many wets as well asdrys because of the opportunities it may afford for politicalabuse. On the other hand, there is substantial opinion whichholds direct participation in the sale of liquor in contempt. Asto the relative efficacy of each, there are no reliable means ofmaking a judgment. Each apparently depends on the integrity andcapacity of the individuals charged with the job of enforcementand oversight. Superimposed on the basic system of regulating the sale ofliquor are other sumptuary laws which are directed at thepurchaser. Sales are not permitted to minors or intoxicatedpersons. Credit is often prohibited on liquor sales as well.Criminal penalties may be imposed for driving under the influenceof alcohol as well as for drunken behavior. The sale of liquor by the drink is permitted in most states,but some still require that it be sold in packaged form only,reflecting the continuing fear of the resurrection of the saloon.In many states Sunday closing laws are enforced, and mandatoryclosing times are imposed upon bars and package stores alike.Sales are prohibited almost uniformly on Election Day, at leastduring polling hours, and, in many places, on Thanksgiving,Memorial Day, Christmas and other holidays. Local option is still granted in most states, in voting unitsranging from the plantation to the city or county. Of themonopoly or control states, only Utah and Wyoming fail to makeprovision for local option at all. Wyoming maintains a statemonopoly at the wholesale level only. Private retailer sellersare licensed. In the remaining monopoly states, it is often possible fortowns within a wet county to go dry, and sometimes vice versa. Ofthe 33 license states, only 10 (including the District ofColumbia) do not permit local option at any level. Notwithstanding the various patterns of regulation, SenatorArthur Capper's words of the 1930's still seem to be correct: We can repeal prohibition, but we cannot repeal the liquorproblem (Peterson, 1969: 126). Neither the states nor the population have yet come to gripswith the problems of alcoholism and alcohol abuse. Both themonopoly system and the license system are directed at otherconcerns. They, no more than Prohibition, have been able tocontrol or even alleviate the very real and dire consequences ofalcohol use by society. References Brown, F. W.: "Prohibition and mental Hygiene"Annals, 163: 61, 71, 76-77, 88, 1176 (September, 1932). Cherrington, E. H.: The Evolution of Prohibition In The UnitedStates of America, Westerville, Ohio: American Issue Press(1920), pp. 16, 18, 37-38, 49-51, 58, 92-93, 134, 156-162,165-169, 250-251, 317-330. Dobyns, F.: The Amazing Story of Repeal, Chicago: Willett,Clark & Co. (1940), pp. 5, 5-130 passim, 9, 22, 107, 132,160, 215, 292, 297. Feldman, H.: "Prohibition: Its Economic and IndustrialAspects," New York City: Appleton and Co. (1927), p. 397. Furnas, J. C.: The Life and Times of the Late Demon Rum, NewYork City: Putnam (1965), pp. 15, 80, 167, 183, 273, 281, 310,334-335. Grant: "The Liquor Traffic Before the 18thAmendment," Annals, 163: 1, 5 (September, 1932). Gustield, J. R.: The Symbolic Crusade, Urbana: University ofIllinois Press (1963), pp. 69-70, 76-77, 100, 108, 119, 127-128,135. Harrison, L. V. and Laine, E.: After Repeal, New York City: Harper & Bros. (1936), pp. 1-2, 24-29, 33, 50-53,63. Health, Education and Welfare: "Alcohol andAlcoholism," p. 41 (1968). Prepared for NationalClearinghouse for Mental Health Information. History of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division, pp. 1420, 28(undated, unsigned monograph in the library of the DistilledSpirits Institute). Hu, T.: The Liquor Tax in the U.S.: 1791-1947, New York City:Columbia University Press (1950), pp. 48, 51-52. Internal RevenueService: "Alcohol and Tobacco Summary Statistics," pp.6, 73, 95 (1966, 1970, 1921). Jellinek, E. M.: "Death From Alcoholism in the U.S. in1940," Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 3 (3): 484(December, 1942). : "Recent Trends in Alcoholism," Quartely Journal ofStudies on Alcohol, 8 (1) : 39 (September, 1947). Kolb., L.: "Alcoholism and Public Health," QuarterlyJournal of Studies on Alcohol, 1: 608, 610, 613 (March, 1941). Krout, J. A.: The Origins of Prohibition, New York City:Russell & Russell (1967), pp. 29-30. Lee, H.: How Dry We Were: Prohibition Revisited, EngleWoodCliffs: Prentice Hall Inc. (1963), pi). 15-16, 1819, 22-23,29-30, 34-35, 42, 68, 212, 231. Malzburg, B.: "A Study of First Admissions with AlcoholPsychoses in New York State 1943-44," Quarterly Journal ofStudies on Alcohol, 10: 294 (December, 1949). Miller, P. andJohnson, T. H. (eds.) : 11 The Puritans, New York City: AmericanBook Co. (1963), pp. 430-431. National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement:"Report On The Enforcement of the, Prohibition Laws of theU.S.," H.R. Doe. No. 722, 71st Cong., 3d Sess., 8, 345(1931). Odegard, P. H.: Pressure Politics-The Story of The AntiSaloonLeague, New York City: Columbia University Press (1928), pp. 23,40-60, 53, 70-72, 126. Peterson, W.: "Vitalizing Liquor Control," Journalof Criminal Law and Crime, 40: 119-120, 122-123, 126 (July,1939). Pollock, H. M.: Mental Disease and Social Welfare, Utica,N.Y.: State Hospital Press (1942), 1). 113. Rice, S. A. (ed.) : Statistics In Social Studies,Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press (1930), 1). 122. Rosenbloom, M. V.: The Liquor Industry: A Surrey of ItsHistory, Manufacture, Problems of Control and IMportance,Braddock: Ruffsdale Distilling Co. (1937 ed.), pp. 27, 51-52(1935)). Rush, B.: "Inquiry Into the Effects of Ardent SpiritsUpon The Human Body and Mind," Quarterly Journal of Studieson Alcohol, 4: 323,325-326 (September, 1943). Rutgers Center ofAlcohol Studies: "Selected Statistics on Consumption ofAlcohol (1850-1968) And On Alcoholism (1930-1968)," 1). 4(1970). Sinclair, A. : The Era of Excess, Boston: Little, Brown(1962), pp. 23-24, 43, 51, 108, 122, 176-177, 190, 193-195, 198,206, 303, 364-365, 367-368. Tillitt, M. H. : The Price of Prohibition, -New York City:Harcourt, Brace & Co. (1932), pp. 35-36, 114-115. Timberlake, J. H.: Prohibition and the Progressive Morement,Cambridge: Harvard University Press (1963), pp. 34-38, 42-55,67-79, 83, 85-86, 98, 118. Towne, C. IL: The Rise and Fall of Prohibition, New York City:The MacMillan Co. (1923), pp. 211-212. U.S. Department of Commerce: "U.S. Census MortalityStatistics," 55 (1924). Warburton, C.: The Economic Results of Prohibition, New YorkCity: Columbia University Press (1932), pp. 102104, 216. 26 U SC   5081-5416 (1971a). 26 USC  5061-5691 (1971b). 18 U SC   1261-1265 (1971). 27 USC  121, 122 (1971a). 27 USC  205 (1971b). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-25IA031-000655-B041-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc2b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113451 text/html 92457HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:34:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:27 GMTContent-length: 92239 History of Tobacco Regulation* Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse History of Tobacco Regulation* *This section is based in part on a paper prepared for theCommission by Jane Lang McGrew, an attorney from Washington, D.C. Since 1613, when John Rolfe introduced a successful experimentin tobacco cultivation in Virginia (Morison, 1965 : 52) the leafhas assumed major social, industrial, economic and medicalimplications. Consequently, persons concerned with tobacco on acommercial or personal basis have been subject to a variety ofdifferent regulations over the past 360 years. Tobacco has been attacked by social observers and medicalauthorities for the damage it has allegedly done, to the socialand physical condition of man. Yet it has also provided asubstantial source of revenue to the state and Federalgovernments of the United States. As is now the case with alcohol, tobacco has long been subjectto regulatory controls over the quantity and quality ofproduction. On the other hand, sumptuary laws affecting tobaccohave been far fewer-and weaker-than those aimed at alcohol. Infact, there has never been a time when tobacco was prohibitedthroughout the United States although consumption under certaincircumstances has been forbidden at various times in differentjurisdictions. Tobacco-associated today with smoking of cigarettes, and to alesser extent, of pipes and cigars-has been popular at times forboth snuffing and chewing. Indeed, until about 1870 cigaretteswere relatively rare in the United States, and almost all tobaccoconsumed domestically was chewed during the mid-19th century(Gottsegen, 1940: 9-10). What ever the preferred mode of consumption, however, the,commodity has always been the subject of debate respecting theappropriate governmental attitude. On the one hand, proponents ofthe leaf stress its social benefits and its economic andindustrial significance. Some enthusiasts even endorse itsalleged medical and psychological benefits. Opposed are those whocite the health hazards of smoking and others who are convincedof its immorality. The motivation for regulation has come from both sides of thecontroversy. Most sumptuary restrictions were fostered by thelatter group in an effort to suppress the habit. Those who seekto institutionalize and foster use of the drug focus on theregulation of the quantity and quality of production. This section does not attempt to weigh the merits of thevarious regulatory schemes. Rather, it will trace from JohnRolfe's day the three threads of regulation which havecircumscribed both the producer and consumer of tobacco in theUnited States. REGULATION OF PRODUCTION In the opinion of King James I of England, tobacco was"loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to thebrain" and "dangerous to the lungs" (Middleton,1953: 93). Whether the King was prescient, or simply sensitive,was irrelevant in the 17th and 18th centuries, however, fortobacco rapidly became the mainstay of the Maryland and Virginiaeconomics. Within seven years of John Rolfe's first imaginativeexperiment,, Virginia exported nothing but tobacco and a littlesassafrass to England (Middleton, 1953: 93-94). Almost asquickly, the leaf became the staple of the colony of Maryland andcompetition developed in Carolina as well. In Massachusetts Bay, the product fared less well. The firstgeneral letter (April 17,1629) from an official of the NewEngland Company to the Massachusetts Bay settlers prohibited theplanting of tobacco except in small quantities for medicinalpurposes (Werner, 1922: 100). Next door in Connecticut, however,the colonists attempted to rival the southern planters with alocal leaf. Indeed, the infant industry was coddled by theprotectionist General Court at New Haven, which promulgated arule in 1641 that: No persons within this jurisdiction shall [smoke] any otherTobacco but such as is or shall be planted within these[districts], except they have license from the Courte (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut, undated: 20). Notwithstanding the royal attitude and the fear of certainpatent holders of the London Company that Virginia had become a"colony founded on smoke" (Tobacco Institute,,Virginia, 1971 : 19; Middleton, 1953: 94), England encouraged thegrowth of the tobacco industry. Monopolies to import tobacco fromthe colonies were granted by the Crown to court favorites whosoon prospered as a result of this trade. In 1621, a bill was introduced which, according to onecontemporary commentator, was "extremely remarkable":No tobacco was to be imported after the 1st of October, 1621,except from Virginia and Bermuda; and, after that day, none wasto be planted in England. Although the act was initially defeatedby the House of Lords, James I in 1922 himself granted the importmonopoly to the Virginia and Bermuda, companies and prohibitedthe domestic cultivation of tobacco (Brooks, 1952: 88). The system worked well for the British importers, but themethods of financing they employed became onerous to the colonialplanters. The tobacco was marketed by consignment to an Englishmerchant who deposited the proceeds of the sale to the planters'accounts. Often, however, the high commissions charged and thecost, of goods ordered by the Virginians in payment for theircrop contributed to the growth of colonial indebtedness. Theextension of credit to cover the deficiencies caused the debts togrow constantly, but the only alternative to the consignmentsystem was to sell the product in the colony at a lower price(Middleton, 1953: 104-107). Industrial competition in this market provided the impulse forcertain regulatory relief. Importation of the Carolinian productinto Virginia was forbidden by an act of 1679, amended in 1726 toprohibit importation by land as well as by sea. Nor was NorthCarolina permitted to export its tobacco from Virginia ports. InGreat Britain, the Privy Council looked with disfavor upon suchcolonial legislation which threatened the financial well-being ofthe merchants and so disallowed the Virginia Act in 1731(Middleton, 1953: 114-115). Competition similarly induced both Virginia and Maryland toenact laws prescribing the dimensions of the hogshead in whichtobacco was packaged in 1658. Vying for purchasers, the twocolonies gradually enlarged the statutory size of the hogsheaduntil, under edict from the Privy Council in Britain, Marylandwas ordered to pass a gauge act establishing the size of thehogshead in the same dimensions as those fixed in Virginia. Notwithstanding such legislation, however, the manufacture ofhogsheads was still characterized by carelessness andirregularity until the warehouse inspection system went intoeffect in the 18th century (Middleton, 1953: 116-117). It was not long before the colonial planters were faced with amore serious problem-overproduction-which was causing a declinein prices as well as quality of the leaf. In 1619, the firsttobacco inspection law was passed by the Virginia House ofBurgesses, ordering the lowest grade of tobacco to be destroyedand prohibiting "second growth" tobacco and themarketing of trash leaves. This act was followed in 1621 by a more direct attempt torestrict production. Each cultivator was required to limit hisgrowth to 1000 plants of nine leaves each. Although this orderwas soon rescinded as a patent failure, an act of 1629 permittedeach planter to tend only 3000 plants with an additionalallowance of 1000 for non-laboring 'women and each child (Brooks,1952: 96). Notwithstanding the statutory effort, the problem intensified.Virginia attempted to encourage the other tobacco colonies toreach agreements restricting plantings, but in Maryland, LordBaltimore resisted. If planters were poor, he asserted: It is not from the low price of Tobacco, but from theirowne sloth, ill husbandry and profusely spending their croppe inBrandewine, and other liquors (Robert, 1949: 11). Carolina, Maryland and Virginia actually reached a decision toprohibit the planting of the staple from. February 1667 toFebruary 1668. This "stint" proved a less effectivemeans of control than the winds of 1667, which almost destroyedthe, crop ready for harvest that year (Tobacco Institute,Virginia, 1971: 19). Acts of God failed to provide an ultimate solution, however,and severe economic dislocation in Maryland and Virginiaintensified. By 1681, the Virginia governor, Lord Culpeper,complained: ... [T]hat which is more to us than all other things puttogether, and will be the speedy and certain ruin of the colony,is the low price of tobacco. The thing is so fatal and desperatethat there is no remedy; the market is overstocked and every cropoverstocks it more. It is commonly said that there is tobaccoenough now in London to last all England for five years.... Ourthriving is our undoing, and our purchase of negroes, byincreasing the supply of tobacco, has greatly contributed thereto(Brooks, 1952: 112-113). The failure of the Virginia Assembly to pass another actrequiring a "stint"' led the so-called "cuttersand pluckers" to take the matter into their own hands in1682 by burning both their own crops and the plants of theirneighbors (Roberts, 1949: 11). The riot stimulated legislativeaction in 1684 of a less helpful sort: the destruction of tobaccowas made a criminal offense,, subject to the death penalty(Brooks, 1952: 12). Seventeenth century quality control laws proved no moresuccessful in the effort to relieve the depression of theindustry. Renewed efforts were made in early years of the nextcentury, however. In 1713, the Virginia House of Burgesses established awarehouse system to enforce tobacco inspection. Forty publicwarehouses were created. Strong opposition to the system led thePrivy Council to disallow the act In 1717, but the ensuingdepression of the 1720's was convincing evidence of the need forrelief. Accordingly, the system was reinstated with Britishapproval in 1730, cornplete with public warehouses and officialinspectors (Middleton, 1953: 120-121). The apparent success of the system appealed to Maryland,suffering also from a surfeit of tobacco. "Tobacco, ourmoney, is worth nothing wrote one Marylander in 1724, "'and[there is] not a Shirt to be had for Tobacco this year in all ourcountry" (Tobacco Institute, Maryland, 1971: 21). Tobacco riots ensued when the Mary] and Assembly initiallyrefused to follow Virginia's example. One individual was moved toinform Lord Baltimore that no improvement in the economic stateof the colony was possible until inspection laws were passed that"will prevent the sending to Market Such trash as is unfitfor any other use but Manure" (Tobacco Institute,,,Maryland, 1971: 23). Accordingly, Maryland followed Virginia inthe creation of an inspection system in 1747,and Carolina didlikewise in 1754 (Brooks, 1952: 165). Tobacco entirely dominated the economic and social structureof Virginia and Maryland. "Tobacco requires us to abhorcommunities or townships," wrote a 17th century governor ofMaryland, "since a planter cannot carry on his affairswithout considerable elbow room within his plantation"(Brooks, 1952: 98). In Virginia, tobacco had gained such ascendancy that it wasused as money. For example, when, in 1621, a cargo of twelveyoung women made its way to the colony, each one was valued at120 pounds of the best leaf (Brooks, 1952: 93). By law,Virginia's ministers were paid in tobacco at 16,000 poundsannually in 1696. The law provided that: A competent and sufficient provision for the clergy will bethe only means to supply this dominion with able and faithfulMinisters whereby the glory of God may be advanced,the churchpropagated, and the people edified (Werner, 1922: 102). Not until the Option Act was passed by the Virginia Assemblyin 1755 could the clergy's fees be paid in either money ortobacco (Brooks, 1952: 167). The regulation of tobacco in the colonies was devised inresponse to the industry with the intent to further theprosperity of the planters who dominated the economy. This themecontinued to pervade all related regulatory efforts in thetobacco-producing states thereafter, as new practices developedin the marketing of the leaf. The initial hogshead inspection system gradually gave way tothe sale of loose-leaf tobacco by auction. In 1849 the VirginiaCode recognized these methods in lieu of the sale of hogsheads ofthe leaf as provided in the 1730 Act. By 1865, the tobaccoauction had completely replaced the earlier marketing techniquesin Virginia (Tobacco Institute, Virginia, 1971: 28-29). More than a half century later Maryland followed suit. In1939, the loose-leaf auction warehouse system was introduced toreplace the hogshead system, and the conversion occurred almostovernight. The practices engaged in are regulated by the MarylandState Tobacco Authority, established in 1947 by law. TheAuthority itself is supervised by eight representatives selectedby the Governor from the producing counties, the University ofMaryland, the buyers and the sellers (Tobacco Institute,Maryland, 1971: 9-10). The Federal Government came to recognize the significance ofthe tobacco industry in response to state pressures. Accordingly,since 1930, several bills have been enacted to aid the growers. Enacted in 1935, the Tobacco Inspection Act directs theSecretary of Agriculture to establish quality standards and todesignate auction markets (7 U.S.C. 511 (b) and (d)). Thefollowing year, the Tobacco Control Act was passed, bestowingCongressional approval upon state compacts which regulate theproduction of tobacco, and subsidizing the expenses of the statecommissions involved (7 U.S.C. 515). Thus, the two elements ofinitial colonial regulation were preserved: the encouragement ofquality and the discouragement of quantity. The latter objective was further implemented by theAgricultural Adjustment Act of 1938. Since that time, paritypayments have been made to tobacco producers: In amounts which, together with the proceeds thereof, willprovide a return to such producers which is as nearly equal toparity price as the funds so made available will permit (7U.S.C. 1303). In addition, the Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to setnational marketing quotas respecting each kind of tobacco (7U.S.C. 1312), to apportion the quotas among the states, and toallot the portions among the farms (7 U.S.C. 1314). Penalties areimposed for overproduction (7 U.S.C. 1314). There is nothing subtle about these measures, of course. Theirintent is obvious: to assure the economic stability of anindustry which, as of 1960, provided the United States populationwith more than 150,000,000 pounds of manufactured tobacco forconsumption annually (Heimann, 1960: 93), and which provided morethan $4.8 billion in taxes in 1971 (USDA, Tobacco Situation,1971b: 44). During the same year, growers' gross receipts reached about$900 million (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 2), while cigarettesales alone grossed for the manufacturer and seller approximately$5 billion (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 53). The commercialmotivation is sound enough if considered abstractly. Whencombined with the revenue incentive, however, it has largelyobscured sumptuary controls. REGULATION FOR REVENUE Alexander Hamilton's tax package of 1794 proposed the firstfederal excise taxes upon tobacco products. To the distress ofPhiladelphia snuff manufacturers (Brooks, 1952: 146), however,the tax was restricted after serious Congressional debate totheir product only. James Madison led the opposition to a general tobacco tax; hisviews were summarized in the Annals of Congress on May 2, 1794: As to the subject before the House, it was proper to choosetaxes the least unequal. Tobacco excise was a burden the mostunequal. It fell upon the poor, upon the sailors, day-laborers,and other people of these classes, while the rich will oftenescape it (Robert, 1949: 100). The legislative decision was probably tempered as well byconsiderations of the enforceability of the measure: snuff had tobe manufactured, while quid and pipe tobacco were often homegrownleaf at the time (Heimann, 1960: 155). In any case, the snuffbill was ultimately enacted, modified, suspended and repealed,with small, if any, effect upon federal revenues. The opportunity to distill tax money from tobacco was seizedupon more vigorously at the time of the Civil War. On July 1,1862, an ad valorem tax was imposed upon cigars for the firsttime. This tax was raised two years later when a separate taxupon cigarettes was also imposed (Werner, 1922: 358). (Even theConfederacy sought to levy a tax-in-kind upon tobacco crops, butwas precluded from doing so by the inspection system whichrequired the inspector to deliver the full amount of tobaccospecified in the warehouse receipt (Robert, 1949: 117).) Thereafter, the taxes were raised in 1865, 1866 and 1875. Atemporary reduction followed, until the Spanish-American Warnecessitated further increases. Concurrently, taxes were leviedupon smoking and manufactured tobacco and snuff, lest the burdenfall unequally upon smokers (Werner, 1922: 559). By 1880, the tobacco taxes bad largely stabilized. At thattime, they accounted for 31% of total federal tax receipts, or$38.9 million. Of this, 50% of the collections was derived fromsmoking and chewing tobacco, 40% from cigars and cheroots, andless than 2% from cigarettes (Heimann, 1960: 156). Since that time, federal tax collections on tobacco productshave risen almost annually. Between 1910 and 1920, they increasedmore than 500%, the greatest increase in any single decade. By1970, they accounted for almost $2.1 billion, down slightly fromthe two preceding years (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5). Indicative of changing patterns of consumption, the taxes oncigarettes, as a percentage of the total federal tobacco revenuejumped from 13.6% in 1910 to 51.1% in 1920. By 1970, thepercentage at 97.2% far outdistanced those revenues derived fromother forms of the product (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5). Excise taxes have proved profitable and easy to collect. Therevenue schemes are simple on both the federal (26 U.S.C. 5701 etseq.) and state levels. In the past, no justification for themhas been deemed necessary since Madison's protest. No elaboratelicensing or state monopoly system, such as those designed tocontrol commerce in alcohol, has ever been imposed. In 1921, Iowa became the first state to cash in on the cropdirectly by taxing cigarettes. By 1930, 11 other states hadadopted the revenue measure (Robert, 1949: 256). In 1950, 40 states and the District of Columbia taxedcigarettes. The rates ranged from one cent to five cents for apack of 20 except in Louisiana which levied an eight cent tax oncigarettes. In 1958, Montana imposed an equivalent rate. Between 1950 and 1962, 43 of the 47 taxing states raised theirrates at least once. The frequent increase in cigarette taxesnarrowed the gap between the rates in low tax states and highertax states. In the 12-year period, the median tax rate rose fromthree cents to six cents per pack (Federal Trade Commission,1970: 3) ; the maximum rate remained at eight cents in Texas,Louisiana, Montana and New Mexico, in contrast to the two centrate in the District of Columbia and Kentucky. The four leading states in terms of both production andrelative dependence on the crop have been North Carolina, SouthCarolina, Kentucky and Virginia, the latter two being the onlystates in the history of cigarette taxation to decrease theirtaxes; the reduction was only .5 cent (from three cents to twoand a half cents) in 1960 and 1961, respectively. By 1966, Oregon became the 49th state to impose a tax oncigarettes; the rate was four cents per pack. Finally, in 1969North Carolina imposed a cigarette tax-two cents. The cigarette excise taxes continued to increase during thesixties. By 1970, the taxes ranged from North Carolina's twocents to Pennsylvania's 18 cents for a weighted average of 10.7cents. Twenty nine states levied taxes of 10 cents or more perpack (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 40). Local governmentssuperimposed further excise taxes on the state taxes, rangingfrom one cent to 10 cents per package (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970:iv). By mid-1971, the range had widened further Connecticut at 21cents and North Carolina at two cents, the weighted average statetax being 11.1 cents (USDA, Tobacco Situation , 1971a: 7). TOBACCO REVENUES A peculiar relationship exists between production and revenue.In 1970, cash receipts from tobacco brought in $11 million forPennsylvania; tobacco farmers and cigarette taxes amassed $194.6million for the state. By comparison growers in North Carolinacollected $576 million while the state collected only $13.4million in cigarette revenues (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b:43). The federal excise tax on a package of cigarettes is currentlyeight cents and has remained so since 1951. The combined stateand federal tax was highest in Pennsylvania; 26 cents for 20cigarettes, which was 58.2% of the retail price. Connecticut's 24cents and Texas's 23.5 cents were close behind; the average forthe United States was 46.8%. To the Federal and state governments today, tobacco is afinancial asset. The total federal and state revenue collected from all tobacco products in 1971 amounted to over $4.7 billion.Local governments excised the product further bringing the sumtotal to $4.8 million (USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 44). From the years 1890 to 1930 cigarette tax collections fromtobacco soared from approximately $1 million to over $339million. By 1950, they exceeded $1.2 billion. Totals for the years 1890 to 1970 are recorded in thefollowing chart (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 5) Cigarette tax Years Collections 1890 $1,100,000 1900 4,000,000 1910 7,900,000 1920 151,300,000 1930 359,800,000 1940 533,000,000 1950 1,242,800,000 1960 1,863,600.000 1970 2,036,100,000 REGULATION OF CONSUMPTION Even as far back as the 16th century, smoking was consideredto have medicinal value. Juan de Cardenas, a Spanish physicianwho lived in Mexico in the late 1500's, wrote that "Soldierssubject to privations, kept off cold, hunger, thirst by smokingand all the inhabitants of the hot countries of the Indiesalleviate their discomforts by the smoke of this blessed andmedicinal weed" (Wagner, 1971: 63-64). During, the recurrent epidemics of plague in the 17th century,it was widely believed that smokers were spared; it has beenreported that men who attended the sick and accompanied the deadkept their pipes lit (Wagner, 1971: 63-64). In 1614, one Scottish doctor praised the tobacco plant which: Prepareth the stomach for meat; it maketh a clear voice: itmaketh a sweet breath . . . in a few words it is the princess ofphysical plants (Gottsegen, 1940: 87). King James disagreed strenuously, and in 1604 ordered asubstantial increase in the import duty on the leaf. Smoking, hewrote in "A Counterblaste to Tobacco", is: A custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmfulto the brain, dangerous to the lungs, and in the black stinkingfume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible Stygian smoke ofthe pit that is bottomless (Brooks, 1952:56, 71). Another more passionate moralist wrote: . . . imagine thou beheldest here a firme-sucker's wifemost fearfully fuming forth very fountains of blood, howling foranguish of heart, weeping, wailing, and wringing her handstogether . . . while she _pitifully pleads with her husband thus:Oh husband, my husband . . . ! Why dost thou so vainly prefer avanishing filthy fume before my permanent virtues? (Brooks,1952: 72). Notwithstanding such alliterative literature, the habit ofsmoking increased in popularity, particularly in the colonies. AFrench visitor observed in 1686 that: Large quantities of it [tobacco] are used in this country,besides what they sell. Everyone smokes while working and idling.I sometimes went to hear the sermon; their churches are in thewoods, and when everyone has arrived the minister and all theothers smoke before going in. The preaching over, they do thesame thing before parting. They have seats for that purpose. Itwas here I saw that everybody smokes, men, women, girls and boysfrom the age of seven years (Robert, 1949: 99). It was said that even in New England, women of the colony"smoke in bed, smoke as they knead their bread, smoke whilstthey're cooking" (Gottsegen, 1940: 147). In the tobacco colonies, of course, there was no attempt torestrict Consumption of tobacco. It was, after all, theireconomic mainstay. Officials in the northern colonies were less enthusiasticabout the habit, however. In 1632, the General Court ofMassachusetts Bay took the initiative and forbade smoking inpublic tinder penalty of a fine (Tobacco Institute,Massachusetts, 1971 : 17). In 1638, the proscription was expandedto prohibit anyone from smoking in any inn or public house exceptin his own room "so as neither the master of the house norany of the guests there shall take offense thereat which if theydo, then such person is forthwith to forebear upon paying of twoshillings sixpence fine for every offense" (Werner, 1922:100). This law was followed by another in 1646 which prohibitedsmoking except on a journey of five miles or more from any town.Nor could a citizen of the colony bring a pipe or tobacco intothe precincts of the court (Werner, 1922: 100), although he mightsmoke at "the ordinary tyme of repast comonly calleddynner" (Heimann, 1960: 83). Plymouth colony was similarly strict. In 1638, a law waspassed forbidding anyone from smoking on the streets. Thefollowing year, it was decreed that jurymen might not smoke, onpain of a five shilling penalty. In 1641, even the importation of tobacco was forbidden,although the law was repealed a year later. A law passed in 1646prohibited all from smoking, but exempted "soldiers in timeof their training." And, finally, in 1669, it was orderedthat anyone found smoking on the Sabbath within two miles of ameeting house, would be fined 12 pence (Werner, 1922: 101). The colony at New Haven, Connecticut, essayed a like series ofstatutes to regulate tobacco consumption. In 1646, the GeneralCourt decreed that: No person under the age of twenty years nor any other thathath not already accustomed himself to the use thereof, shalltake any tobacko, until he hath brough a certificate under thehands of [a physician] that it is usefull for him, and also, thathe hath received a license from the court for the same.... Noneshall take any tobacko, publickly in the street or any openplaces unless on a journey of at least ten miles. (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut: 20-21). Within three years those laws were repealed (Werner, 1922:102). However, it was further ordered in 1655 that: No tobacco shall be taken in the streets, yards or aboutethe howses in any plantation or farme in this jurisdictionwithout dores, neere or aboute the towne, or in the meetinghowse, or body of the trayne Souldiors, or any other place wherethey may doe mischief thereby, under the penalty of 84 pence apipe for a time, wch is to goe to him that informs and prosecuts (Heimann,1960: 83). As a result of the regulation, snooping became a profitableundertaking. In the end, however, the laws were of no avail insuppressing tobacco. By 1680, the governor of Connecticut recognized thesignificance of the leaf and reported that, "We have no needof Virginia's trade, most people planting so much Tobacco as theyspend," (Heimann, 1960: 84). Indeed, by the early 18thcentury, New England-grown tobacco was being produced in greatenough quantity for both domestic consumption and export (TobaccoInstitute, Connecticut: 22-23). Tobacco was not one of the major concerns of the 18th centuryeither before or after the Revolution. Social reform wasgenerally secondary to political issues. By the end of thecentury, however, Dr. Benjamin Rush had published his"Observations upon the influence of the Habitual use ofTobacco upon Health, Morals, and Property" in his collectionof Essays, Literary, Moral and Philosophical. It appeared in1798, and stressed the Doctor's thesis that smoking and chewingprovoked drunkenness: One of the usual effects of smoking and chewing is thirst.This thirst cannot be allayed by water, for no sedative or eveninsipid liquor will be relished after the mouth and throat havebeen exposed to the stimulus of the smoke, or juice of Tobacco. Adesire of course is excited for strong drinks, and these whentaken between meals soon lead to intemperance and drunkenness.One of the greatest sots I ever knew, acquired a love for ardentspirits by swallowing ends of Tobacco, which he, (lid, to escapedetection in the use of it. . . (Robert, 1949: 106). There was little immediate response to Rush's dire warnings,although in the year his tract was published, Boston enacted astatute to prohibit the carrying of a lighted pipe or cigar inpublic streets-apparently with the intent to reduce the hazard offire (Brooks, 1952: 245). An anti-tobacco crusade was launched in the 19th century,although with considerably less fervor that its sister movementagainst alcohol. Among the leaders were Rev. George Trask whosaid tobacco and alcohol were Satan's twins; and the Rev. OrinFowler, who declared in 1833: "Rum-drinking will not cease,,till tobacco-chewing and tobacco smoking and snuff -taking shallcease" (Robert, 1949: 107). Another, Dr. Joel Shew,attributed delirium tremens, perverted sexuality, impotency,insanity and cancer to the effects of smoking and chewing(Brooks, 1952: 219). The crusade warned as the pipe continued to attract adherents.From the 18th century on, the cigar too began to grow in favor,particularly after 1840. It is estimated that by 1850, theaverage number of cigars smoked was approximately 19 per capita.Within 10 years, the number had increased to about 26 (Gottsegen,1940: 8-10). Women smoked and chewed as well as the men. Indeed, Mrs.Andrew Jackson and Mrs. Zachary Taylor both smoked their pipes inthe White House (Heimann, 1960: 90). And, of course, the otherresidents of the Capital engaged heavily in the practices of bothchewing and spitting, to the extent that Charles Dickens, duringhis tour of the States, felt called upon to report that: Washington may be called the headquarters oftobaccotinctured saliva.... In all the public places of America,this filthy custom is recognized. In the courts of law, the judgehas his spittoon, the crier his, the witness his, and theprisoner his; while the jurymen and spectators are provided for.. . . The stranger will find [the custom] in its full bloom ofglory, luxuriant in all its alarming recklessness, at Washington (Brooks,1952: 215-216). Chewing and snuffing remained popular until the time of theCivil War. Thereafter, cigarette smoking was gradually adopted inNorth America, a habit indirectly acquired through the Britishfrom their Turkish and French allies during the Crimean War(Werner, 1922: 105). By 1870, approximately 13.9 million cigarettes were smokedannually in the United States, or .36 per capita. Over the next60 years, the number was to reach 976.91 per capita (Gottsegen,1940: 28). As more persons took to cigarettes, the zeal of reformers,which had ebbed during the Civil War, was renewed. Pamphlets,like those of the Temperance Movement, were published, urgingabstinence from smoking: "I'll never use tobacco, no; It is a filthy weed; I'll never put it in my mouth." Said Little Robert Reed. "It hurts the health ; it makes bad breath; 'Til very bad indeed. I'll never, never use it, no!" Said Little Robert Reed (Brooks, 1952: 242-243). During the period following the Civil War and prior to theformation of the American Tobacco Company in 1890, theanti-liquor forces continued to snipe at tobacco in all forms. Areformed drinker and temperance lecturer, John B. Gough, wouldpull from his pocket a square of tobacco, smell it as if it werea rose, cry out "Ali you black devil, I love-you" andthrow it away. The anti-tobacconists were led by Lucy Gaston, the greatest,warrior in the anti -cigarette campaign who was trained in theoffice of the Women's Christian Temperance Union and then movedover into the anti-tobacco Movement in the 1890's. Miss Gastonencouraged children to wear anti-tobacco pins or buttons andorganized armies of children to sing and preach to and againsttheir smoking elders (Wagner, 1971: 40). "All hostility to tobacco seems nowadays to beconcentrated on cigarettes," noted Harper's Weekly,observing the scene in 1905 (Robert, 1949: 169). It was scarcelya startling revelation. Twenty years earlier, the New York Timeseditorialized that: A grown man has no possible excuse for thus imitating thesmall boy.... The decadence of Spain began when the Spaniardsadopted cigarettes and if this pernicious habit obtains amongadult Americans the ruin of the Republic is close at hand . . . (Brooks,1952: 253). Miss Gaston witnessed some legislation victories. Between 1895and 1921, 14 states banned the sale of cigarettes (Neuberger,1963: 52). Even in the city of New York it was declared unlawfulfor women to smoke in public (Brooks, 1952: 271). Curiously,However, the city of Boston repealed its law which prohibitedsmoking in public in 1880 (Gottsegen, 1940: 153). The apparent success of the prohibitionists revived theanti-tobacconists' enthusiasm. "Prohibition is won; now fortobacco!" pledged Billy Sunday. Miss Gaston also renewed herdedication and actually announced her candidacy for thepresidency of the United States in 1920 on an antitobaccoplatform. For many anti-tobacconists, when it became apparent that theelder generation may be lost, the war against tobacco was focusedon the youth of the country. The National Education Associationpledged its membership to cooperate in efforts made in the city,state and nation to safeguard the health and morals of youth fromcigarette smoking to the end that high ideals for Americanmanhood may be, preserved for the coming generation (Hamilton,1927: 168). The National Congress of PTA, in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1926resolved "to lend its force to the cause of eliminatingthroughout the United State-, the use of cigarettes by minors andmake this a special work for the ensuing year for the good of ouryouth" (Hamilton, 1927: 168). It is for these reasons that the WCTU declared an educationalwar against tobacco, but declined to seek prohibitory legislation(Robert, 1949: 247). The disenchanting experience of Prohibition, the omnipresenceof the tobacco industry, the need for new sources of staterevenues and the prevalence and popularity of cigarette smokingcombined to frustrate the anti-tobacco campaign. Cigarettes didprovide a new source of revenue. Federal income from tobaccotaxes soared to new heights because of increased cigaretteconsumption and advanced rates. In any event, by 1927, each of the 14 states which had enactedprohibitory laws against cigarettes had repeated them (Neuberger,1963: 52). Immediately thereafter these, states imposed taxesupon the once forbidden product (Robert, 1949: 256; Federal TradeCommission, 1970: 3). STATE REGULATION Only those laws which forbade the sale of tobacco products tominors remain on the books, a trend set by New Jersey andWashington in 1883 (Gottsegen, 1940: 155). All but a few statutes restricting tobacco products to minorswere enacted between 1916-1920, simultaneous to the developmentand popularity of the domestic-blend cigarette. All 50 states bad laws banning sales to minors by 1950. Sincethen, Georgia,. Louisiana, and Wisconsin have repealed theirs leo 47 states plus the District of Columbia, WIL Vs prohibitingsales to minors. The most common age of restriction for cigarettes and tobaccoproducts today applies to persons under the age of 18. In aneffort to ensure stricter enforcement 11 states have lowered theage of restriction from 21 to 15 (Tobacco Merchants Association,1971: 1-2). In contrast to this trend, however, the, CaliforniaLegislature, 1971 defeated a bill to allow school smoking areasand lowering the sale to minor restrictions to 15 years old (NICSmoking and Health, 1971: 1). According to a Special Report released by the TobaccoMerchants Association of the United States, the liability forinfractions in all states is on the vendor and donor ofcigarettes. In a few states, manufacturer and persons advising orcompelling the minors to smoke, or owning the premise where suchbehavior occurs are also liable. However, in some states theinfraction does not extend to the parent or guardian. Some statespenalize the minor himself and others require that he divulge hissource. Most of the statutes that prohibit the furnishing ofcigarettes to minors extend the ban also to one or more othertobacco products. Only I 1 states restrict the sale"only" to cigarettes. The efficacy of such statutes, inthe day of the cigarette machine, is subject to substantialskepticism. A complete listing of existing state statutes concerningpossession by and sales to minors follows (Tobacco MerchantsAssociation, 1971: 3-4) : State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia ,see footnotes at end of table. Sale to minors Prohi I bited Age Yes Minor Yes Under 18 Yes Minor YeS Under 18 Yes Under 18 Yes Under 16 Yes Under 16 Yes Under 17 .. Yes Under 16 Yes Minor No provision Use or possession Prohibited Age No provision No provision Yes I Minor. No provision Yes (4). No provision No provision No provision No provision No provision No provision Sale to minors Use or possession State Prohibited Age Prohibited Age Hawaii Yes Under 15 No provision Idaho Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Illinois Yes 5 Under 18 Yes Under 18. Indiana Yes Under 16 Yes Under 21. Iowa Yes Under 18 (57) Under 18. Kansas Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Kentucky Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Louisiana No provision No provision Maine Yes Under 16 No provision Maryland Yes Under 15 No provision Massachusetts Yes' Under 18 No provision Michigan Yes Under 21 Yes Under 21. Minnesota Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Mississippi Yes5 Under 18 No provision Missouri Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Montana Yes Under 18 No provision Nebraska Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Nevada Yes 5 Under 18 No provision New Hampshire Yes Minor No provision New Jersey Yes Under 16 No provision New Mexico Yes5 Under 18 8 No provision New York Yes Under 18 No provision North Carolina Yes Under 17 No provision North Dakota Yes Under 21 Yes Under 18.9 Ohio Yes Under 18 No provision Oklahoma Yes Minor (6) Minor. Oregon Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Pennsylvania Yes Minor (6) Minor. Rhode Island Yes Under 16 Yes Under 16. South Carolina Yes Under 18 (6) Under 18. South Dakota Yes Under 18 Yes Under 18. Tennessee Yes Under 18 No provision Texas Yes,' Under 16 No provision Utah Yes Under 19 Yes' Under 19. Vermont Yes5 Under 17 No provision Virginia Yes Under 18 No provision Washington Yes Under 21 Yes Between 18 and 21.1 West Virginia Yes Under2l Yes Under 21. 'Wisconsin No provision No provision Wyoming Yes Under 18 No provision 1 Includes a prohibition against the purchase of cigarettes byminors (in Illinois without written order of parent or guardian),as well as use or possession by 2 if other than parent or guardian. 3 However, inmates in State correction institutions 16 orover, with consent of parent or guardian, may be furnishedtobacco and tobacco products. Eighteen and over. in junior college if not permitted bygoverning board. Without consent of parent or guardian. Minors smoking or in possession of cigarettes are required togive source of cigarettes; use or possession not otherwiseregulated. in addition, high school students may not smoke. And any pupil of any school in State. Or a minor pupil in any school. Purchase or possession by misrepresentation of age amisdemeanor. THE IMPETUS FOR FEDERAL SUMPTUARY REGULATION The effect of smoking on health has been the subject ofdiscussion for hundreds of years. Early participants in thetobacco controversy, beginning in the late 16th century, did notassociate the use of tobacco with the production of cancersalthough they credited it with causing or curing nearly everyother known disease. Dr. John Hill, of London, a physician, botanist and prolificwriter, first suggested the relation in 1761. In Cautions Againstthe Immoderate Use ol Snuff, he reported six cases of"polypusses" related to excessive indulgence in tobaccoin the form of snuff. One such "polypus" was describedas a swelling in one nostril that was hard, black and adherent ona broad base. Painless at first, it later developed "all thefrightful symptoms of an open cancer." Dr. Hill believedthat this lesion could be fatal and placed the blame for itsorigin on tobacco. Dr. Hill has been noted as the first to reportan association of tobacco with cancer (Redmond, 1970: 21). In 1939, the first scientific study linking lung cancer withsmoking was published. Between 1950 and 1954, 14 studiesassociating cigarettes and serious diseases were completed(Fritschler, 1969: 145). At the present time, there is no government agency with clearjurisdiction over the health aspects of cigarettes. The FederalTrade Commission can act on matters of advertising and packageinformation. The Food and Drug Administration concerns itselfonly with foods, drugs, solids, or liquids that are eaten ordrunk. Tobacco is neither a food nor a drug under current legaldefinitions. Nor are cigarettes eaten or drunk; they are inhaled. The 1890 edition of the U.S. Pharmacopoeia, an officiallisting of drugs published by the government, included tobacco.In later editions, tobacco was dropped. Former Senator MaurineNeuberger has claimed that the removal of tobacco from thePharmacopoeia was the price paid to get support of tobacco-statelegislators for the Food and Drug Act of 1906. The leaf wasthereby removed from the jurisdiction of the FDA (Wagner, 1971:74). The first statement from the Public Health Service on thesubject was made by its Surgeon General, Leroy F. Burney, M.D.,in the Journal of the American Medical Association in November,1959. The heart of this statement was that "the weight ofevidence at present implicates smoking as the principaletiological factor in the increased incidence of lungcancer" (Diehl, 1969: 154). In June, 1961 the American Cancer Society, the American HeartAssociation and the National Tuberculosis and Respiratory DiseaseAssociation jointly requested that a commission be appointed"to consider the responsibilities of government, of businessand of voluntary agencies relative to the health hazards ofcigarette smoking and to recommend a solution of this healthproblem that would protect the public and would interfere leastwith the freedom of industry and the happiness ofindividuals" (Diehl, 1969: 155). On June 7, 1962, the then Surgeon General, Dr. Luther Terry,announced, with the approval of the President, that he wasestablishing an "expert committee to undertake acomprehensive review of all data on smoking and health." The members of this committee were respected scientists whohad previously expressed no opinion about the relationship oftobacco to health. All members were approved for appointment bythe tobacco industry as well as by the American MedicalAssociation and several national health agencies. Half of thecommittee members were cigarette smokers. On January 11, 1964, after some 15 months of intensive study,this Advisory Committee- to the Surgeon General issued itsmonumental unanimous report stating that "cigarette smokingis a health hazard of sufficient importance in the United Statesto warrant, appropriate remedial action." The committee stated unequivocally that "cigarettesmoking is causally related to lung cancer in men; the magnitudeof the effect of cigarette smoking far outweighs other factors.The data for women, though less extensive, point in the samedirection." Air pollution was found to be a very minorfactor in the cause of the disease, far outweighed by cigarettesmoking. The death rate from heart disease, the report noted, was 70percent higher in cigarette smokers than in nonsmokers, andalthough there was not enough evidence to say positively thatsmoking causes heart disease, there was enough to assume that itis a cause and to take action against it. Another conclusion of great importance was that"cigarette smoking is the most important of the causes ofchronic bronchitis in the United States and increases the risk ofdying from chronic bronchitis and emphysema." The report analyzed the statistical, pathological, clinical,and experimental evidence in relation to smoking and otherdiseases. A total of more than 4,000 published reports werestudied and more than 150 investigators were personallyinterviewed. "The result was the most comprehensive andauthoritative report on this subject ever made" (Diehl,1969: 156). THE HEALTH WARNING REQUIREMENT At the time the Surgeon General's Report was published, nostatute, administrative ruling or court decision required thatcigarette packaging or advertising contain any statement aboutthe dangers to health attributable to cigarette smoking. After Trade Regulation Rule Proceedings in March and June1964, the Federal Trade Commission concluded that cigaretteadvertising was deceptive (misleading) and that advertisers had aresponsibility to warn the public of the health hazards ofcigarette smoking. To accomplish this, the Commission proposed that cigarettepackages state the amount of tar and nicotine in the smoke of thecigarette which the package contains and that cigarette packagesand cigarette advertising carry a statement such as:"Caution: Cigarette 'Smoking is Dangerous to Health. It MayCause Death from Cancer and Other Diseases." This warning was to be required on cigarette packagesbeginning January 1, 1965, and in cigarette advertising beginningJuly 1, 1965. The tobacco industry first obtained a postponementof the effective dates of this ruling and then prevailed uponCongress to vitiate the ruling by passing the Cigarette Labelingand Advertising Act, requiring all packages of cigarettes sold inthis country to carry the label "Cigarette Smoking May beHazardous to Your Health," but prohibiting the Federal TradeCommission and state and local governments from requiring anyother label on cigarette packages and any warnings in cigaretteadvertising at least until 1969. A New York Times editorial called the Cigarette Labeling andAdvertising Act of 1965 "a shocking piece ofspecial-interest legislation-a bill to protect the economichealth of the tobacco industry by freeing it of properregulation" (Cigarette Labeling and Advertising, 1965). Anarticle in the Atlantic Monthly described the politicalmaneuvering behind this legislation under the title "TheQuiet Victory of the Cigarette Lobby: How It Found the BestFilter Yet-Congress" (Diehl, 1969:162). Public concern attending publication of the Surgeon General'sreport, Smoking and Health, and the pending FTC regulations forwarnings on cigarette packages and in cigarette advertisingapparently convinced the tobacco industry that some action byCongress was inevitable. Reportedly the industry decided to accept a weak label oncigarette packages provided that the legislation would preventany regulation of cigarette advertising. This was accomplished byinserting into the proposed law the provision precluding the FTCand all state or local governments from requiring any warning oncigarette packages other than the one approved by Congress andalso preventing any warnings in cigarette advertising. At House and Senate committee hearings, committee membersfriendly to the industry attempted to discredit both the SurgeonGeneral's Report and the testimony given by the Surgeon General,the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, and therepresentatives of various medical and health organizations. Thetobacco industry then presented a number of physicians whotestified that they disagreed with the conclusions of the SurgeonGeneral's Advisory Committee and that in their opinion there wasno real evidence that cigarette smoking is harmful (Diehl, 1969:162). Although this act temporarily prevented any requirement thattar and nicotine content be indicated on cigarette packages, theFederal Trade Commission did establish a laboratory to determinethe, tar and nicotine content of the smoke of cigarettes on theAmerican market, making the results of these tests availableperiodically to the public. The Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act also required thatabout July 1, 1967, and annually thereafter the Federal TradeCommission report to Congress concerning the effectiveness of thewarning label, and upon current practices of cigaretteadvertising and promotion, with "recommendations forlegislation that are deemed appropriate." After an intensive study the Federal Trade Commission made adetailed report to Congress with the following summary andrecommendations: "There is virtually no evidence that thewarning statement on cigarette packages has had any significanteffect." Sales remained constant and the industry continued to investhundreds of millions of dollars in advertising; $200 million ayear was being spent on radio and television alone in 1967;cigarette advertisers had become the single largest productadvertisers on television accounting for about eight per cent oftelevision advertising time (Wagner, 1971: 166). THE FAIRNESS DOCTRINE Another government agency had become concerned with cigaretteadvertising. The Federal Communications Commission is mandated toassure that the airways, which belong to the public, are used inthe public interest. John P. Banzhaf, III, who has been called the "RalphNader of the tobacco industry" was responsible for the FCC'sinvolvement in the cigarette advertising controversy. Afterviewing several cigarette commercials on television, Banzhafconcluded that "what he was seeing might be consideredlegally 'controversial"' (Wagner, 1971: 168). He then wroteto WCBS-TV in New York on December 1, 1966, requesting that he orsome other responsible spokesman be given an opportunity topresent contrasting views on the issue of the benefits andadvisability of smoking. Banzhaf's letter cited three commercials that presented theview that smoking is "socially acceptable and desirable,manly, and a necessary part of a rich full life. "Heasked-free time roughly approximate to that spent on thepromotion of the "virtues and values of smoking." CBSroutinely turned down the request. He sent a second letter to CBSand submitted a formal complaint against WCBS-TV to the FCC inWashington. The FCC, in a letter to the television station dated June 2,1967, said programs it had broadcast dealing with the effect ofsmoking on health were insufficient to offset the effects of paidadvertisements broadcast for a total of five to 10 minutes eachbroadcast day. "We hold that the fairness doctrine isapplicable to such advertisements" the Commission said. Theyrejected Banzhaf's claim for equal time, however. The FCC called on the station to provide free each week"a significant amount of time for the other viewpoint,"thereby implementing the smoking education campaigns launched bythe government under the cigarette labeling law. "Thisrequirement will not preclude or curtail presentation by stationsof cigarette advertising which they choose to carry." TheFCC basically decided that it was not in the public interest forthe airways to be used by radio and television to advertisecigarettes without some warning of the health hazards involvedwith smoking (Wagner, 1971: 169). The FCC was deluged with requests to reconsider its action.The agency stood firm in its unanimous decision. As a result ofthe ruling many of the voluntary health agencies and the PublicHealth Service made available to the television and radioindustries spot announcements and other program materials on theserious consequences to health caused by cigarette smoking. The FCCs decision was upheld by the U.S. Court of Appeals onNovember 21, 1968; the court said the agency could indeed use itsfairness doctrine to require free time for anti-smokingcommercials. "The danger cigarettes may pose to health is,among others, a danger to life itself," the Court said. As the Commission emphasized, it is a danger inherent in thenormal use of the product, not one merely associated with itsabuse or dependent on intervening fortuitous events. It threatensa substantial body of the population, not merely a peculiarlysusceptible fringe group. Moreover, the danger, though notestablished beyond all doubt, is documented by a compellingcumulation of statistical evidence (Wagner, 1971: l66-173). (The cigarette manufacturers then asked the Supreme Court toreview their case, but the high court turned down the request,leaving the appeals court decision standing.) "Most observers agree that the dramatic entrance ofthe FCC into the smoking controversy was probably the mostimportant single event during the three-year moratorium onrequiring health warnings in cigarette advertisements imposed byCongress on the FTC" (Wagner, 1971 : 175). THE BAN ON ADVERTISING Both the U.S. Public Health Service and Federal TradeCommission have annually reported findings to Congress sincepassage of the cigarette labeling law. The FTC recommended thatthe Act should be amended to: "Warning: Cigarette Smoking IsDangerous to Health and May Cause Death From Cancer and OtherDiseases." Additionally, the FTC recommended legislation to require thesame warning to appear in all cigarette advertisements and torequire statements of tar and nicotine content on all cigarettepackages and in all advertising. Legislation to accomplish these objectives as well as thefollowing were recommended by the FTC: Cigarette advertising on television and radio should bebarred entirely. Alternately, cigarette advertising on televisionand radio should be limited as to hours in which it may appear;the extent to which it may appear; and the types of programs onwhich it may appear; Increased appropriations, should be made to the Departmentof Health, Education, and Welfare for education of the public(especially young people) as to the health hazards of smoking; Appropriations should be made for research under thedirection of the National Institutes of Health on the developmentof less hazardous cigarettes. "By 1969, the stage had been set for a showdown overcigarette advertising and promotion" (Wagner, 1971: 190).The U.S. Government was increasing its efforts to discourage thesale of cigarettes. Post office trucks carried posters:"100,000 Doctors Have Quit Smoking." The Surgeon General continued to release reports about theadverse health effects of smoking. Dr. Daniel Horn, director of the National Clearinghouse forSmoking and Health, was urging doctors to deliver antismokingappeals to patients in their offices. Movie personalities had become involved in the American CancerSociety's campaign called I.Q. (for "I Quit") thatpassed out lapel buttons and dispatched public speakers aroundthe country to discourage the habit. Doris Day, Debbie Reynoldsand Lawrence Welk refused to allow tobacco companies to sponsortheir TV shows. Two ad agencies--Ogilivy and Mather and Doyle DaneBernbach-and a few radio and television stations would not acceptcigarette business. Several magazines did not accept cigaretteadvertising as a matter of principle: Reader's Digest, the NewYorker, and the Saturday Review. The Christian Science Monitorhad never carried cigarette ads; the Boston Globe announced inMay, 1969 that it would no longer accept such advertising"because accumulated medical evidence has indicated thatcigarette smoking is hazardous to health" (Wagner, 1971:220). In April 1969, a few weeks before the House Interstate andForeign Commerce Committee was scheduled to open hearings on theFTC proposals, a series of bills were introduced in the House byrepresentatives of tobacco producing states. One such bill, H.R.7177, co-sponsored by all eleven of North Carolina's HouseDelegation, proposed "to establish a comprehensive Federalprogram to deal with cigarette labeling and advertising withrespect to any relationship between smoking and health." Identical measures were introduced under the sponsorship ofcongressmen from Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, and Florida. Someaccounts of the activity on Capitol Hill during this periodattribute these bills to the tobacco interests' intention"to prevent strengthening of the warning label and makepermanent the ban on state and Federal regulation of cigaretteadvertising, which was due to expire on June 30. Passage of thislegislation was the best tobacco interests could have hoped forunder the circumstances" (Wagner, 1971: 205). After testimony from both sides, the House Committee approveda stiffer health warning but prohibited regulatory action oncigarette advertising for six years and in other ways generallyupheld the status quo. The Senate, Commerce Committee, on December 5, 1970, voted outa bill banning cigarette commercials from the air as of January1, 1971. The FTC was prohibited from acting on cigarette ads innewspapers and magazines until the middle of 1972. The labelingprovision in the Senate bill was weaker than that established inthe House-voted measure, and the bill also precluded cigaretteregulatory action by the fifty states and local governments. In a session on December 12, a floor amendment was introducedwhich loosened the Committee's proposed restriction on the FTC byallowing the agency to require health warnings in advertising asof July 1, 1971. The bill also authorized the FTC to move soonerif it found that tobacco companies were switching from broadcastto print advertising so massively that it could be considered a" gross abuse." This bill also approved a new requiredhealth warning for cigarette packages"Warning: CigaretteSmoking Is Dangerous to Your Health." After Senate passage, the measure still had to -pass a jointSenate-House Conference Committee where important differencesbetween the two bills had to be reconciled. The bill that emerged from conference differed only slightlyfrom the Senate measure. The cautionary label to which theconferees agreed provides: "Warning: The Surgeon General HasDetermined That Cigarette Smoking is Dangerous to YourHealth." "In a final concession to the broadcasters,the conferees agreed to delay for one day the blackout ofcigarette commercials from December 31, 1970, to midnight January1, 1971. That would give them a last shower of cash from the NewYear's Day football bowl games" (Wagner, 1971: 216). It wasestimated that the loss to television and radio stations wouldamount to about $220 million a year, or about 7.5% of their totaladvertising revenues. President Nixon signed the Act on April 1, 1970. Some observers marvel that the bill was passed "in spiteof massive pressure that had been brought to bear against it andagainst the regulation of cigarette advertising generally, by thetobacco industry, the broadcasting industry, and the lobbyistsand their political allies. This was a combination that for yearshad proved invincible against a counterforce of scientists andpublic health and public interest advocates who, armed withformidable statistics on the damage to health and life caused bycigarette smoking, had sought to protect consumers by requiringall cigarette advertising to provide adequate warnings of thesedangers" (Whiteside, 1970: 58). There are those observers , on the other hand, who do not viewthe ban of cigarette advertising on television and radio as sucha success for the consumer. Rather, they cite the statistics onconsumption in other countries to point up the fact that bans onadvertising do not reduce sales. In Czechoslovakia, for example, no direct advertising oftobacco is permitted; yet consumption increased 14% between 1953and 1958. Advertising of foreign cigarettes was banned in 1962 inItaly; the following year sales increased 39.4% and in 1964, 11.7%. Sales increased in England after television cigaretteadvertisements were banned in 1965. Consumption figures for thefollowing three years in Britain reveal increases: 112 billioncigarettes in 1965, 118 billion in 1966; and 119.1 billion in1967 (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 113-114). Robert Miller, an agricultural economist in the Department ofAgriculture's Economic Research Service, reports that cigaretteconsumption is up in every part of the world although advertisingwas banned in several European countries some years ago. Hepredicts an eventual decrease in sales during the next five yearsand perhaps a 12-13% decrease in tobacco consumption (TobaccoAdvertising Could End, 1970: 7). Other observers can see a gradual reduction in cigaretteconsumption as a result of a prohibition on advertising; somefeel a ban on advertising merely makes it difficult to launch anew brand. Others predict that the ban will eliminate the socialacceptability of the habit although consumption will not go down. The "live dangerously novelty" has also beenidentified as a possible cause for gains in consumption;"such a philosophy might well be prevalent among the young,the very ones that antismoking advocates are most anxious toprotect" (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 112-113). Another consequence of the ban on cigarette commercials wasthe FCC ruling that the broadcasters' obligation to airantismoking messages had ended. The stations continue to run themas public service spots; however, the volume was decreasedconsiderably from the former 1 to 3 ratio established by the FCC.The antismoking forces are fearful that a decrease in these spotsis harmful to their cause and may retard their efforts to reducecigarette consumption. On October 20,1971, a U.S. District Court ruled that theCongressional ban on cigarette advertising is constitutional. Theruling stated that such advertising does not qualify under theFirst Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech; a sharpdistinction was drawn between guarantees of freedom. of speechfor individuals and the "limited extent" to whichbroadcast advertising qualifies for such protection. The court also ruled that Congress had more than one"rational basis" for excluding cigarette ads fromtelevision and not the printed media one being that broadcastsare the "most persuasive" types of advertising(Cigarette Ad Ban, 1971). Ultimately, the constitutional questionwill have to be decided by the United States Supreme Court. CONSUMPTION TRENDS Cigarette smoking is widespread in America today; 45.9% of themale population 17 years of age and over and 30.5% of females 17and over are smokers. In 1970, about $10.6 billion ofindividuals' expenditures was for cigarettes. Data on cigarette sales and advertising has been obtained bythe FTC from domestic cigarette manufacturers; the table belowprovides cigarette sales for the years 1963 to the present(Federal Trade Commission, 1970: 3) : TOTAL CIGARETTES SOLD Year Billions 1963 516.5 1964 505.0 1965 521.1 1966 529.9 1967 535.8 1968 540.3 1969 527.9 1970 534.2 The reduction in sales in 1964 coincides with the publicattention given the Report of the Surgeon General issued onJanuary 11, 1964. Public awareness of the dangers cited in theReport was high. It was soon forgotten, for in 1965 the totalnumber of cigarettes sold was almost 5 billion higher than theyear prior to the Surgeon General's Report. In 1969 there was another significant decline; it has beensuggested that this decline is attributable to severalhigh-visibility events and also by sales tax increases. Forexample, the FCC ruling was upheld in November 1968 givingimpetus to the antismoking TV campaign; the federal government'santi-smoking campaign was in full swing during 1968-69; thepublic outcry was being felt by economic interests-magazines,newspapers, personalities and advertising agencies which refusedsponsorship for business from tobacco companies. There were significant state tax increases immediately priorto 1969 which probably contributed to the reduction in salesduring that year. During fiscal year 1967, 15 states increasedtheir cigarette tax rates; the average increase was 3.5 cents.The rate increase ranged from New York's, Ohio's, and Illinois'two cents to California's and Florida's seven cents. The nextyear, seven more states increased their cigarette taxes. Therates ranged from Massachusetts' and Vermont's two cents toMinnesota's, Rhode Island's, and Tennessee's five cents theaverage increase approximately four cents (Council of StateGovernments, 1968: 196-197). The ban on cigarette advertising on television and radio beganon January 2, 1971, yet several calculations reflect a rise incigarette sales during the past year. Business Week projectionsof industry sales and brand rankings show that a record 529billion cigarettes were consumed in 1971, 1.5% more than 1970'ssales (Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 56). Tobacco industrysources estimate that consumption has risen in 1971 by 1.5% to535 billion cigarettes (Cigarette Sales Up, 1972: 3). John C. Maxwell, tobacco analyst for Oppenheimer &Company, a brokerage firm, also reported a rise-2.3% in domesticunit sales in 1971. He relates part of the growth in cigaretteconsumption to the population mix the increase hit the 20-40 yearage group, where smoking is heaviest. The Maxwell report suggeststhat the rest of this growth must be related to "governmentoverkill, wherein many voices in Washington suggest thateverything we eat or drink is harmful" (Maxwell, 1971: 1). An industry specialist with Manufacturers Hlanover TrustCompany, on the other hand, attributes both the lag in sales in1969 and the new increase to the "very effective antismokingads on television. Since the ban, these commercials rarelyappear" (Cigarette Sales Up, 1972: 3). Another industry executive notes, "For years we havebelieved that the role of cigarette advertising is to attractsmokers from competitive brands rather than induce nonsmokers tostart smoking. We failed to convince the Federal CommunicationsCommission of this, but it is borne out by our industry'sexperience since the TV ban. Within a relatively stable market,some companies have continued to gain while others lost. Somebrands have increased their share of market while others havedeclined" (Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 56). Skepticscontinue to argue that tobacco companies have also been trying torecruit new young smokers. TOBACCO: ECONOMICS AND POLITICS It is generally accepted that tobacco has been an extremelypowerful force in American politics. Approximately 50 millionsmokers smoked 535 billion cigarettes in the past year. More than100,000 employees receive $500 million in wages annually fromtobacco manufacturing companies; over 4,500 wholesalers handlethe distribution of tobacco products and hundreds of thousands ofmerchants depend on tire sale of cigarettes as a source of theirincome. Cigarette companies had been spending over $200 million peryear on radio and television advertising, and since the ban,almost all of this money has been diverted to other mediaadvertising providing many thousands of jobs in ad agencies andin the various media. Three million people from about 750,000families receive $1.4 billion annually for the cultivation oftobacco used in cigarettes. Peripherally affected are those involved in producing the 40million pounds of moisture-proof cellophane, the 70 millionpounds of aluminum foil, the 27 billion printed packs, and the2.7 billion cartons (Cigarette Advertising, 1970: 110-111;Wagner, 1971: 120; USDA, Tobacco Situation, 1971a: 29-31). One writer, reporting on the present public policy trend,notes that "attempts to discourage smoking would affect thelives of millions of people and would have profound economic andpolitical consequences" (Wagner, 1971: 121). Advocates of cigarette smoking today are organized intoextremely powerful groups, each having its own specific functionand plentiful resources. The Tobacco Tax Council, established in 1949, compiles data onthe taxation of tobacco products by the Federal, state and localgovernments. The Council's annual booklet, "Cigaret Taxes inthe United States" has been superseded by " The TaxBurden on Tobacco" since 1966. This pamphlet"undertakes to trace the history of tobacco taxes from theyears of the Civil War down through [the present year]"(Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: iii). The trade association promoting the welfare of the tobaccoindustry is the Tobacco Merchants Association of the U.S. It iscomposed of manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, importers,exporters, leaf dealers, suppliers, and firms interested in theindustry. Its Bulletins cover legislation, trends, specialreports; its numerous other publications and activities seek toimprove industry operations and expand outlets (e.g.,international) f or potential sales (Tobacco MerchantsAssociation, 1971: 1-4). The tobacco industry's point of view is nurtured and protectedby the Tobacco Institute, a nonprofit corporation founded in1958. Its membership includes major U.S. manufacturers ofcigarettes, smoking and chewing tobacco, and snuff: The BlochBrothers Tobacco Company, Brown & Williamson TobaccoCorporation, Conwood Corporation, G. A. Georgopulo & Company,Helme Products, Larus & Brother Company, Liggett & Myers,Lorillard, Philip Morris Incorporated, R. J. Reynolds Industries,Scotten-Dillion Company, and United States Tobacco Company. The Institute is financed by contributions from the largecorporations according to their share of the market. Theinstitute reports on the pro-tobacco side of the medical story,attempting to discredit antismoking publicity, and publishesinformation on the historical role of tobacco, its place in thenational economy, the industry itself, and the public's use oftobacco products. The Council for Tobacco Research, created in 1953 in responseto medical bulletins reporting on the hazards of smoking,processes and administers millions of research grants."Although research money was to be awarded with no stringsattached [The Council] nicely serve[s] the purpose of identifyingthe industry with the welfare of humanity and spreading good willthrough the scientific community" (Wagner, 1971: 80). The scientific data continue to be attacked from both sides.Since 1954 a great quantity of research has been published and,in turn, disputed. For example, "the press played up theHammond and Auerbach study and the claim that twelve beagles haddeveloped lung cancer" from cigarettes. "The findingshave subsequently been downgraded by ' v the author to twomicroscopic tumors with the further revelation that two dogs inthe control group also developed tumors" (Maxwell, 1971: 1). Another area of contention has developed around therelationship between cigarette smoke itself and lung cancer. Arecent paper by Dr. Geoffrey Myddelton given at the Second WorldConference on Smoking and Health in London, September 20-24,1971, compares the incidence of smoking and lung cancer invarious countries. He indicates, "Japan smokes 86% as muchas Britain but has only 27% of its lung cancer. Canada smokestwice as many cigarettes as the Netherlands but has only 69% asmuch lung cancer." He goes on to correlate the use of dieselfile] in England to lung cancer (Maxwell, 1971: 2). From the other side, the United States Public Health Service1972 report The Health Consequences of Smoking maintains that"nonsmokers as well as smokers may be harmed by cigarettes,. . . tobacco smoke in closed cars and poorly ventilated roomscan contaminate the atmosphere for everyone. . . . The chiefdanger is exposure to low levels of the deadly gas, carbonmonoxide. Experiments, with animals have shown that variousconcentrations of the colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas'adversely affect' the structure and function of the heart andlungs. The implication is that this may also be true in man"(Study Says Cigarette Smoke Also May Harm Nonusers, 1972: 1). It is estimated that at the present time one and a half to twomillion adults give up smoking every year. Sensing the hazards ofthe future, some cigarette, companies sought fiscal security indiversification and substitution; tobacco manufacturers are nowmarketing, for example, safety razors, fertilizers, dog food,ballpoint pens, peanut butter and other non-nicotine products. By1967, sales on non-tobacco products accounted for approximatelyone-third of the, total sales of cigarette manufacturers. It remains to be seen whether tobacco power will be whittledaway any further in the next few years. Some feel that "thetobacco subsystem has succeeded in keeping the health question alow priority item on the government's agenda by playing onegovernment agency off against another.... This subsystem cutsacross institutional lines and includes the paid representativesof tobacco growers, marketing organizations and manufacturers.,.Congressmen representing tobacco growing states [are] leadingmembers of four subcommittees, including two ,appropriationssubcommittees and two committees in each house of Congresshandling tobacco legislation. . . . Tobacco power [is] thusfirmly entrenched and well supported" (Wagner, 1971: 121). On the other hand, a strongly worded commentary by an industryspokesman cites Justice John Marshall's statement to illustrateindustry's precarious position: "The power to tax involvesthe power to destroy." He continues with a description ofthe tobacco industry's present situation: The onslaught of state and local taxes on tobacco products... represents a most serious threat to all segments of ourindustry.... We are now facing a calculated attempt to destroy,or at least drastically curtail, the sale of smoking products.The political and economic climate is most favorable for thisattack. Smoking and health is a prime political issue in the samecontext as air pollution, crime in the streets, and consumerism.At the same time, local governments are verging on bankruptcy.Revenue of any sort is therefore a must. It is a tough battle,and cigarette industry is currently bearing the largest part ofthe attack (Regensburg, 1971: 146). The revenues gained from tobacco tax collections aresignificant. Over $2.1 billion in Federal taxes and over $2.5billion in state cigarette taxes were collected in Fiscal Year1971 (Tobacco Tax Council, 1970: 4-6, 8; USDA, Tobacco Situation,1971b: 44). Total tobacco taxes were $4.8 billion in 1971compared with $1.7 billion in 1950. In 1970 tobacco taxes accounted for 1.1% of total federal taxreceipts and represented 13.8 percent of all excise taxes (USDA,Tobacco Situation, 1971b: 40). This places the tobacco tax as theseventh largest source of collection by the Federal governmentbehind the major giants, e.g., income and profit taxes (bothcorporate and individual), employment taxes, manufacturers excisetaxes, alcohol taxes, and estate and gift taxes. In terms ofindividual commodities it ranks behind only alcohol. Thus,federal revenue would be importantly affected if tobaccoconsumption were to decline. CONCLUSION The big question is how the Federal government plans toproceed. Six tobacco bills are now pending in Congress. One ofthese bills would give the Federal Trade Commission authority toset maximum permissible limits on tar and nicotine. Another wouldestablish a graduated cigarette tax based on tar content. The FTC is presently carrying on negotiations with theindustry to come up with a "clear and conspicuous"health warning for its print advertising. It is expected that theindustry, " which has been working closely with the FTC'will' take some 'voluntary' labeling action" (WhereCigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 57). The industry feels the pressure; one member explains: "Weare resigned to it. Over-all.... the industry mood is much morerelaxed-now that we have this first big year behind us"(Where Cigarette Makers Spend, 1971: 57). The public is clamoring for government action; a 1970 CollegePoll'. surveying-youths 18 and older on more than 100 campusesreveals that 96% believe that smoking is dangerous to one'shealth (College Poll, 1971). Further, a 1969 study on teenage (13- to 18-yearolds) smokingattitudes, motivation and habits indicates "deep teenagedissatisfaction with cigarette smoking, considerable knowledge ofits ill effects, but a very exaggerated estimate of theacceptance of smoking by the adult world" (LiebermanResearch, 1969: 1-20). And, a 1970 nationwide survey of teenagersrevealed: "72% of non-smokers identified physicians as theone group that could persuade them not to start smoking and 42%of those who smoked said their physician's advice would influencethem to stop" (Doctors, 1970: 24). Critics of the industry claim: "The controversy aboutsmoking and health continues largely because of the energy, timeand money spent by the tobacco industry in keeping thiscontroversy alive" (College Poll, 1971). In September, 1935, Fortune Magazine published a discussion ofthe medical implications of smoking. It concluded that: This much can be said: That the possible benefit to bederived from tobacco is always less than the possible harm (Robert,1949: 256). Official policy has never accepted this judgment. In recentyears, steps have been taken to discourage smoking, althoughthere is little conclusive evidence that consumption patterns arechanging. It can be expected that official policy and alterationsin individual behavior will both evolve slowly during the comingyears. The socioeconomic impact of a sudden change in officialpolicy would be great, a circumstance reflecting the momentum ofseveral centuries of intense commercial activity. References Brooks, J. E. The Mighty Leaf: Tobacco Thru the Centuries,Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1952, 12, 27, 56, 71-72, 88,93-98, 102, 112-113, 146-147, 165, 167, 215216, 219, 242-243,245, 258, 271, 274. "Cigarette Ad Ban Ruled Constitutional by Panel,"Washington Post (Washington, D.C.), October 21, 1971."Cigarette Advertising and the Public Health," ColumbiaJournal of Law: Social Problems, 6 (1) : 110-114, 1970."Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1965," NewYork Times (New York, New York), July 9, 1965. "CigaretteSales Up Despite Ad Curbs," Washington Post (Washington,D.C.), January 1, 1972,3. "College Poll Shows Students' Smoking Habits,"Tobacco Reporter, June, 1971. Council of State Goverments. The Book of the States,1968,196-197,200-208,212-213. Diehl, H. Tobacco and Your Health, New York: McGrawHill BookCo., 1969, 154-156, 161-162. "Doctors Could Disuade Youths From Smoking,"Pediatric News, 4(2) :24, 1970. Federal Trade Commission. "FTC StatisticalSupplement," December, 1970, 3. Fritschler, A. T. Smoking and Politics, New York:Appleton-Century-Cross, Inc., 1969, 145. Gottsegen, J. J. Tobacco-A Study of its Consumption in theUnited States, New York-Chicago: Pitman Publishing Corp., 1940,8-10, 28, 87, 147, 153, 155. Hamilton, A. E. This Smoking World, New York: The Century Co.,1927, 168, 205. Heimann, R. K. Tobacco and Americans, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1960, 22-23, 83-84, 90, 93, 155-156. Lehman Brothers. About Tobacco, (N.P.), 1955, 39. Lieberman Research, Inc. "The Teenager Looks at CigaretteSmoking," Report of a Study Conducted for the AmericanCancer Society, November, 1969, 1-20. Maxwell, J. C., Jr. "Preliminary Year End Estimate,"The Maxwell Report, November, 1971,1-2. Middleton, A. P. Tobacco Coast, Charlottesville: University ofVirginia Press, 1953, 93-94, 104-107, 114-117, 120-121. Morison, S. E. The Oxford History of the American People, NewYork: Oxford University Press, 1965, 93-94. National InteragencyCouncil on Smoking and Health. "State Activities,"Bulletin, July-September 1971, 1. Neuberger, M. B. Smoke Screen: Tobacco and the Public Welfare,Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1963, 52, 62. Redmond, D. E., Jr., "Tobacco and Cancer: The FirstClinical Report, 1761," New England Journal of Medicine,28-9 (1) : 21, 1970. Regensburg, A. "The Tax That Destroys," NATDCoordinator, XXXI: 146, April, 1971. Robert, J. C. The Story of Tobacco, Chapel Hill: University ofNorth Carolina Press, 1949, 11, 99-101, 106107, 117, 169, 247,256. "Study Says Cigarette Smoke Also May Harm Nonusers,"Washington Post (Washington, D.C.), January 10, 1972, 1 (6). "Tobacco Advertising Could End in 1975," Herald(Lexington, Kentucky), January 18, 1970, 7. Tobacco Institute. "Connecticut and Tobacco,"Washington: Tobacco Institute, Undated], 20-23. "Kansas and Tobacco," Washington: Tobacco Institute,1970, 9. "Kentucky and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 0. - "Maryland and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 9-10, 21, 23. - "Massachusetts and Tobacco," Washington: TobaccoInstitute, 1971, 17. -"Virginia and Tobacco," Washington: Tobacco Institute,1971, 19, 22, 28, 29. Tobacco Merchants Association. "Sales of Tobacco Productsto Minors," March 1971, 1-4. Tobacco Tax Council. "The Tax Burden on Tobacco,"1970, iii-iv, v, 2, 4-6,8,17,53. U.S. Department of Agriculture. "Tobacco Situation," Economic Research Service, TS-136, June, 1971a, 29-31. -"Tobacco Situation," Economic Research Service, TS-137,September, 1971b, 7, 39-44. Vlassis, T. "Should Pharmacists Sell Cigarettes?"Iowa Pharmacists, 24 (9) : 10, 15, 1969. Wagner, S. Cigarette Country, -New -York: Praeger Publishers,1971, 40, 63-64, 74, 80, 120-121, 166-173, 175, 190, 205, 216,220. Werner, C. Tobacco Land, New York: Tobacco Leaf PublishingCo., 1922, 100-102, 105, 358-359, 559. "Where CigaretteMakers Spend Ad Dollars Now," Business Week, December 25,1971, 56-57. Whiteside, T. "Annals of Advertising: Cutting Down,"The New Yorker, December 19, 1970, 58-80. 7 USC  511 (b) (d), 1935. 7 USC  515, 1936. 7 USC  1303,1938. 7 USC  1312, 1938. 7 USC  1314, 1938. 26-USC -5701, et seq. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-26IA086-000614-B046-115http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/misintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022043 text/html 7777HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:20:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:21 GMTContent-length: 7560 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Introduction This is the first of two Reports by the National Commission onand Drug Abuse. Public Law 91-513 requires that we report to thePresident, Congress and the public initially on marihuana andthen on the broader issue of drug abuse in the United The secondReport will include a review of the marihuana issue withparticular attention to studies which have been conducted in theinterim. In large measure, the marihuana issue is a child of thesixties, the visual and somewhat pungent symbol of dramaticchanges which have permanently affected our nation in the lastdecade. Some have that our mandate has placed the cart before thehorse, and that we should have focused first on the wider socialissue and assessed marihuana's impact on society within thatcontext. much thought and investigation, we now believe thatCongress was wise in focusing this Commission's attention firston marihuana. separating it from the rest of the drugcontroversy, we have been better able to analyze the uniqueposition marihuana occupies in our society. Our mandate was a broad one, covering, for example, the natureand scope of use, the effects of the drug, the relationship ofmarihuana use to other behavior and the efficacy of existing law.Realizing that marihuana had never before in the Americanexperience been the subject of a concentrated, authoritativegovernmental study, we launched a comprehensive research andfact-finding effort. We sought.. to evaluate and supplementexisting material, to fill knowledge voids. and to assess theso-called truths commonly posed in the marihuana debate. Soon after funds became available on March 22, 1971, wecommissioned more than 50 projects, ranging from a study of theeffects of marihuana on man to a field survey of enforcement ofthe marihuana laws in six metropolitan jurisdictions. Ofparticular importance in our fact-finding effort were theopinions and attitudes of all groups in our society. Through formal and informal hearings, recorded in thousands ofpages of transcripts, we solicited all points of view, includingthose of public officials, community leaders, professionalexperts and students. We commissioned a nationwide survey ofpublic beliefs, information and experience referred to in thisReport as the National Survey. In addition, we conducted separatesurveys of opinion among', district attorneys, judges, probationofficers, clinicians, university health officials and free clinicpersonnel. This inquiry focused on the American experience. However, wehave been well aware from the outset that the scope of marihuanause in the United States differs considerably from that in othercountries where the drug has been used for centuries.Accordingly, the Commission sought to put the American experiencein perspective by seeing the situation first hand in India,Greece, North Africa, Jamaica, Afghanistan, and other countries. Because of our initial concentration on marihuana, certainissues common to marihuana and other drugs have been deferred formore complete coverage in the second Report. For example, adetailed analysis of educational programs about marihuana and itsuse will be considered when we evaluate drug education programsin general. Further, we do not discuss the rehabilitation of the problemmarihuana user since no such specialized programs exist; we foundthe subject is best approached from a broader perspective ofrehabilitation programs for problem users of all non-narcoticdrugs. An examination of federal and state organizationalresponse to the drug issue, as well as an in-depth study ofgeneral law enforcement strategies, have both been undertaken andwill continue, but will not be reported fully until the secondyear. Officers of the Federal Government have set a high priority onfuller understanding of the marihuana issue and appropriategovernmental action. President Nixon has frequently expressed hispersonal and official commitment to providing a rational andequitable public response to the use and misuse of drugs.Similarly, Congress has shown its concern in passing theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. Inappointing this Commission, both the President and Congress haverecognized the need for an independent, nonpartisan appraisal ofthe nature of marihuana and the consequences of its use, for asimilar appraisal of the abuse of all drugs, and for appropriaterecommendations for public policy as a result of both studies. The Commission decided early in its deliberations to write aReport that was complete but not overly technical so that thereader could understand the points discussed without analyzingdetailed studies. Some. studies and supporting data are includedin an Appendix to the Report, which is published separately. Forthe researcher and others interested in greater detail, theAppendix provides the necessary technical data. This Report focuses on marihuana, the popular name for amixture of stems, leaves and flowering tops of the Indian hempplant, Cannabis Sativa L. This Report presents the mostsignificant information gathered to date about the drug and itsusers, concluding with the Commission's recommendationsconcerning the most appropriate public response to marihuanausage in our society. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-27IA086-000614-B046-158http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/mis2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022104 text/html 70753HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:20:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:02 GMTContent-length: 70535 Marihuana and the Problem of Marihuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding I -- marihuana and the problem of marihuana "There are no whole truths; all truths are half -truths.It is trying to treat them as whole truths that plays thedevil." Alfred North Whitehead (1953) We are a nation of problem-solvers. We are restless andimpatient with perceived gaps between the way things are and theway we think ought to be. Understandably, such an impulse towardself-correction never leaves us wanting for social problems tosolve. Although it is a prerequisite to social progress, thisproblem-solving orientation misdirects our attention. In order tomaximize public awareness we are apt to characterize situationsas being far worse than they really are. Because any activity iscommonly regarded as a move toward a solution, rhetoric andstopgap legislation sometimes substitute for rational reflection.We become so impressed with social engineering that we overlookinherent human limitations. Since the mid-sixties, American society has been increasinglyagitated by what has been defined as a marihuana problem. Thetypical sequences of "a national problem" haveresulted: exaggeration, polarization and the inevitable demandfor a. solution. The appointment of this Commission and thepublication of this Report reflect the escalation of marihuanause into the realm of social problem. Since the beginning of ourofficial life, we have grappled with the threshold question: Whyhas the use of marihuana reached problem status in the publicmind? Origins of the Marihuana Problem Marihuana has been used as an intoxicant in various parts ofthe world for centuries and in this country for 75 years. Yet useof the drug has been regarded as a problem of major proportionsfor less than a decade. We will not find the reasons forcontemporary social concern in pharmacology texts or previousgovernmental reports, for we are dealing with two separaterealities: a drug with certain pharmacologic properties anddeterminable, although variable, effects on man; and a pattern ofhuman behavior, individual and group, which has, as a behavior,created fear, anger, confusion, and uncertainty among a largesegment of the contemporary American public. The marihuanabehavior pattern is the source of the marihuana controversy. The most apparent feature of the behavior is that it isagainst the law. But inconsistency between behavior and the legalnorm is not sufficient, in itself, to create a social problem.Marihuana, has been an illegal substance for several decades; andthe widespread violation of laws against gambling and adulteryhave not excited the public to the same extent as hasmarihuana-smoking in recent years. At the same time, we suspect that illegality may play animportant role in problem definition where drugs are concerned.Alcohol is of proven danger to individual and societal health andthe public is well aware of its dangers, yet use of this drug hasnot been accorded the same problem status. Marihuana's illegalitymay have been a necessary condition for the marihuana problem,but the increased violation of the legal proscription does not byitself explain the phenomenon. The Commission believes that three interrelated factors havefostered the definition of marihuana as a major national problem.First, the illegal behavior is highly visible to all segments ofour society. Second, use of the drug is perceived to threaten thehealth and morality not only of the individual but of the societyitself. Third, and most important, the drug has evolved in thelate sixties and early seventies, as a symbol of wider socialconflicts and public issues. VISIBILITY More than anything else, the visibility of marihuana use by asegment of our population previously unfamiliar with the drug iswhat stirred public anxiety and thrust marihuana into the problemarea. Marihuana usage in the United States has been with us for avery long period of time, dating back to the beginning of thecentury. For decades its use was mainly confined to theunderprivileged socioeconomic groups in our cities and to certaininsulated social groups, such as jazz musicians and artists. Aslong as use remained confined to these groups and had anegligible impact on the dominant social order, the vast majorityof Americans remained unconcerned. From the other side, theinsulated marihuana user was in no position to demand carefulpublic or legislative scrutiny. However, all this changed markedly in the mid-1960's. Forvarious reasons, marihuana use became a common form of recreationfor many middle and upper class college youth. The trend spreadacross the country, into the colleges and high schools and intothe affluent suburbs as well. Use by American servicemen inVietnam was frequent. In recent years, use of the drug hasspanned every social class and geographic region. The Commission-sponsored National Survey, "A NationwideStudy of Beliefs, Information and Experiences," indicatedthat some 24 million Americans have tried marihuana at least onceand that at least 8.3 million are current users. Other surveys uniformly indicate that more than 40% of theU.S. college population have tried marihuana, and in someuniversities the figure is much higher. Also, use of the drug hasbecome almost as common among young adults out of college, andamong older teenagers in high school. The National Surveyindicates that 39%, of young adults between 18 and 25 years ofage have tried marihuana. The stereotype of the marihuana user asa marginal citizen has given way to a composite picture of largesegments of American youth, children of the dominant majority andvery much a part of the mainstream of American life. Public confusion, anger, and fear over this development becameincreasingly apparent during the mid and late 1960's. Such massdeviance was a problem and the scope of the problem was augmentedby frequent publicity. The topic of the usage of marihuana by theyoung received considerable attention from newspapermen andtelevision reporters. The drug's youthful users abetted the mediain this regard by flaunting their disregard of the law, Few of ushave not seen or heard of marihuana being used en masse at rockconcerts, political demonstrations and gatherings of campusactivists. In addition, new scientific and medical interest in marihuanaand its use was stimulated by the sudden public interest. For thefirst time in the American experience, the drug became thesubject of intensive scrutiny in the laboratories and clinics.Unfortunately, this research was conducted in the spotlight ofpublic controversy. Isolated findings and incomplete informationhave automatically been presented to the public, with littleattempt made to place such findings in a larger perspective or toanalyze their meanings. Any new marihuana research has had ready access to the newsspotlight and often has been quickly assimilated into therhetoric of the marihuana, debate. Science has become a weapon ina propaganda battle. Because neither the reporters nor the publichave the expertise to evaluate this information, the result hasbeen an array of conflicting anecdotal reports, clinical studieson limited populations, and surveys of restricted utility. Visibility, intense public interest, and fishbowl research areall important components of the marihuana problem. PERCEIVED THREATS Although marihuana is taken by most users for curiosity orpleasure, the non-using public still feels seriously affected byuse of the drug. Several decades ago it was popularly assertedthat the drug brought about a large variety of social andindividual ills, including crime and insanity. As a result it wasprohibited by federal law in 1937. The marihuana explosion of themid-sixties occurred within the context of 30 years of instilledfear. Although based much more on fantasy than on proven fact,the marihuana "evils" took root in the public mind, andnow continue to color the public reaction to the marihuanaphenomenon. Even beyond the violation of law, the widespread useof marihuana, is seen as a threat to society in other ways. Andthe threats grow proportionately as the controversy swells. It has been astutely observed that any statement frequentlyrepeated in public assumes the status of fact. With so manypeople continually arguing about marihuana, the public hasunderstandably become alarmed and confused. On the basis of the National Survey, we have tried to identifythe ways in which the public feels threatened by marihuana use.Essentially these threats fall into three general categories:threats to the public safety, threats to the public health, andthreats to the dominant social order. In terms of public safety, the concern is with therelationship between marihuana and aggressive behavior, crime andjuvenile delinquency. Threats to the public health usually referinitially to the impact of marihuana on the user. Lethality,psychosis, addiction potential and effects of chronic long-termuse, are major concerns. Additionally, the fear exists thatmarihuana leads to the use of more dangerous drugs, especiallyLSD and heroin. The threat which marihuana use is thought to present to thedominant social order is a major undercurrent of the marihuanaproblem. Use of the drug is linked with idleness, lack ofmotivation, hedonism and sexual promiscuity. Many see the drug asfostering a counterculture which conflicts with basic moralprecepts as well as with the operating functions of our society.The "dropping out" or rejection of the establishedvalue system is viewed with alarm. Marihuana becomes more than adrug; it becomes a symbol of the rejection of cherished values. SYMBOLISM The symbolic aspects of marihuana are the, most intangible ofthe items to which the Commission must address itself, and yetthey may be at the heart of the marihuana problem. Use ofmarihuana was, and still is, age-specific. It was youth-relatedat a time in American history when the adult society was alarmedby the implications of the youth " movement": defianceof the established order, the adoption of new life styles, theemergence of "street people," campus unrest, drug use,communal living, protest politics, and even political radicalism.In an age characterized by the so-called generation gap,marihuana symbolizes the cultural divide. For youth, marihuana became a convenient symbol ofdisaffection with traditional society, an allure whichsupplemented its recreational attraction. Smoking marihuana mayhave appealed to large numbers of youth who opposed certainpolicies or trends, but who maintained faith in the Americansystem as a whole. In ;a time when symbolic speech is oftenpreferred to the literal form, marihuana was a convenientinstrument of mini-protest. It was also an agent of groupsolidarity, as the widely-publicized rock concerts so wellillustrate. For the adult society, the decade of the sixties was adistressing time. The net effect of racial unrest, campusdisruption, political assassination, economic woes and anunpopular war was widespread uneasiness. Attending a general fearthat the nation was witnessing its own disintegration was adesire to shore up our institutions and hold the line. That linewas easy to define where drugs, particularly marihuana, wereconcerned. Use of drugs, including marihuana, is against the law. Formany, marihuana symbolized disorder in a society frustrated byincreasing lawlessness. Insistence on application of the lawtended also to harden views, thereby escalating still further theuse of marihuana as a symbolic issue. The social conflicts underlying the drug's symbolic statushave dissipated somewhat in the past few years; and in some ways,the Commission has similarly noted a partial deflation of themarihuana problem and of the emotionalism surrounding it. We arehopeful that our attempt to clarify the scientific and normativedimensions of marihuana use will further deemphasize, the problemorientation and facilitate rational decision-making. The Need for Perspective This Commission has the task of exploring the marihuanacontroversy from as many vantage points as possible in itsattempt to make sound, realistic and workable policyrecommendations. Because we are dealing essentially with acomplex social concern rather than a simple pharmacologicphenomenon, any social policy decision must discuss the realitiesof marihuana as a drug, marihuana use as a form of behavior, andmarihuana as a symbol. Particularly important is the determination of the longevityof the behavior. Are we dealing with a behavior that is becomingrooted in our culture or are we experiencing an aberration, a fadthat will in time, of its own accord, pass away? The vortex of the marihuana controversy is the present, butthe prudent policy planner must not be blinded by the deluge ofrecent statistics. It is important that we scan the past forclues about the meaning of certain behavior and the promiseoffered by various social policy responses. We are convinced thata wider historical understanding will also go a long way towarddeflating marihuana as a problem. HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE When viewed in the context of American society's ambivalentresponse to the non-medical use of drugs, the marihuana problemis not unique. Both the existing social policy toward the drugand its contemporary challenge have historical antecedents andexplanations. Somewhat surprisingly, until the last half of the19th century, the only drugs used to any significant extent fornon-medical purposes in this country were alcohol and tobacco. American opinion has always included some opposition to thenonmedical use of any drug, including alcohol and tobacco. Fromcolonial times through the Civil War, abstentionist outcriesagainst alcohol and tobacco sporadically provoked prohibitorylegislation. One 18th century pamphleteer advised against the useof any drink "which is liable to steal away a man's sensesand render him foolish, irascible, uncontrollable anddangerous." Similarly, one 19th century observer attributeddelirium tremens, perverted sexuality, impotency, insanity andcancer to the smoking and chewing of tobacco. Despite such warnings, alcohol and tobacco use took deep rootin American society. De Tocqueville noted what hard drinkers theAmericans were, and Dickens was compelled to report that "inall the public places of America, this filthy custom [tobaccochewing] is recognized." Nonetheless, the strain in ourculture opposed to all non-medical drug use persisted and in thelate 19th century gained ardent adherents among larger segmentsof the population. Beginning in earnest around 1870, abstentionists focused thepublic opinion process on alcohol. As science and politics werecalled to the task, public attention was drawn to the liquorproblem. "Liquor is responsible for 19% of the divorces, 25%of the poverty, 25% of the insanity, 37% of the pauperism, 45% ofchild desertion and 50% of the crime in this country,"declared the Anti-Saloon League. "And this," it wasnoted, "is a very conservative estimate." The Temperance advocates achieved political victory during thesecond decade of the 20th century. By 1913, nine states wereunder statewide prohibition, and in 31 other states local optionlaws operated, with the ultimate effect that more than 50% of thenation's population lived under prohibition. Four years later,Congress approved the 18th Amendment and on January 16, 1919,Nebraska became the 36th state to ratify the Amendment, thusinscribing national Prohibition in the Constitution. Although on a somewhat smaller scale and with lesser results,public attention was simultaneously attracted to a growingtobacco problem. Stemming partly from the immediate popularity ofcigarette-smoking, a practice introduced after the Civil War, andpartly from riding the coattails of abstentionist sentiment,anti-tobacconists achieved a measure of success which hadpreviously eluded them. The New York Time editorialized in 1885that: The decadence of Spain began when the Spaniards adopted cigarettes and if this pernicious habit obtains among adult Americans, the ruin of the Republic is close at hand. . . . Between 1895 and 1921, 14 states banned the sale ofcigarettes. Although though there has been some posthumous debate aboutthe efficacy of alcohol Prohibition as a means of reducingexcessive or injurious use, the experiment failed to achieve itsdeclared purpose: elimination of the practice of alcoholconsumption. The habit was too ingrained in the society to beexcised simply by cutting off legitimate supply. In addition, the 18th Amendment never commanded a. popularconsensus; in fact, the Wickersham Commission, appointed byPresident Hoover in 1929 to study Prohibition, attributed theAmendment's enactment primarily to public antipathy toward thesaloon, the large liquor dealers and intemperance rather than topublic opposition to use of the drug. Subsequent observers have agreed that Prohibition wasmotivated primarily by a desire to root out the institutionalevils associated with the drug's distribution and excessive use;only a minority of its supporters opposed all use. And in thisrespect, Prohibition succeeded. Upon repeal, 13 years afterratification, liquor was back, but the pre-Prohibition saloon andunrestrained distribution had been eliminated from the Americanscene. Both the scope of the alcohol habit and the ambivalence ofsupporting opinion are manifested in the internal logic ofProhibition legislation. The legal scheme was designed to cut offsupply, not to punish the consumer. Demand could be eliminatedeffectively, if at all, only through educational efforts. Onlyfive states prohibited possession of alcohol for personal use inthe home. Otherwise, under both federal and state law, theindividual remained legally free to consume alcohol. The anti-tobacco movement was not propelled by theinstitutions outrage or the cultural symbolism surrounding thealcohol problem It never succeeded on a national scale. Localsuccesses were attributable to the temporary strength of theabstentionist impulse, together with the notion thattobacco-smoking was a stepping-stone to alcohol use Lacking theconsensus necessary to reverse a spreading habit, tobacco"prohibition" never extended to possession. Insofar asthe anti-tobacco movement was really a coattail consequence ofalcohol Prohibition, is not surprising that all 14 states whichhad prohibited sale repealed their proscriptions by 1927. By the early 1930's, the abstentionist thrust against alcoholand tobacco had diminished. State and federal governmentscontented themselves with regulating distribution and extractingrevenue. When the decade ended, the general public no longerperceived alcohol and tobacco use as social problems. The twodrugs had achieved social legitimacy. A comparison between the national flirtation with alcohol andtobacco prohibition and the prohibition of the non-medical use ofother drugs is helpful in analyzing the marihuana issue. In 1900,only a handful of states regulated traffic in"narcotic" drugs--opium, morphine, heroin and cocaineeven though, proportionately, more persons probably were addictedto those drugs at that time than at any time since. Estimatesfrom contemporary surveys are questionable, but a conservativeestimate is a quarter of a million people, comprising at least 1%of the population. This large user population in 1900 includedmore females than males, more whites than blacks, was notconfined to a particular geographic region or to the cities, andwas predominantly middle class. This 19th century addiction was generally accidental and wellhidden. It stemmed in part from over-medication, carelessprescription practices, repeated refills and hidden distributionof narcotic drugs in patent medicines. Society responded to thislargely invisible medical addiction in indirect, informal ways.Self -regulation by the medical profession and pharmaceuticalindustry, stricter prescription practices by the stategovernments and regulation of labeling by the Federal Governmentin 1906 all combined in the early years of the new century toreduce the possibility of this accidental drug addiction. About this same time, during the late 19th and early 20thcenturies, attention within the law enforcement and medicalcommunities was drawn to another use of narcotics----the"pleasure" or "street" use of these drugs byethnic minorities in the nation's cities. Society reacted to thisnarcotics problem by enacting criminal legislation, prohibitingthe non-medical production, distribution or consumption of thesedrugs. Within a very few years, every state had passedanti-narcotics legislation, and in 1914 the Federal Governmentpassed the Harrison Narcotics Act. The major differences between the temperance andanti-narcotics movements must be, emphasized. The temperance,movement was a matter of vigorous public debate; theanti-narcotics movement was not. Temperance legislation was theproduct of a highly organized nation-wide lobby; narcoticslegislation was largely ad hoc. Temperance legislation wasdesigned to eradicate known problems resulting from alcoholabuse; narcotic--, legislation was largely anticipatory.Temperance legislation rarely restricted private activity;narcotics legislation prohibited all drug-related behavior,including possession and use. These divergent policy patterns reflect the clear-cutseparation in the public and professional minds between alcoholand tobacco on the one hand, and "narcotics" on theother. Use of alcohol and tobacco were indigenous Americanpractices. The intoxicant use of narcotics was not native,however, and the users of these drugs were either alien, like theChinese opium smokers, or perceived to be marginal members ofsociety. As to the undesirability and immorality of nonmedical use ofnarcotics, there was absolutely no debate. By causing its usersto be physically dependent, the narcotic drug was considered asevere impediment to individual participation in the economic andpolitical systems. Use, it was thought, automatically escalatedto dependence and excess, which led to pauperism, crime andinsanity. From a sociological perspective, narcotics use wasthought to be prevalent among the slothful and immoralpopulations, gamblers, prostitutes, and others who were already"undesirables." Most important was the threat thatnarcotics posed to the vitality of the nation's youth. In short, the narcotics question was answered in unison: thenonmedical use of narcotics was a cancer which had to be removedentirely from the social organism. Marihuana smoking first became prominent on the American scenein the decade following the Harrison Act. Mexican immigrants andWest Indian sailors introduced the practice in the border andGulf states. As the Mexicans spread throughout the West andimmigrated to the major cities, some of them carried themarihuana habit with them. The practice also became common amongthe same urban populations with whom opiate use was identified. Under such circumstances, an immediate policy response towardmarihuana quite naturally followed the narcotics pattern ratherthan the alcohol or tobacco pattern. In fact, marihuana wasincorrectly classified as a "narcotic" drug inscientific literature and statutory provisions. By 1931, all buttwo states west of the Mississippi and several more in the Easthad enacted prohibitory legislation making it a criminal offenseto possess or use the drug. In 1932, the National Conference of Commissioners on UniformState Laws included an optional marihuana, provision in theUniform Narcotic Drug Act, and by 1937 every state, either byadoption of the Uniform Act or by separate legislation, hadprohibited marihuana use. In late 1937, the Congress adopted theMarihuana Tax Act, superimposing a, federal prohibitory scheme onthe state scheme. Not once during this entire period was any comprehensivescientific study undertaken in this country of marihuana, or itseffects. The drug was assumed to be a 'narcotic' to render theuser psychologically dependent, to provoke violent crime, and tocause insanity. Although media attention was attracted tomarihuana use around 1935, public awareness was low and publicdebate non-existent. As long as use remained confined toinsulated minorities throughout the next quarter century, thesituation remained stable. When penalties for narcoticsviolations escalated in the 1950's, marihuana penalties wentright along with them, until a first-offense possessor was afelon subject to lengthy incarceration. With this historical overview in mind, it is not surprisingthat the contemporary marihuana experience has been characterizedby fear and confusion on one side and outrage and protest on theother. As scientific and medical opinion has become better known,marihuana has lost its direct link with the narcotics in thepublic mind and in the statute books. But extensive ambivalence remains about the policies forvarious drugs. Marihuana's advocates contend that it is no moreor less harmful than alcohol and tobacco and should therefore betreated in similar fashion. The drug's adversaries contend thatit is a stepping-stone to the narcotics and should remainprohibited. At the present time public opinion tends to considermarihuana less harmful than the opiates and cocaine and moreharmful than alcohol and tobacco. Interestingly, while marihuana. is perceived as less harmfulthan before, alcohol and tobacco are regarded as more harmfulthan before. In some ways, the duality which previouslycharacterized American drug policy has now been supplanted by anenlightened skepticism as to the variety of approaches to thenon-medical use of various drugs. Despite this shift in attitudes, however, the use of alcoholand tobacco is not considered a major social problem by manyAmericans, while marihuana use is still so perceived. This remains true despite the fact that alcoholism afflictsnine million Americans. According to the National Institute onAlcohol Addiction and Alcoholism of the National Institute ofMental Health: alcohol is a factor in half (30,000) of thehighway fatalities occurring each year; an economic cost to thenation of $15 billion occurs as a result of acoholism and alcoholabuse; one-half of the five million yearly arrests in the UnitedStates are related to the misuse of alcohol (1.5 million offensesfor public drunkenness alone) ; and one-half of all homicides andone-fourth of all suicides are alcohol related, accounting for atotal of 11,700 deaths annually. Similarly, tobacco smoking is not considered a major publicconcern despite its link to lung cancer and heart disease.According to the Surgeon General in The Health Consequences ofSmoking, 1972: cigarette smoking is the, major "cause" of lung cancer in men and a significant "cause" of lung cancer in women; the risk of developing lung cancer in both men and women is directly related to an individual's exposure as measured by the number of cigarettes smoked, duration of smoking, earlier initiation, depth of inhalation, and the amount of "tar" produced by the cigarette; and data from numerous prospective and retrospective studies indicate that cigarette smoking is a significant risk factor contributing to the development of coronary heart disease (CHD) including fatal CHD and its most severe expression, sudden and unexpected death. CULTURAL PERSPECTIVE Realizing the importance of social change in understanding theissues surrounding the use of marihuana and other drugs, theCommission decided early that an objective appraisal of culturaltrends was vital for the, development of policy recommendations.Since neither the increase in marihuana use nor its attendantcontroversy is an isolated phenomenon, we sought a wider culturalperspective. To this end, the Commission sponsored a wide-rangingseminar on "Central Influences on American Life." Withthe cooperation of the Council for Biology in Human Affairs ofthe Salk Institute, we elicited a three-day conversation among 13exceptionally thoughtful and perceptive observers of Americanlife.* *The participants included Jacques Barzun, as moderator, MaryBingham, Claude T. Bissell, Kenneth Boulding, Robert R. Bowie,Theodore Caplow, Jay W. Forrester, T. George Harris. Rollo May,Jay Saunders Redding, Jonas Salk, Ernest van den Haag, and LeroyS. Wehrle. It is well beyond both our mandate and our competence toattempt a definitive presentation of the status of the Americanethical system However, we shall try to suggest some of the moresalient influence in our changing society, recognizing that onlyagainst the backdrop of society's fears, aspirations and valuescan a rational response to marihuana be formulated. Although weare not prepared to identify specific causal connections betweenthese social trends and marihuana use, we do believe that some ofthe major points raised in the discussion of cultural changeprovide essential background in understanding the marihuanaproblem. The Search for Meaning One overriding influence in contemporary America is thedeclining capacity of our institutions to help the individualfind his place in society. As one of the participants at theSeminar observed: A society is stable, peaceful, happy, not when it has rid itself of the tensions-because you never get rid of the tensions, because people's drives will be satisfied in ways that clash and so on-but when a very high proportion of the people feel fulfillment of some sort within the context which the society normally provides. The long-term problem now, for many many people, not just young people, is that this condition is not met. Another noted: What is wrong with our social system, it seems to me, is that it no longer inspires in people a feeling of purpose, meaningfulness and so on. A number of institutional trends have joined to deprive theindividual of a sense of communal inspiration. Perhaps mostimportant is the economic element. Whereas the individual'seconomic achievement formerly gave his life broad social meaningand inspired his existence, automation and technological advancehave tended to depersonalize the individual's role in theeconomy. Instead of the economic system being dependent onindividual productivity, the individual is increasingly dependenton the system. As his work dwindles in significance to the totalsociety, it diminishes in meaning for him. Moreover, as more andmore of our people share the nation's affluence, Horatio Alger'sexample is no longer needed to climb the economic ladder. A particularly emphatic manifestation of the decliningeconomic demand on the individual is the institutionalization ofleisure time. Whereas the economy used to require long hours ofwork, now it barely requires more than a five-day week. Expandingvacation time and reduced work-weeks tend to diminish thestrength of the work ethic. The implications of enforced leisuretime are only now becoming apparent, and the concept of"idle hands are the devil's plaything" has to bereexamined in terms of acceptable forms of non-work behavior.This new time component, allowing for the assertion ofindividuality, has produced both privileges and problems. In the last decade we have seen the beginnings of theinstitutionalization of this leisure ethic. A leisure-timeindustry has sprung up to organize this time period for theindividual. Many Americans, due to the nature of their jobs in anautomated economic system, find little personal satisfaction intheir work, and many are now searching for individual fulfillmentthrough the use of free time. Where meaning is not found ineither work or recreational pursuits, the outcome is likely to beboredom and restlessness. Whether generated by a search forindividual fulfillment, group recreation or sheer boredom, theincreased use of drugs, including marihuana, should come as nosurprise. Another social development which has chipped away atindividual identity is the loss of a vision of the future. In anage where change is so rapid, the individual has no concept ofthe future. If man could progress from land transportation to themoon in 60 years, what, lies ahead? Paralleling the loss of thetechnological horizon is the loss of a vision of what the future,in terms of individual and social goals, ought to look like. Aretimes moving too fast for man to be able to plan or -to adjust tonew ways and new styles? This sense of the collapsing time framewas best summed up by one of the Seminar participants: .... there are great forces that have developed over the last several decades that cause one to lose sight of the distant future. Let me contrast a rural farm family of several decades ago which settled a farm. They expected their children to live there, they can imagine their grandchildren living there-there is an image of the future. There is really no one who [now] has any image of where his great grandchildren will he or what they will do. This comes about because of the nature of industrial society; it comes about because we have retirement plans instead of looking after one's own old age. There area whole set of these [factors]. Now the morality, the ethics get tied into it because ethics are really a long-time horizon concept. It's something you engage in because it's contrary to immediate reward and immediate gratification and so you look to some distant future. But as one loses sight of any future then I think the ethics and morality creep up to the very near term also . . . We have no one who has got an image of this country two hundred years from now, who is trying to create a structure that be believes will exist that long. So a number of these things . . . tie together in terms of the long-term goals and how they have shifted. In any of our systems there tend to be a conflict between the short-term and the long-term goals. If the long-term goals are lost sight of then the short-term expediencies seem to be the things that well up. To the extent that planning for the future no longer gives theindividual his inspiration, he must look to the present. Such aclimate is conducive to pleasure-seeking, instant gratificationand an entire life-perspective which our society has alwayspreviously disclaimed A third force depriving the individual of apresumed place in society is the loss of a sense of community, asense of belonging. Mobility, mass living and rapid travel allconspire to destroy the smaller community. The family moves fromplace to place and then separates with each child going his ownway. This global thinking leaves little time for home-townconcern. The dissipation of geographic roots parallels a socialuprooting. As one of our Seminar participants noted: When you grow up with a, small number of people with whom you have to live for a while, it does something which isn't done now. It forces you to face yourself. It forces you to ask what kind of pet-son you are, because you can't get away with it with a group you're going to have to live with. They know what you really are. The mobility has the effect of making it possible for people to live playing parts for years. It seems to me we see it among the youngsters: role playing as distinguished from being somebody. . . . All of these social trends have their most potent impact onyoung people who are just beginning to develop their values,beliefs and commitments. The adult society has found it easier toadjust to the emergence of the leisure value. Having experiencedit as a gradual process, they see it as a reward for previoustoil. For many of our young, however, a substantial segment ofleisure time may be considered an essential part of living; theyhave known no other experience. Similarly, an adult society,increasingly influenced toward the present, at least hasdeveloped an historical perspective. Also, adult values wereinternalized at a time when a future vision was possible. Formany of the young, however, the present weighs more, heavily.This notion is best reflected in the vociferous youth response tothe Vietnam conflict, the embodiment of a war fought for thefuture, Finally, all of these cultural changes have occurred,especially for the young, in an environment of affluence. Thesuccessful economic system has maximized individual freedom. Butthe individual has been given unlimited choices at exactly thetime when a, value system within which to make such choices is indoubt. Because he has no sense of direction, the result isrestlessness, boredom and an increase in the likelihood ofpresent-oriented choices. Self-destructive drug-taking is oneform such behavior may take. One of our Seminar participantsobserved in this connection: It seems to me that you've got this affluence. So that while most of us grew up with the feeling that the channels within which we were going to have to move and make choices were very narrow, channels for these youngsters look absolutely open. It's an absolutely a, la carte menu-it's the biggest a la, carte menu you can imagine. [This occurs] in a situation in which this sense of radical change is going on so fast that you can't master it, together with a feeling that the society is being operated by very large organizations which you can't get a grip on, giving one a sense of helplessness, of not knowing where to take hold. All these things inherently are disorienting to youngsters and don't give them a, feeling of challenge, [but rather] a doubt as to the meaning of their own lives, of the significance of their being here, [a sense of] being atoms. So then they do act like children in the sense of behaving violently to call attention to themselves. They do a whole lot of other things which, it seems to me, are the sort of things you often see when people feel their lives have no meaning. Skepticism Another major influence in contemporary American life withsubstantial relevance to the marihuana problem is the uneasyrelationship between the individual and society's institutions,particularly the state. For 50 years, there has been a continuingupward flow of power to large institutional units, whether theybe corporate conglomerates, labor unions, universities or theGovernment. We have created a society which "requires theindividual to lean on society," observed one of our Seminarparticipants, "in ways that formerly he did not have to do.He used to lean on the clan, on the family, on the village. Wehave used bureaucracy to deal with these problems." Formany, the Federal Government epitomizes this development,bureaucratizing a social response to the most human of needs. We suspect that the implications of this trend for theindividual, although inevitable, became more visibly apparent inthe 1960's. Mass institutions must deal through rules; theindividual becomes a number. "Intuitively, [the individual]feels that bureaucracies must make man into an object in order todeal with him." So we have a depersonalization at exactlythe time that many individuals are casting about for identity andfulfillment. Simultaneously, technological advance poses the awesomeprospect of 1984: the intrusion of the omnipresent state into theprivate affairs of the individual. Computerized data-banks andelectronic surveillance are perceived as restrictions onindividuality at a time when the desire for personal privacy isascendant. Another cultural feature of governmental bureaucracy duringthe sixties has been failure to match expectations. Governmentpromises the elimination of poverty, the dissipation of racialdiscrimination, the excision of drug abuse, and creates risingexpectations. But government is often ill-equipped or unable toperform such monumental tasks. As individual helplessnessincreases, as the "responsibility" of the bureaucracyenlarges, those in need often feel that the gap between publicdeclaration and performance must be the result of a conspiracy tofail. And for the rest of us, there is the credibility gap. Thenet result is a loss of confidence in society's institutions.Viewed from this perspective, youthful dissent, cynicism anddisobedience of the 1960's were not such surprising consequences. Still another significant feature of institutional life incontemporary America is the lag between purpose andimplementation. That is, some of our social institutions have notyet begun to deal with the consequences of the social andeconomic changes which have occurred over the last severaldecades. The best example, and the one most germane to the youth,is the educational system. Two generations ago, the labor forcecould assimilate the large majority of the nation's youth.Neither a high school nor a college education was prerequisite tooccupational choice or achievement. Increased educationalattainment was presumed to be limited to either the privileged orthe able and would be rewarded by certain careers. Today, however, the labor force grows more quickly than thesystem is able to assimilate it, and the educational system nowserves as custodian as well as teacher. Although we sincerelywish to achieve the democratic ideal of a highly educatedpopulace, we also keep our children in school as long as possiblebecause we have nothing else for them to do. The trend isstrikingly apparent even in the last 20 years. Percent enrolled in school Age 1950 1970 14-15 94.7 98.1 16-17 71.3 90.0 18-19 29.4 47.7 20-24 9.0 21.5 This custodial function confronts educators with a dilemma.Attrition is not in society's best interest; thus, single-mindeddevotion to the highest levels of achievement would bedysfunctional. In a sense, because the system no longer wants toturn away its subjects, the notion of failure has lost itsmeaning. As one of the Seminar participants observed: I think one of the problems is that there is no longer a penalty for failure. We-the educators-have had to lower standards in order to accommodate these people who need no longer fear failure. Of course this has been a cyclical thing, a wheel within a wheel. [If ] there is no longer a penalty for failure, then there is no longer the need to acquire. The changing function of education has been felt in both thesecondary schools and in our institutions of higher learning.Numerous high school graduates cannot read. Colleges and juniorcolleges have sprung up overnight to accommodate the population,but many provide classrooms with little specific purpose. Onlyslowly is the educational system beginning to come to grips withits role in a changed society. At the university level, manyeducators have been appalled at sacrifices which have ensued fromthe custodial feature; rote learning, they contend, hassupplanted citizen and character education. Uncertainty about the role of the educational system has notescaped the students, particularly at the college level. Many ofour youth, pressed into longer attendance, question its need ordesirability. The demand for "relevance" is but anotherreflection of the search for meaning, for an understandable rolein society. Drug use has perhaps provided an outlet for somemembers of this restless generation, uncertain of its place. The Limits of Rationality The social response to the individual's search for meaning hasfostered an ambivalence, an unwillingness to act, a paralysis. Inlarge measure, according to one Seminar member, this default ofauthority reveals the intensity of the search: In the same way we are getting universities that can't teach, families that can't socialize and police forces that can't catch criminals. In every case, the same issue is involved: the subject of authority questions the legitimacy of authority and the exerciser of it is unable to find-very often doesn't even try to find-a defense, because he feels in himself a sympathy, as do so many parents, with the challenge. To a significant extent, society is waiting, hoping that theimpulse for change will settle around certain fundamentalattributes of the American ethic. At the present time, however,no consensus about the nature of these fundamentals exists. Weare all looking for values that have deep roots, as we attempt tosort out the durable from the ephemeral. All of the participants at our Central Influences Seminaragreed that the unique feature of this search was its a rationalquality. As one observer put it: We have been discussing the question of how we change a society. I don't think it's changed by rational intention. As I understand societies, historically and our own, what really is required to change it is something on a deeper level that involves myth, ritual, sacrament-a number of these functions that have always been related to societies. On these you can't just suddenly make up your mind and then prescribe. Regarding our problem of authority, you cannot really ask the question: why can't these people hang onto their authority? They can't hang onto it because what gave them authority is something not of themselves, but part of the society, part of a ritual, a sacrament: a way of behaving in the group which gave them authority, [whether] professorial, parental or policy authority. In each one of these cases, what we see is not the diminishing of these men so much but rather the developing emptiness, the lack of the particular ethic that gave them authority to start with. This is why we are in a terrible dilemma. What is essentially lacking is a system of ethics, morality or religion that gives birth -to the myths, the rituals, the sacraments that are its expression. These touch human beings on the unconscious level. These are the ways we see the world. They are not our conscious thought, but the ways we form ourselves, form each other, love each other or hate each other-in terms not so much of rational intention as a deeper unconscious-conscious and unconscious-which is my definition of a myth; much more of a feeling level, a living level. That is what is not present now. What we need, below and above all of our deliberations, is the growth and development of an ethical system. We just do not have this now. As we move into the 1970's, our society is collectivelyengaged in the task -of determining what America means, and howeach individual should find fulfillment in `a changing age. Fromthis wider perspective of flux emerges an uncertainty about whatthe increased prevalence of marihuana use means for theindividual and the total society. Formulating Marihuana Policy Present symbolism, past implications, and future apprehensionsall combine to give marihuana many meanings. These diversenotions of what marihuana means constitute the marihuana problem.In this atmosphere, the policy-maker's position is precariousinsofar as no assumption is beyond dispute. Accordingly, theCommission has taken particular care to define the process bywhich a social policy decision should be reached. In studying the arguments of past and present observers tojustify a particular kind of marihuana policy, we conclude that amajor impediment to rational decision-making in this area isoversimplification. As suggested earlier, many ingredients areincluded in the marihuana mix-medical, legal, social,philosophical, and moral. Many observers have tended to isolateone element, highlight it and then extrapolate social policy fromthat one premise. In an area where law, science and morality areso intertwined, we must beware of the tendency toward suchselectivity. SCIENTIFIC OVERSIMPLIFICATION It is wrong to assume, as many have done, that a particularstatement of marihuana's effects compels a given social policy orlegal implementation. An accurate statement of the effects of thedrug is obviously an important consideration, but it isconclusive only if the effects are extreme one way or the other.For example, if the use of a particular drug immediately causesthe user to murder anyone in his presence, we have no doubt thata vigorous effort to eliminate use of that drug would be inorder. On the other hand, if the effects of the drug are purelybenign, presenting no danger whatsoever to the user or society,no reason would exist to suppress it. We know of no psychoactive substance, including marihuana,which falls at either of these extremes. Thus, it begs the issueto contend, as some have done, that because we don't know enoughabout the effects of heavy, chronic use, we should maintain thestatus quo. We know a lot about the adverse effects of alcoholismand heavy cigarette smoking, and yet no responsible observersuggests that we should adopt total prohibition for these drugs.Similarly, previous estimates of marihuana's role in causingcrime and insanity were based quite erroneous information; but toinfer from this that marihuana should be considered totallybenign and hence made freely available is also not logical. Bothapproaches are simplistic; both approaches fail to take intoaccount the social context in which the drug is used and thedynamic factors affecting the role that marihuana use may or maynot play in the future. A similar manifestation of scientific oversimplification isthe focus on causality. Many opponents of marihuana use feelcompelled to establish a causal connection between marihuana useand crime, psychosis, and the use of other drugs, while, theiradversaries focus the dispute on negating such relationships. TheCommission believes that this tendency misses the mark. The policy-maker's task is concerned primarily with theeffects of marihuana on human behavior. For both philosophicaland practical reasons, proof of causal relationships is next toimpossible. At the same time, however, the extent to whichmarihuana use is associated with certain behaviors and whetherany significant relationships exist can offer important clues. We must be cautious when dealing with such data. Yet we cannotafford to paralyze the decision-making process simply becauseabsolute "proof " is lacking. Spokesmen on both sidesof the marihuana debate should focus not on causation but insteadon the relevance of the association between various behavioraleffects and marihuana use. PHILOSOPHICAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Some partisans stoutly maintain that the state has no right tointerfere with essentially private conduct or that the state hasno right to protect the individual from his own folly. Some ofthe greatest minds of the Western world have struggled over suchphilosophical issue always with the same outcome: a recognitionof the need to draw a line between the individual and his socialsurroundings. That is, everything an individual does, in privateor not, potentially may affect others. The issue is really todetermine when the undesirable effect upon others is likelyenough or direct enough for society to take cognizance of it andto deal with it. Coupled with this is the further question ofwhether the nature of the behavior and its possible effect issuch that society should employ coercive measures. Advocates of liberalization of the marihuana laws commonlycontend either that the decision to use marihuana is a privatemoral decision or that any harm flowing from use of the drugaccrues only to the user. Defenders of the, present restrictionsinsist that society not only has the right but is obligated toprotect the existing social order and to compel an individual toabstain from a behavior which may impair his productivity.Unfortunately, the issue is not so simple and the line oftendrawn between the private conduct and behavior affecting thepublic health and welfare, is not conclusive or absolutelydefinable. For example, a, decision to possess a firearm, while privateis considered by many to be of public magnitude, requiringgovernmental control. A decision to engage in adulterous conduct,although generally implemented in private, may have publicconsequences if society believes strongly in the desirability ofthe existing family structure. Similarly, excessive alcoholconsumption, in addition to its adverse effects on individualhealth, may impair familial stability and economic productivity,matters with which the total society is concerned. So, while we agree with the basic philosophical precept thatsociety may interfere with individual conduct only in the publicinterest, using coercive measures only when less restrictivemeasures would not suffice this principle merely initiatesinquiry into a rational social policy but does not identify it.We must take a careful look at this complicated question of thesocial impact of private behavior. And we must recognize at theoutset the inherent difficulty in predicting effects on publichealth and welfare, and the strong conflicting notions of whatconstitutes the public interest. Again and again during the course of our hearings, we havebeen startled by the divergence of opinion within differentsegments of our population. Sometimes the disagreement is quitevehement, and relates to the underlying social concerns ofparticular groups. For example, we were told repeatedly byleaders of the urban black communities that they wanted to purgeall drug use from their midst, marihuana included, and that the"legalization" of marihuana would be viewed as part ofa design to keep the black man enslaved. On the other hand, we were informed repeatedly by the activiststudent element that the pre-sent social policy regardingmarihuana was merely a tool for suppression of political dissent,and until the law was changed, there could be no hope ofintegrating the dissident population into the mainstream ofAmerican society. Such statements reemphasize the degree to which marihuana isregarded as a symbol of a larger social concern. The conflicting notions of the public interest by differentsegments of the population reinforced in the Commission'sdeliberations the realization that we have been called upon torecommend public policy for all segments of the population, forall of the American people. The public good cannot be defined byone segment of the population, the old or the young, users ornon-users of marihuana, ethnic minorities or white majority. Atthe same time, the fears of each of these groups must be takeninto consideration in arriving at the basic social objectives ofthe Commission's public policy recommendation. Where such fearsare real, they must be confronted directly; where they areimagined, however, they must be put in perspective and,hopefully, laid to rest. SOCIOLOGICAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Public debate and decision-making in our society suffer fromthe glorification of statistical data. After a particular socialphenomenon, such as marihuana use, has been defined as a problem,armies of social scientific researchers set out to analyze anddescribe the problem. A sophisticated computer technologyinstantly translates millions of bits of data into correlations,probabilities and trends. The most striking findings are then fedto a data-hungry public. The result is data overload. Descriptive information about the nature and scope ofmarihuana use as a behavior is an essential component of thepolicy-maker's knowledge-base. However, such information does notin itself have social policy implications. The policy-maker mustdefine goals and evaluate means; only after he asks the rightquestions will statistical data suggest useful answers.Unfortunately, a tendency exists in the marihuana debate toassign prescriptive meanings to descriptive data without testingthe underlying assumptions. Further, the data have often beenaccumulating in a fragmented way. No overall plan was devisedbeforehand; the result has been an ad hoc use of available datatriggered by individual research interests rather than bylong-term policy needs. What does it mean that 24 million people have tried marihuana?Some have suggested that it means marihuana ought to belegalized. But does it mean the same thing if 15 million triedthe drug once and have decided not to use it again? And does itmean the same thing if popular interest in the drug turns out tobe a passing fancy, which wanes as suddenly as it waxed? On the other side of the controversy, what does it mean that asubstantial percentage of the public would favor increasedpenalties for marihuana use? The prescriptive implications of ademocratic impulse may be offset by a preference for individualfreedom of choice. Also, this segment of public opinion may havebeen influenced by incorrect information, such as unwarrantedbelief in marihuana's lethality or addiction potential. So,although the policy-maker must be aware of political realities,he must not allow his function to be supplanted by public opinionpolls. This is an area which requires both awareness of publicattitudes and willingness to assert leadership based on the bestinformation available. LEGAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION Perhaps the major impediment to rational decision-making isthe tendency to think only in terms of the legal system ingeneral and of the criminal justice system in particular. Thisthinking is certainly understandable, given the history ofmarihuana's involvement with the criminal law. Nonetheless, thelaw does not exist in a social vacuum, and legal alternatives canbe evaluated only with reference to the values and policies whichthey are designed to implement and the social context in whichthey are designed to operate. Legal fallacies are apparent on both sides of the marihuanacontroversy. Many of the persons opposed to marihuana use lookexclusively to the law for social control. This reliance on thelaw is stronger today because many of our fellow citizens areuneasy about the diminishing effectiveness of our otherinstitutions, particularly when the non-legal institutions havebeen relatively lax in controlling drug related behavior.Increasing reliance is placed upon the legal system to act notonly as policeman, but as father confessor, disciplinarian,educator, rehabilitator and standard-bearer of our moral code.Little or no thought is given to what impact this over-relianceon the law has on the viability of other social institutions, notto mention it's effect on the legal process. A society opposed to marihuana use need not implement thatpolicy through the criminal law. Non-legal institutions, such asthe church, the school and the family, have great potential formolding individual behavior. Accordingly, the policy-maker mustdelicately assess the capacity of the legal system to accomplishits task and must consider the mutual impact of legal andnon-legal institutions in achieving social objectives. We recognize the short-sightedness of an absolute assumptionthat the criminal law is the necessary tool for implementing asocial policy opposed to marihuana use. But equally short-sightedis the opposing contention which attempts to analyze the lawseparately from its underlying social policy objective. Thisargument assumes that if the law isn't working, or if the costsof enforcing the law outweigh its benefits, the law should,therefore, be repealed. If society feels strongly enough about the impropriety of acertain behavior, it may choose to utilize the criminal law eventhough the behavior is largely invisible and will be minimizedonly through effective operation of other agencies of socialcontrol. Laws against incest and child-beating are good examples.In weighing the costs and benefits of a particular law, one mustprovide a scale and a system of weights. The scale is thenormative classification of behavior, and the system of weightsis the largely subjective evaluation of the importance of thevalues breached by the behavior. This weighing process is what isopen to dispute. In sum, no law works alone. Where an unquestioned consensusexists about the undesirability of a particular behavior and allsocial institutions are allied in the effort to prevent it, as isthe case with murder and theft, the law can be said to"work" even though some murders and thefts may still becommitted. Where society is ambivalent about its attitude towardthe behavior and other institutions are not committed to itsdiscouragement, the law cannot be said to be working, even thoughmany people may not engage in the behavior because it is againstthe law. The question is whether the social policy, which the law isdesigned to, implement, is being achieved to a satisfactoryextent. To determine the role of law regarding marihuana, we mustfirst look to society's values and aspirations, and then definethe social policy objective. If we seek to discourage certainmarihuana-related behavior, we must carefully assess the role ofthe legal system in achieving that objective. The Report In this Chapter, we have tried to put the marihuana problem inperspective. In the remainder of this Report, we explore severalaspects of the phenomenon of marihuana use, its effects, itssocial impact and its social meaning, assessing their relativeimportance in the formulation of social policy. In Chapter II, we consider the effects of the drug on theindividual user, with particular attention to the size of theuser population for whom various effects are relevant. TheCommission emphasizes that this material is related onlyindirectly to its policy-making function. The social policyplanner is concerned not about the effects on the individual perse, but about the impact of any adverse effect on his behaviorand on the larger society and about the meaning of this behaviorin the larger social perspective. The material in Chapter IIserves primarily to educate and inform. In Chapter III, the Commission evaluates the various threatswhich marihuana use is perceived to present to the public safety,public health, and dominant social order. This Chapter isdesigned to assess the social impact of marihuana use, theinitial step in the policy making process. In Chapter IV, we consider what role marihuana use plays andwill play in the life of American society. This is the dynamicelement of marihuana use and is the most intangible of themarihuana realities, but is particularly important from apolicy-planning perspective. This consideration is the one mostoverlooked by contemporary observers and participants in themarihuana debate. Because social meaning is not a directly measurable entity, wemust examine the ways in which society responds to the behaviorand whether such responses, both formal and informal, are fluidor. static. After analyzing public opinion, law enforcementbehavior and the reactions of medical, educational, and othersegments of the population, we then discuss what marihuana usehas come to mean and is likely to mean in the future.Particularly important in this highly speculative endeavor is thewider cultural perspective which we described earlier in thisChapter. In Chapter V, we bring this information to bear on apolicy-making process. After establishing the philosophicalframework, we explore the spectrum of social policy options,choosing the one we judge most suitable to the present time. Thenwe consider the range of legal alternatives for implementing thischosen policy, and select the one we believe to be mostappropriate for achieving it. In an addendum to the Report, we present some ancillaryrecommendations. Some of these recommendations flow from ourbasic premise, others are a result of independent evaluation bythe Commission of other areas of concern. We ask the reader to set his preconceptions aside as we havetried to do, and discriminate with us between marihuana, thedrug, and marihuana, the problem. We hope that our conclusionswill be acceptable to the entire public, but barring that, wehope at the least that the areas of disagreement and theirimplications will be brought into sharper focus. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-28IA086-000614-B046-193http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncchap2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022141 text/html 104889HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:21:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:53:45 GMTContent-length: 104670 Marihuana Use and Its Effects Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana - A Signal of Misunderstanding. Chapter II marihuana use and its effects "Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be ourwishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passions, theycannot alter the state of facts and evidence." John Adams(1770) The ultimate objective of the Commission is to evaluate thetotal impact of actual and potential marihuana use oncontemporary American society. This endeavor involves threephases: first, an evaluation of the nature and scope ofcontemporary American marihuana use; second, a carefulreevaluation of the pharmacological effects of the drug on thehuman body with special emphasis on the drug's capacity to alteror modify behavior; and third, an evaluation of the impact ofmarihuana use on society. This chapter deals with the first andsecond phases, and Chapter Three deals with the third. The Marihuana User Cannabis has been used widely for many centuries innonindustrialized countries of Asia and Africa. Today, as inearlier years, use of drug is concentrated primarily among lowersocioeconomic groups. in these countries, the practice isestimated to be confined to a tenth of the lower socioeconomic,male population. Although such use of the drug iswell-established, it offers little direct comparison with theAmerican experience. Although the commercial, industrial and therapeutic value ofthe hemp plant was widely recognized and exploited in the UnitedStates from the earliest days of its history, knowledge and useof its intoxicating and psychoactive properties remained largelyunknown until about 1900. At that time, the custom of smoking marihuana was generallylimited to groups of Mexican itinerant workers in the borderstates of the Southwest. By 1910, marihuana use began to emergein other southern states and cities, particularly New Orleans,and in the port cities along the Mississippi River. In time,these cities became distribution centers for enterprisingsailors. From there, marihuana use spread cross-country to otherurban centers, mining camps, railroad construction sites, farmlabor camps, "bohemian" communities of artists and jazzmusicians, and various other groups outside the mainstream ofAmerican society. Recently, of course, use of the drug has spread to young,white, middle class groups and especially to high school andcollege populations. DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS On the basis of the Commission-sponsored National Survey, wehave concluded that contemporary marihuana use is pervasive,involving all segments of the U.S. population. The Surveyestimated that about 24 million Americans over the age of 11years (15% of the adults 18 and over, and 14% of the 12-17 yearolds) have used marihuana at least once, referred to in thisReport as ever-users. Until recently twice as many males asfemales had used it; the most up-to-date studies of high schoolstudents, college-age individuals, and young adults carried outby the Commission indicate that this sex differential appears tobe diminishing. In many youthful populations use is almostequally distributed between males and females. Marihuana use does not appear to vary significantly by race.With respect to the religious affiliation of the users, Jews andCatholics appear to be slightly overrepresented as compared toProtestants. Usage is highest in cities, towns, and suburbs but notuncommon in rural areas. States in the Northeast and West haveconsiderably higher rates of use than have the North Centralstates, which in turn have significantly higher rates than thosein the South. Use is found in all socioeconomic groups and occupations,though slightly more predominant among persons with above-averageincomes. A New York survey of the state's general populationindicated that ever-use as well as regular use is almost equallyprevalent among sales workers, clerical workers,skilled, semiskilled and unskilled workers, managers, owners,professionals and technical workers. At the same time, the incidence of use seems to vary accordingto educational attainment. Among all adults not now in school, 5%of those with an eighth grade education or less have used thedrug, contrasted with 11% of those who completed some highschool, 14% of those who graduated from high school, 25% of thosewho completed some college and 21 % of those who graduated fromcollege. Age is presently one of the most significant correlates ofmarihuana use. Among the total population, those who have triedor used marihuana at least once, termed ever-users, are heavilyconcentrated in the 16-25 age bracket. Of all the ever-users,about half are in this group. At the same time, however, weshould emphasize that use is by no means confined to teenagersand young adults. The proportion of individuals in different age groups who haveused marihuana is indicated in Figure 1. The incidence of use is greatest among young people: 27% ofthe 16-17 year olds, 40% of the 18-21 year olds, and 38% of the22-25 year olds have tried marihuana; at the low extremes, 6% ofthe 12-13 year olds and 6% of the over-50 generation have usedthe drug. Among those now in school, incidence also seems to rise withincreasing school level: Ever-users represent 44% of thosepersons now in college or graduate school; 30% of high schooljuniors and seniors; 17% of freshmen and sophomores; and 8% ofstudents in junior high school. At the same time, the use of the drug among adults is by nomeans confined to college students. Even among the 18-25 yearolds, 75% of the ever-users are not now in school. The initial patterns of contemporary marihuana use appear tobe shifting; there is a trend toward increased use among collegestudents as well as non-college students. Non-student users nowspan social class, income level and occupational classification.In addition, the proportion -of users increases during the teens,peaks during the young adult years and then falls off rapidly(Figure 1). Having described the incidence of any use of marihuana ever,and demographic characteristics of the 24 million Americans whohave tried the drug, we recognize the need to place thisinformation into perspective. The policymaker must also beconcerned with the patterns of use: frequency, amount consumed ateach smoking, and duration of use. PATTERNS OF USE The most striking of the use patterns revealed in the NationalSurvey is that 41 % of the adults and 45 % of the youth who haveever used marihuana reported that they no longer use the drug.Twenty-nine percent of the adults and 43% of the youth reportedthat they are still using marihuana (see Table 1). When asked whythey bad terminated use, the overwhelming majority of adults(61%) specified, among other reasons, that they had simply lostinterest in the drug. Table I.-EXPERIENCE WITH MARIHUANA Percent of ever-users Frequency Adults Youth Designation (18 and (12-17) over) Have used marihuana but no longer 4145 u se. lExperimenters. Once a month or less 9 15 2-3 times pet month 8 10 Intermittentusers. Once per week 4 9 @ Several times per week 5 4Moderate users. Once daily 1 1 1 More than once daily 2 4 Heavyusers. No answer 30 12 These data indicate that at least 41% of the adults and 45% ofthe youth have used marihuana but have -discontinued use; 9% ofthe adults and 15% of the youth use the drug sporadically, oncea, month or less. These persons can be characterized asexperimental marihuana users.* To ensure an understanding of this section of the Report, somedefinitions are required at this juncture. In this report, theCommission employs the following designations: Frequency of Use Experimental-At least one trial to once a monthor less. Intermittent-Two to 10 times monthly. Moderate-11 times monthly to once, daily. Heavy-Several times daily. Very Heavy-Almost constant intoxication withpotent preparations; brain rarely drug free. Duration of Use Short Term-Less than two years. Long Term-Two to 10 years. Very Long Term-Over 10 years. Twelve percent of the adults and 19% of the youth who haveever used marihuana can be designated intermittent users; theycontinue to use the drug more than once a month, but less thanseveral times a week, probably on weekends. Six percent of theadults and five percent of the youth are moderate users whocontinue to use marihuana several times a week to once daily. Finally, 2% of the adults and 4% of the youth who have everused marihuana are heavy users: they use the drug several timesdaily. A very small fraction of these heavy users may be veryheavy users, who are intoxicated most of their waking hours andprobably use very potent preparations of the drug. In addition to frequency, duration of use is an importantvariable in discussing use patterns and especially whenconsidering drug effects. Most users in this country have smokedthe drug over a short term, that is, less than two years. Othershave used the drug over a long term, two to 10 years. Very fewAmericans can be considered very long term users, that is, over10 years. Another important element of use is the amount of marihuanaused on each occasion. Most intermittent and moderate usersaverage about one-half to one cigarette per occasion, usually atnight. Most heavy users smoke at least one to two cigarettes anoccasion, with a few using as many as five consecutively. As this brief description of use patterns suggests, marihuanause and the marihuana user do not fall into simple, distinctclassifications. Although it is possible to sketch profiles ofvarious marihuana-using populations, no valid stereotype of amarihuana user or non-user can be drawn. The spectrum ofindividuals who use or have used marihuana varies according tofrequency, intensity and duration of use. It is meaningless totalk of "the marihuana user" or "marihuanause" without first clarifying descriptive data. *All respondents for the National Survey were asked tocomplete a self administered questionnaire. This instrumentcovered many sensitive areas, including a series of items onpersonal experience with marihuana and other drugs. Given thenature of the questions, the contractor took every precaution toinsure that the interviewee responded honestly and that hisresponses were kept strictly confidential. Even the interviewerwho orally administered the rest of the Survey was not permittedto view the written instrument. One of the inevitable costs of such confidentiality is therisk that a certain percentage of respondents would not completeone or more of the questions. Where a significant number ofquestions remained unanswered, the questionnaire was nottabulated at all. However, in 30%, of the otherwise completequestionnaires, the adult respondents who had ever used the drugdid not answer the question, "On the average, about howoften do you use marihuana at the present time?" Concerned about the meaning of this non-response rate, the,Commission directed the contractor to conduct a detailed analysiscomparing the non-respondents with all respondents and with thoseindividuals who had never used marihuana at all. On the basis ofthis analysis, we are confident that the overwhelming majority,if not all, of the non-respondents are experimenters. In the flrst place, the demographic characteristics of thenon-respondents coincide closely with those of the non-users andless frequent users. Very few of the young adults, where morefrequent use is concentrated, failed to respond. Secondly, the non-respondents are disproportionately locatedin the geographic regions where use was least prevalent and leastfrequent. For example, 50% of the ever-users in the North Centralregion failed to respond, compared to 71% in the West. Yet only5% of the ever-users in the North Central region continue to usethe drug more than once a week, compared to 21% in the West; andless than .5% of the ever-users in the North Central region usethe drug more than once a day, as compared to 4% in the West. PROFILES OF USERS Several studies by the Commission and many other recentcollege and high school surveys have elucidated a variety ofpersonality types or categories of marihuana users. Theseprofiles relate primarily to the patterns depicted above and tothe meaning of marihuana use for various individuals. Essentiallywe will describe a continuum with much overlapping among thecategories. The reader should understand that groupidentification is at best a hazardous occupation; the traitsdescribed are not exclusive to marihuana users. A much largernumber of individuals who have not used the drug can be similarlydescribed. Experimental Users The first and by far the largest group has been designated as"experimenters" because of their extremely infrequentor non-persistent marihuana usage. Experimentation with the drugis motivated primarily by curiosity and a desire to share asocial experience. These experimenters are characteristicallyquite conventional and practically indistinguishable from thenon-user in terms of life style, activities, social integration,and vocational or academic performance. Disciplined, optimistic, and self-confident, experimentersappear to be as conventional, responsible, goal-oriented andorderly as non-users. Intermittent Users The intermittent users are motivated to use marihuana forreasons similar to those of the experimenters. They use the drugirregularly and infrequently but generally continue to do sobecause of its socializing and recreational aspects. For theintermittent user, marihuana often contributes to theestablishment and solidification of close social relations amongusers similarly inclined. The individual has a sense of belongingto an intimate group. Investigations of behavioral aspects of marihuana smokingclearly demonstrate that marihuana smoking is a social activity,believed by intermittent users to enhance the enjoyment of sharedactivities, especially music, art, films and food. In a Commission-sponsored study to determine the effects ofrepeat doses of marihuana, under free access conditions, thesubjects smoked almost exclusively in groups. A certain number ofthese individuals tended to share much of their leisure time incommon activities, and marihuana, smoking was the focal activityaround which other types of social interactions revolved, such asconversation, watching TV, listening to music and playing games.The intermittent users studied exhibited an increased sense ofwell-being, relaxation, and friendliness during these activities.They were more inclined to seek and emphasize the social ratherthan personal effects of the drug. Intermittent marihuana users, like the experimenters, aregenerally conventional in most respects. They are more liberalpolitically and socially and they tend to stress education forpersonal improvement rather than for recognition or high grades.Like many non-users, these individuals are likely to beself-expressive, intellectually and culturally oriented,creative, and flexible. Placing a high value on experimentationand responsible, independent decision-making, they often manifesta desire to search for new experiences, resulting in somebehaviors which depart from the norms of the larger society.Often accompanying their search is a sense of uncertainty aboutthe future. Moderate and Heavy Users The final groups of marihuana users are the moderate and heavyusers. This range is wide and includes individuals who usemarihuana more than 10 times a month to several times a day.Practically all of the American research effort to date hasfocused on the large majority of individuals who use less often,that is, the experimental and intermittent users. Consequently,not enough is known about characteristics and behavior of themoderate and the heavy users, so it is difficult to distinguishaccurately between the two groups. We suspect however that themoderate users share traits with both the intermittent and theheavy users. Having already discussed the intermittent group, wewill now turn to the characteristics of the heavy group. Heavy users seem to need the drug experience more often. Theirinitial and continued marihuana use is motivated not only bycuriosity and an urge to share a social experience but also by adesire for "kicks," "expansion of awareness andunderstanding," and relief of anxiety or boredom. Generally, the heavy marihuana user's life style, activities,values and attitudes are unconventional and at variance withthose of the, larger society. These individuals are morepessimistic, insecure, irresponsible, and nonconforming. Theyfind routine especially distasteful. Their behavior and mood arerestless and uneven. Heavy users place particularly strong emphasis on impulsiveresponse in the interest of pleasure-seeking, immediategratification, and individual expression. They tend to evidencesocial and emotional immaturity, are especially indifferent torules and conventions, and are often resistant to authority.However, several surveys have also revealed that they tend to becurious, socially perceptive, skillful and sensitive to the needsof others, and possess broadly based, although unconventional,interests. The Boston free-access study permitted the Commission toobserve a group of individuals whose life styles, activities,values and attitudes are representative of a segment of theunconventional youthful subculture. The month-long period ofcontrolled study during the fall prevented the participation ofindividuals who were married, steadily employed, or enrolled inschool. Individuals who smoked marihuana once a week or less weresought by the researchers but were exceedingly unusual among thepopulation available for the study. Consequently, the groupstudies contrasted with the student and full-time workingpopulations in which weekly marihuana use is more common. Forthis reason, the intermittent users studied appeared to besimilar to, rather than different from, the moderate and heavyusers studied. Both groups had used marihuana for an average offive years. Under the study's confined conditions, participants tended tosmoke more marihuana than they did "on the outside."The intermittent users, who by our definition averaged eighttimes a month under outside conditions, averaged three cigarettesa day during the study. The range was from one-half to sixcigarettes daily. The moderate and heavy users, who "on the outside"averaged 33 times a month, now averaged six-and-a-half cigarettesa day. The range was three-and-a-half to eight cigarettes. Indiscussing the Boston study, we will call this group"daily" users. Smoking usually occurred at night, sometimes during theafternoon and only occasionally upon awakening. The intermittentand heavy users usually smoked one cigarette a session. The dailyusers were more likely to smoke more than one a session. A fewindividuals in the daily group could have been consideredconstantly intoxicated on a few occasions during the 21 -dayperiod. The mean age of the subjects studied was 23. Based on IQtesting, they were superior intellectually, although they hadcompleted, on the average, only two-and-a-half years of college.Their job histories were rather erratic, characteristic of apattern of itinerant living. The intermittent users -were from amiddle or upper class background, while the daily users generallyshared a lower socioeconomic status. Broken homes and instancesof alcohol or drug abuse were more common in the familybackgrounds of the daily users. Alcohol was rarely used by the subjects. Use of hallucinogensand amphetamines was significantly more widespread and had begunearlier in the daily user group. In contrast to the intermittentgroup, the daily users almost uniformly reported that marihuanasmoking produced relaxation, noting also increasedalteration in perception or psychedelic-like effects.Similarly, they reported an increased sense of well-being,friendliness, carefreeness and decreased hostility. Additionally,the daily users appeared to demonstrate a moderate psychologicaldependence on the marihuana experience while theintermittent users demonstrated little or no psychologicaldependence. Analysis of social-behavioral aspects of daily users'marihuana smoking clearly demonstrated that it is a pivotalsocial activity around which conversation, other personalinteractions, and much of the users' lives revolve. Smokingalmost exclusively occurred in groups and was the focal activityaround which these groups formed. The daily users exhibited areadiness to take part in but not to initiate a smoking session. In contrast to the intermittent users, all the daily users ina group smoked when marihuana was made available. Marihuanasmoking appeared to be a primary means of reinforcing groupsolidarity. Yet these users were more inclined to seek thepersonal effects of the drug rather than the socializing effectssought by the intermittent users. The social adjustment of the daily users, when judged from atraditional psychiatric standpoint, was impaired. Individualstended to be more withdrawn and to interact less with each otherthan the intermittent users, regardless of the type of activityor state of intoxication. However, the daily users did appear toaccommodate themselves better than the intermittent users to theeffects of the intoxication on social interaction. Despite a relatively high level of scholastic attainment andsuperior intelligence, many of the subjects were performing wellbelow their intellectual capability, usually working at menial,mechanical or artisan tasks. They were not oriented towardachieving the traditional goals of the larger society. Nonetheless, during the period of the Boston study, thesubjects could not be characterized as displaying a generallassitude and indifference, carelessness in personal hygiene orlack of productive activity, all supposed to be characteristic ofvery heavy use. Even during the periods of heaviest marihuanasmoking, they maintained a high level of interest andparticipation in a variety of personal activities, such aswriting, reading, keeping up on current world events, andparticipating in athletic and aesthetic endeavors. Additionally, all of the subjects maintained a desire tocomplete all aspects of the research study. Although they couldbe labeled 'underachievers" in terms of the traditionalstandards of the larger society, these individuals were motivatedto pursue actively the interests and activities of their own subculture. Generally, most studies which have been undertaken indicatethat individuals who are heavy marihuana users cannot find aplace for themselves in conventional society. Their heavymarihuana use may reflect and perhaps perpetuate theirunconventionality while providing social acceptance in one of thenon-conventional subcultures. Very Heavy Users The Commission's analysis of frequency, quantity and durationof marihuana use suggest that the United States is at the presenttime in a fortunate position. All of the studies available to theCommission have indicated that only a minute number of Americanscan be designated as very heavy marihuana users. These studiesuniformly indicate that chronic, constant intoxication with verypotent cannabis preparations is exceedingly rare in this country. The Commission believes that important distinctions must bemade between the daily (moderate and heavy) American marihuanauser and the very heavy hashish or charas user in other parts ofthe world where cannabis is widely cultivated and its use deeplyingrained. Many of the North African and Asian users do notemploy the drug only as an intoxicant in the western sense.Instead, it is frequently used in "folk medicalpractice," in religious rites and as a work adjunctparticularly in those occupations which are physically demanding,monotonous, unintellectual, and offer little possibility ofadvancement. In these countries, very heavy use is typically associatedwith young males from a lower socioeconomic background.Nonetheless, use is more widespread among all ages and elderlychronic users are not uncommon. Generally, these very heavy users consume high amounts of verypotent preparations continually throughout the day so that theyare rarely drug-free. These individuals evidence strongpsychological dependence on the drug, requiring compulsivedrug-taking. Clear-cut behavioral changes occur in these extremecases. The very heavy User tends to lose interest in allactivities other than drug use. A common element of thebehavioral pattern is lethargy and social deterioration. Notsurprisingly, these users have been held in low esteem and veryheavy use has been subject to societal disapproval in almost allcountries. BECOMING A MARIHUANA USER Our attempt to classify marihuana users is primarily fordescriptive purposes. It does not imply that all individuals whoresemble any of the categories are necessarily marihuana users.Nor is it implied that all marihuana users fit neatly orprecisely into these slots. There is no "typical"marihuana user, just as their is no typical American. The mostnotable statement that can be made about the vast majority ofmarihuana users-experimenters and intermittent users-is that theyare essentially indistinguishable from their non-marihuana usingpeers by any fundamental criterion other than their marihuanause. But if most users and non-users of marihuana essentially areindistinguishable, why have some people chosen to use the drugand others not, and why have some people continued to use it andothers not? An important part of the explanation is that use ofmarihuana, like all human behavior, occurs within specific socialand cultural settings. The individual's biologicalcharacteristics and personality probably play an important rolein determining the pattern his use will take. However, thecultural and social setting play a larger role in determiningwhether be will use it at all. Numerous studies have demonstrated that the young person whochooses to use marihuana differs in some important sociologicalrespects from his peer who does not choose to do so. Thesedifferences relate to his willingness to experiment with a drug,especially a forbidden one. in short, the process of becoming amarihuana user is not a " seduction of the, innocent"as is often portrayed. Based on interrelated familial, social andcultural factors, persons, especially young persons, who maychoose to use marihuana can be predicted statistically. Parental Influence The decision to use marihuana is related to parental lifestyle. Parents provide the most important example of acceptabledrug-taking behavior for their children. That marihuana usersfrequently have medicine-taking, cigarette-smoking, orliquor-drinking parents has been demonstrated. In a series ofCanadian studies, grade and high school students who said theirmothers took tranquilizers daily were three times more likely totry marihuana than the students who did not so report. Beyond the influence of a drug-taking example, parents havethe primary influence on their childrens' acquisition of skills,values and attitudes necessary to be mature and responsibleadults. Many parents have oriented their children toward becomingindependent, competent, educated, and adaptive adults. Simultaneously, many young people observe in their parents'lives the trend toward shorter work periods, earlier retirementand increased emphasis on leisure time activities. It appearsthat the incidence of adolescent marihuana use is stronglycorrelated with this trend toward increased leisure time. Situational Factors and BehavioralCorrelates All studies of the ever user, including theCommission-sponsored National Survey, have established thatmarihuana smoking is significantly correlated with a number ofdemographic variables. Males, college students, and residents ofmetropolitan areas, especially in the Northeast and West, aregenerally overrepresented in proportion to their percentage ofthe total population. Among the behaviors statistically correlated with marihuana,use are radical politics, visits to psychiatrists, sexualfreedom, and separate residences from parents. The mostsignificant behavior seems to be use of legal drugs, especiallyalcohol and tobacco. Young people who choose to experiment withmarihuana are fundamentally the same people, socially andpsychologically, as those who use alcohol and tobacco. Forexample, in a study of high school youngsters, only 3% of all thenonsmokers in the sample had ever tried marihuana, compared with50% of all the current cigarette smokers. Similarly, for alcoholdrinking outside the family setting, only 2% of all thenondrinkers had tried marihuana, as compared to 27% of thedrinkers. The National Survey tends to confirm the closeassociation between marihuana use and cigarette smoking andalcohol use. Among all the adults sampled in the Survey, 71% hadsmoked cigarettes and 39% are current smokers. Similarly, ofadult non-marihuana users, 70% have smoked cigarettes and 38% arecurrent smokers. These percentages increase somewhat formarihuana users: 87 have smoked cigarettes and 54% are currentcigarette smokers. In regard to alcohol consumption, 40% of all the adultssampled indicated that they had not consumed beer or bard liquorin the 30 days prior to the survey. Marihuana users tended tohave consumed alcohol more often than non-marihuana users (Table,2). Table 2.-LIQUOR CONSUMPTION DURING 30-DAYPERIOD 1-4 5-10 11 or No 0 days days days moreanswer days Percent of nonmarihuana users. . 4519 6 7 21 Percent of marihuana users...... 2630 12 8 24 Social Group Factors One of the most influential factors in determining behavior incontemporary America among adolescents and young adults is peergroup influence. Knowing other people who use marihuanapredisposes the individual to use marihuana, and havingmarihuana-using friends provides the social opportunity for thecurious. Ile individual who is already part of a, social groupwhich uses marihuana indicates by this choice that his attitudesand values are already to some degree compatible with illicitdrug use. Social peer groups are especially influential upon individualswho have not yet become "successful" adults, such asadolescents, college students and young adults, who spend a greatdeal of time and effort competing for status in situations wherestatus opportunities are minimal. The social peer group providesan opportunity for achieving status among equals by demonstratingcompetence and autonomy. Outstanding performance in athletics,organizations or academics demonstrates competence but notautonomy because these activities are adult-oriented andcontrolled. Additionally, only a relative few are able to excel. Opportunity to prove oneself is more readily available in thepeer group. Often, adolescents participate in forms of delinquentbehavior, termed symbolic infractions, in order to demonstrateautonomy and competence to their peers. These include joy-riding,vandalism, sexual promiscuity, underage drinking, violation ofrules of decorum and dress, and purposeless confrontation withauthority. Marihuana use has recently been added to the list ofinfractions and offers several advantages for adolescents andyoung adults. Most important, it provides a shared groupexperience which offers the, shy, lonely, socially awkwardneophyte a means of entrance to the group, complete with its ownceremonial initiation. Repetition of the behavior serves toincrease closeness and commitment to the group. Usually theexperience is pleasurable and the individual is able to controlhis level of intoxication. This delinquency is viewed asrelatively harmless to oneself and others, although its symbolicimpact on parents and authority is often greater than that ofother common infractions. Therefore, a, subtle process of acquiring attitudes favorableto drug use, of having friends and acquaintances who define themarihuana experience in acceptable and pleasurable terms, and ofhaving a social belief system which prepares one to accept theconversion process to begin with, are all powerful complementaryfactors which direct a young person toward marihuana use. At thispoint, the use of marihuana provides further opportunities foracquiring new marihuana using friends and entering the socialmilieu of marihuana, users. The Dynamics of Persistent Use The cultural and social factors sketched above, in combinationwith the individual's somatic and psychic characteristics,determine the pattern of his drug behavior once he has chosen toexperiment with it. The majority of individuals who reach thispoint progress no further and often discontinue marihuana use.The most common explanation for discontinuing use is loss ofinterest; the effect lost its novelty and became boring. Otherless common reasons are fear of legal hazards, social pressure,and concerns over physical and mental drug effects. Among theinfrequently noted reasons are: interference with otheractivities; replacement by alcohol; unavailability; cost;unpleasant experiences; fear of moral transgression; orprogression to other forms of non-drug interests such as yoga,transcendental meditation, agrarian communes, esoteric religionand restrictive diets. For those who continue use, psychosocial factors are importantdeterminants of the use patterns. Many marihuana users arestrongly committed to traditional society in which they desire torise socially. They have chosen to participate fully in thetraditional adult-oriented activities and the formalachievement-reward system. Their peer groups consist primarily ofsimilarly oriented individuals. The infrequent use of marihuanaby these persons is a social activity for fun and satisfiescuriosity. Those individuals who continue to use marihuana morefrequently appear to be different types of people and orientedtoward a different part of the social system. Most of themmaintain stable career orientations and continue to functionwithin the broader society. But they feel more burdened by thetraditional system of social controls and more removed fromcontemporary society's institutions. These individuals tend toturn away from more traditional adult-oriented reward systems andintensify their peer-group orientation. Their interests andactivities emphasize an informal "in-crowd,"out-of-school or work orientation. The meaning of marihuana useby this peer group emphasizes the ideological character of usage.In contrast to the infrequent type of user, these individualsseem to build their self-identity around the marihuana-using peergroup. BECOMING A MULTIDRUG USER The more one smokes marihuana, the more involved hisinterpersonal relationships are likely to become with his peerswho share the experience with him. As he spends more time withthis group, he begins to sever his contacts with conventionalindividuals and conventional routines. He may eventually viewhimself as a drug user and be willing to experiment with otherdrugs which are approved by his peer group. Only ;a small portionof the marihuana users who reach this stage are likely to becomepersistent, frequent users of these other drugs. The majorityappear to experiment only. Epidemiologic Studies The Commission's studies have confirmed the associationbetween marihuana usage and the consumption of other drugs forcuriosity and pleasure. This association holds for all drugs,including over-thecounter and prescription pain relievers,tension relievers, sleeping pills, and stimulants as well ashashish, methamphetamines, cocaine, LSD and mescaline, andheroin. The National Survey showed that current marihuana usersare about twice as likely to have used any illicit drugs than arethose who have ceased using marihuana (Table 3). Table 3.-ILLICIT DRUG USE BYADULTS Have used Currently but no using Substance Never used marihuana longer usemarihuana marihuana (percent) (percent) Hashish Less than 0.5 percent 28 63 LSD or mescaline Less than 0.5 percent 11 28 Methamphetamine Less than 0.5 percent 10 23 Cocaine Less than 0.5 percent 4 10 Heroin Less than 0.5 percent 1 4 The Commission additionally has contracted a study of 105selected, middle class, young, working adults from California,who are marihuana smokers. Of this sample, 11% were dailymarihuana users and 47% used it several times a week; 33% used itseveral times a month; 6% used it once to several times a year;and 3% had used it but were not currently using marihuana. Thestudy indicates that while most of the subjects were frequentmarihuana users, the incidence of other drug use was relativelylow (Table 4). Table 4.-FREQUENCY OF OTHER DRUG USE BYMARIHUANA USERS Percent who use marihuana Percent Substance who Once to SeveralSeveral never several times timesDaily used times a month aweek marihuana a year Hashish 42 31 21 5 0 LSD 96 4 0 0 0 Mescaline 79 19 0 0 2 Psilocybin 96 4 0 0 0 STP, DMT 100 0 0 0 0 Heroin 98 2 0 0 0 Codeine 87 11 0 0 2 Amphetamines 89 7 0 4 0 Barbiturates 86 10 4 0 0 Cocaine 75 19 2 4 0 Glue 100 0 0 0 0 With the exception of marihuana and hashish, no drug was usedby more than 25% of this population and this use was almostexclusively experimental. Interestingly, the more exotic drugs,mescaline and cocaine were more frequently used (21% and 25% ofthis sample respectively) than the common dangerous drugs: LSD(4%), heroin (2%), codeine (11%), barbiturates (14%), andamphetamines (11%). Among high school students, marihuana, is normally the, firstillicit drug used, although several recent studies have suggestedthat a significant number of students initiate illicit use, withother drugs. Of the marihuana users, a majority have used noother illicit drug, and they tend to be experimental orintermittent users of marihuana. The more frequently the adolescent uses marihuana, the morelikely he is to experiment with other drugs. For example, in onerecent study of San Diego high school students of predominantlywhite middle socioeconomic background, 80% of the students whoused marihuana weekly or more often had used other drugs, and 50%of this group had used LSD. In contrast, 33% of the less thanweekly users bad used other drugs. Profiles and Dynamics The personality profile of the heavy marihuana user discussedearlier includes elements propelling him toward heavy involvementin the multiple-drug-using-subculture. Heavy drug use by theseindividuals may reflect and aggravate a total alienation anddisaffiliation from American society and its institutions. Thisgroup hopes to find in drug use more than simple, fun or relieffrom boredom. The heavy use of drugs represents a shift into thedrug subculture and an adoption of a totally new life style. Someobservers feel that this shift provides a new identity whichallows the individual to counteract his apathy and search formeaning in a society he views as unloving, lonely, andmeaningless. He seeks to become involved with what he describesas the exciting, relevant, "real" experience of life.Additionally, he believes drug use provides new feelings andawareness needed to overcome barriers between himself, others,and the natural world. The drug culture as a community also helps to meet the needsof the individual. It provides a ready supply of drugs, unitescommon experiences and secrets that enhance the drug experience,and protects the individual against undesired experiences andagainst "the outside world." Most important, theculture instills self-confidence by reassuring the individualthat he has been wise in choosing this new identity. Frequently, these are individuals who express feelings ofloneliness, isolation and over-protection from their home andfamily. One frequent pattern involves an intimate, dominatingmother and a distant, unemotional father. In some cases, thedrug-use ritual and the, sense of community closeness offered bythe drug subculture appear to satisfy certain personal needs.Additionally, joining the subculture provides a release fromsheltered life, a test of competence, an opportunity toparticipate, and a chance to express anger. When the anger isturned inward instead of directed at society and family, drug usebecomes a form of passive, self-destructiveness. Sociocultural Factors After the individual views himself as a drug user and hasbecome immersed in the drug-using subculture, the drugs hechooses to experiment with and his pattern of use are determinedprimarily by non-drug factors well beyond the simple propertiesof the psychoactive chemical. These factors are predominantlysocioeconomic and sociocultural, although psychic and somaticfactors also play a role in determining who will continue and howintensively. The availability of a distribution system which stocks theother drugs is essential. Most often, contact with thisdistribution system is increased by having friends oracquaintances who use or sell other drugs. However, much of themarihuana selling takes place, at the customer level betweenfriends, and involves little profit and relatively smallquantities of the drug. The marihuana user who only buys haslittle contact with the professional multidrug dealing system.However, the user-buyer-seller of marihuana is more involved withthe multidrug system, uses more himself and has more friends whouse and sell other drugs. This factor of being a seller ratherthan only a buyer-user is influential in determining the degreeof an individual's involvement with and commitment to the use ofother drugs. Marihuana use does not itself determine which drugs theheavily involved user will choose to use. Generally, theselection of other drugs is influenced by the social group. Forexample, blacks and whites have roughly equal rates of trying andusing marihuana, but their choice of other drugs and the stylesof drug use are quite different and distinctive, due to theirfrequently different sociocultural backgrounds. Additionally, onerecent study of white high school and college students revealeddifferent patterns of further drug use among males and females.Men and women used marihuana in equal numbers, but the men whoused other drugs tended to use hallucinogens while the womentended to use amphetamines. An extensive survey of drug use among 3,500 liberal artsundergraduates attending 14 campuses in the New York areademonstrated the racial character of drug use among thispopulation (Table 5). Table 5.-RACIAL CHARACTER OF DRUG USE Meth- Amphet- Hallu- Percentage tried drugs Heroin Cocaineamphet- amine cinogens mine Blacks................ 9 16 59 13 Whites................ 4 7 1119 21 According to recent studies, heroin usage is not common amongwhite marihuana users. Heroin is most strongly linked tomarihuana use in black and Spanish-speaking ghettos where manyfeel they have little chance of personal advancement andself-fulfillment. In such communities, a segment of thepopulation constructs new illegitimate but accessible avenues forsocial coping. For some this involves the hustle (non-violentstealing) and the excitement of obtaining and using heroin andcocaine. They regard marihuana as a "cool" drug and useit for its social and calming effects. In contrast, studies have demonstrated that the psychedelicsare more often used by the white, middle to upper middle class,collegeeducated populations. The typical use of these drugs inhigh school college and working populations is episodic andexperimental, and is usually discontinued rather rapidly incontrast with marihuana use, which for many persons is of longduration. In many instances, psychedelic drug use begins almostsimultaneously with marihuana. For a few, drug use becomes an ideologic focus, reflectingdisillusionment with society and rejection of the"establishment." These and other motives, includingmere pleasure-seeking, lead to continued use of LSD and otherhallucinogens. Marihuana is viewed as a dilute LSD and is oftenused to enhance or prolong the effects of that drug. Sometimes itis encountered after first LSD use. Methamphetamine, or "speed," use is morecharacteristic of those lower socioeconomic white, youth who arenot school or work oriented. Living for the moment is thecharacteristic attitude of the speed scene. The speed user viewsmarihuana as he does alcohol and uses it for fun or for itscalming effects. For these three groups of illicit drug users, marihuana usehas different meanings and is secondary in importance to the useof the other drugs. Whether or not marihuana leads to other druguse depends on the individual, on the social and cultural settingin which the drug use takes places, and on the nature of the drugmarket. Its use, however, is neither inevitable nor necessary. The Effects of Marihuana on the User The previous section has attempted to paint a broad picture ofthe marihuana user. This section will deal with the, drug and itseffects on these individuals. The meaning of drug often varies with the context in which itis used. The physician would define a drug as any substance usedas a medicine in the treatment of physical or mental disease.Today, due to the influence of many factors, the layman may focuson the negative connotations of drugs, such as the stupefying,poisoning, habit-forming misuse of the opiate drugs. Theconsiderably wider and more scientific definition of a drug whichwill be used in this section is: any chemical substance which hasan action on living tissues. A psychoactive drug is any substance capableof modifying mental performance and individual behavior byinducing functional or pathological changes in the centralnervous system. As defined, psychoactive drugs exert their major effect on thestate of the mind including emotions, feelings, sensibility,consciousness and thinking. The definition implies neitherpositive nor negative meanings. Chemical substances are notinherently good or bad. All substances, including medicines andfoods, which man has chosen to consume have certain desiredeffects (whether therapeutically beneficial or pleasurable) andundesired effects (whether detrimental or unpleasant). Forexample, eating food is certainly a necessary and pleasurableactivity. However, obesity plays an important role in manydiseases, including diabetes, high blood pressure and heartattacks, and tends to limit physical activities. The classification of any drug effect as either beneficial orharmful often greatly depends on the values the classifier placeson the expected effects. This is especially relevant with respectto the psychoactive drugs such as tranquilizers, stimulants,coffee, cigarettes, alcohol, marihuana and other licit or illicitdrugs. For all of these drugs, the weights of benefit and harmare difficult to determine when viewed merely in terms of theirstated effects. BOTANY AND CHEMISTRY Marihuana refers to a preparation derived from a plant,cannabis sativa L. The preparation contains varying quantities ofthe flowers and their resinous secretions, leaves, small stemsand seeds. These plant parts contain many chemical substances.The chemical substance which produces the major drug effects istetrahydrocannabinol (THC). According to current information, theamount of THC present determines the potency of the preparation.Hereinafter, any reference to drug content or drug effect ofmarihuana will, for all practical purposes, mean that oftetrahydrocannabinol. The drug content of the plant parts is variable, generallydecreasing in the following sequence: resin, flowers, leaves.Practically no drug is found in the stems, roots or seeds. Thepotency and resulting drug effect of marihuana fluctuates,depending on the relative proportions of these plant parts in themarihuana mixture. Most marihuana available in this country comes from Mexico andhas a THC content of less than 1%. Marihuana of American originoften contains less than two-tenths of 1% THC. Marihuanaoriginating in Jamaica and Southeast Asia often has a 2% to 4%THC content. Marihuana is the least potent preparation of the plant.Jamaican ganja, containing primarily the flower tops and thesmall leaves or bracts, has a THC content of about 4% to 8%depending on the mixture. Indian ganja is less potent. The mostpotent preparation is hashish (charas) which is composed of onlythe drug-rich resinous secretions of the flowers. Generally, theTHC content of hashish is 5 % to 12 %. FACTORS INFLUENCING DRUG EFFECT A number of variable factors exert an important influence onthe psychopharmacologic effects of marihuana in man, as is truefor all drugs. Failure to take these factors into considerationprobably accounts for a large part of the inconsistency andcontroversy surrounding the description of the drug effect. Dosage The dosage or quantity of the drug (tetrahydrocannabinol)consumed is the most important variable. As with most drugs, thelarger the dose taken, the greater the physical and mental effectwill be and the longer the effect will last. The effect of a highdose of marihuana on an individual would be quite different fromthe effect of a low, usual "social" dose. Method of Use The method of use has a bearing upon the drug effect. Themethod is directly related to both dosage and time lapse beforethe drug effect is felt. Injection directly into a vein deliversthe total dose immediately, producing a rapid, maximal responseof minimal duration. Smoking and inhalation cause rapid but lessefficient delivery of the dose; variable quantity of the drug isdestroyed during burning or escapes into the air and does notreach the lungs. Oral ingestion produces different effects,according to the system in which the drug is dispersed.Generally, oral ingestion diminishes the drug effect, butprolongs it. Metabolism Another factor which influences the effect of the drug ismetabolism. During the metabolic process, the body cells,principally in the liver and lungs, chemically alter drugsubstances, changing their activity and providing for theirelimination from the body. Increasing evidence indicates thatmarihuana is first changed by the body in a way that activates orenhances the drug effect and is subsequently altered in a waythat inactivates the drug prior to its removal from the body. The rate and direction of these metabolic steps cansignificantly influence the effect of marihuana. For instance,individuals with extensive exposure to marihuana or other drugsmetabolize more rapidly, and perhaps differently, from thoseindividuals with no drug exposure. Set and Setting An important variable in discussing the effect of marihuana onthe user is the social and emotional environment; that is, theindividual's "set" and "setting." "Set" refers to a combination of factors that createthe "internal environment" of the individual, includingpersonality, life style, and philosophy, past drug experiences,personal expectations of drug effect, and mood at the time of thedrug experience. "Setting" refers to the external environment andsocial context in which the individual takes the drug. Thesefactors are most influential when drugs are taken at low dosagesand, like marihuana, produce minimal physical and subtlesubjective mental effects. The effect of marihuana generally willbe quite different for an intermittent social adult smoker fromthat of a youth deeply involved in the youthful drug subculture.These factors partially account for the belief of a marihuanauser that he is experiencing a "high" in certainexperiments even when he is given a non-marihuana substance(placebo) but is told it is marihuana. Tolerance Another important factor that determines the immediate effectof any drug is tolerance. Tolerance has two differentconnotations. The first, initial tolerance, is a measure of theamount of a drug which a subject must receive on first exposureto produce a designated degree of effect. A variety of innate andenvironmental factors contributes to initial tolerance amongindividuals. Different individuals require varying amounts of thedrug to attain the same physical and mental effect. The second connotation, which shall be referred to when we usethe word tolerance, is that of an acquired change in tolerance.That is, within the same individual, as a result of repeatedexposure to the drug, the same dose of the drug may produce adiminishing effect so that an increased amount of the drug isrequired to produce the same specified degree of effect. Tolerance develops at differential rates to given effects ofthe same drug. If tolerance has developed to one specific effect,it has not necessarily developed to other specific effects. By definition, the development of tolerance is neitherbeneficial nor detrimental. If tolerance develops rapidly to thedesired mental effect of a "high" but slowly to thebehavioral or physical effects, rapid increase in dose would benecessary in order to have the desired effect, and progressivebehavioral and physical disruption would be seen. This is thepattern for amphetamines. However, if tolerance develops slowly or not at all to thedesired mental effects but more rapidly to the behaviorally orphysically disruptive effects, no dosage increase or only aslight one would be necessary and the unpleasant and undesiredeffects would progressively diminish. With regard to marihuana, present indications are thattolerance does develop to the behaviorally and physicallydisruptive effects, in both animals and man, especially at highfrequent doses for prolonged time periods. Studies in foreigncountries indicate that very heavy prolonged use of very largequantities of hashish leads to the development of tolerance tothe mental effects, requiring an increase in intake to reach theoriginal level of satisfaction. However, for the intermittent usepattern and even the moderate use pattern, little evidence existsto indicate the development of tolerance to the desired"high," although the high may persist for a shortertime period. During the Boston free-access study, no change wasapparent in the level of the high produced by a relatively largedose of the drug over a 21-day period of moderate to heavysmoking. The fact that some individuals smoke more of the drug thanothers may merely reflect a desire for a different level of"high." There is a tendency to develop a tolerance tothe physical effects and behaviorally disruptive effects,especially the depressant effects, in heavy daily users. Thedevelopment of such behavioral tolerance of this nature mayexplain the fact that experienced marihuana smokers describe alower occurrence rate of undesirable drug effects. Thedevelopment of tolerance may also explain why these smokersexhibit normal behavior and competent performance of ordinarytasks, while not appearing intoxicated to others even though theyare at their usual level of intoxication. Reverse Tolerance Repeated exposure to marihuana has been said to cause anindividual to need lesser amounts of the drug to achieve the samedegree of intoxication. This "reverse tolerance" may berelated to one's learning to get high or to the recognition ofthe subtle intoxication at low doses. Or perhaps, such tolerancereflects an increase in the body's ability to change the drug toan active chemical. To date, the existence of "reversetolerance" has not been substantiated in an experimentalsetting. Duration of Use Tolerance development is only one of a variety of occurrenceswhich possibly are related to repetitive use of marihuana. Anydiscussion of drug effect must also take into account the timeperiod over which the drug use occurs. Immediate effects of asingle drug experience must be contrasted with effects ofshort-term use and the effects of longterm use in order to detectany cumulative effects or more subtle, gradually occurringchanges. This issue of an individual's change over a period of years isquite complex; a multitude of factors other than marihuana usemay affect his life. As previously defined, short-term refers toperiods of less than two years, long-term to periods of two to 10years, and very long-term to periods greater than 10 years. Mostof the American experience involves short-term and long-term use,with low doses of weak preparations of the drug. Patterns of Use The drug effect of marihuana can be realistically discussedonly within the context of who the user is, how long he has usedmarihuana, how much and how frequently he uses it, and the,social setting of his use. In general, for virtually any drug, the heavier the pattern ofuse, the greater the risk of either direct or indirect damage.For purposes of this discussion, the patterns of use developed inthe first section of this chapter will be utilized. Becausefrequency of use is presently the, primary determinant of usepatterns in this country, we employ similar designations: (1) The experimenter who uses marihuana,at most a few times over a short term and then generally ceasesto use it, or uses once a month or less; (2) The intermittent user who usesmarihuana, infrequently, that is more than once monthly but lessthan several times a week; (3) The moderate user who uses it fromseveral times a week to once daily, generally over a long term; (4) The heavy user who uses it severaltimes a day over a long term and; (5) The very heavy user who isconstantly intoxicated with high tetrahydrocannabinol contentpreparations, usually hashish, over a very long term. Again, these classifications are not intended to be rigid butare designed to facilitate a discussion of the many usagepatterns. Definition of Dependence Before describing the effect of marihuana, onthe user, two additional definitions are required. They concernthe concept of dependence which has so clouded public andprofessional consideration of psychoactive drugs. Throughout theremainder of this report, we refer Separately to psychologicaland physical dependence, defined as follows: Psychological dependence is the repeateduse of psychoactive drugs leading to a conditioned pattern ofdrug-seeking behavior. The intensity of dependence varies withthe nature of the drug, the method, frequency, and duration ofadministration, the mental and physical attributes of theindividual, and the characteristics of the physical and socialenvironment. Its intensity is at its peak when drug-seekingbecomes a compulsive and undeviating pattern of behavior. Physical dependence is the state oflatent hyper-excitability which develops in the central nervoussystem of higher mammals following frequent and prolongedadministration of the morphine-like analgesics, alcohol,barbiturates, and other depressants. Such dependence is notmanifest subjectively or objectively during drug administration.Specific symptoms and signs, the abstinence syndrome, occur uponabrupt termination of drug administration; or with morphinelikeagonists by administering the specific antagonists. EFFECTS RELATED TO PATTERNUSE Set out below is a brief summary of effects of marihuana,related to frequency and duration of use. The remainder of theChapter discusses the effects of immediate, short-term, long-termand very long-term use of the drug. Experimenters and intermittent users ------ Little or nopsychological dependence. Influence on behavior related largely to conditioning to drug use and its social value to the user. No organ injury demonstrable. Moderate users ------------ Moderatepsychological dependence in- creasing with duration of use. Behavioral effects minimal in stable per- sonalities, greater in those with emo- tional instability. Probably little if any organ injury. Duration of use increases probability of escalation of all effects including shift from moderate to heavy use. Heavy users -------------- American "pothead." Strong psychological dependence. Detectable behavior changes. Possible organ injury (chronic diminution ofpulmonary function). Effects more easily demonstrable with long-termuse. Very heavy users ---------- Users in countrieswhere the use of cannabis has been indigenous for centuries. Very strong psychological dependence to pointof compulsive drug seeking and use. Clear-cut behavioral changes. Greater incidence of associated organ injury. IMMEDIATE DRUG EFFECTS The immediate effects are those which occur during the drugintoxication or shortly following it. The user is aware of someof these effects, for they often cause him to use the drug. Atthe same time, many changes may occur in his body which can bemeasured by others but are not obvious to him. Subjective Effects A description of an individual's feelings and state ofconsciousness as affected by low doses of marihuana is difficult;the condition is not similar to usual waking states and is theresult of a highly individual experience. Perhaps the closestanalogies are the experience of day dreaming or the moments justprior to falling asleep. The effect is not constant and acyclical waxing and waning of the intensity of the intoxicationoccurs periodically. At low, usual "social" doses, the intoxicatedindividual may experience an increased sense of well-being;initial restlessness and hilarity followed by a dreamy, carefreestate of relaxation; alteration of sensory perceptions includingexpansion of space and time; and a more vivid sense of touch,sight, smell, taste, and sound; a feeling of hunger, especially acraving for sweets; and subtle changes in thought formation andexpression. To an unknowing observer, an individual in this stateof consciousness would not appear noticeably different from hisnormal state. At higher, moderate doses, these same reactions areintensified but the changes in the individual would still bescarcely noticeable to an observer. The individual may experiencerapidly changing emotions, changing sensory imagery, dulling ofattention, more altered thought formation and expression such asfragmented thought, flight of ideas, impaired immediate memory,disturbed associations, altered sense of self-identity and, tosome, a perceived feeling of enhanced insight. At very high doses, psychotomimetic phenomena may beexperienced. These, include distortions of body image, loss ofpersonal identity, sensory and mental illusions, fantasies andhallucinations. Nearly all persons who continue to use marihuana describethese usual effects in largely pleasurable terms. However, othersmight call some of these same effects unpleasant or undesirable. As discussed earlier, a wide range of extra-drug factors alsoinfluences marihuana's effects. The more the individual usesmarihuana and the longer he has been using it, the more likelythe experiences will be predominantly pleasurable, and the lesslikely the effects will be unpleasant. An increasingsensitization to those effects viewed as pleasant occurs as theuser has more experience with the drug. Persons subject to unpleasant reactions may eliminatethemselves from the using group although the occasionalexperience of an unpleasant effect does not always discourageuse. Body Function A large amount of research has been performed in man andanimals regarding the immediate effect of marihuana on bodilyprocesses. No conclusive evidence exists of any physical damage,disturbances of bodily processes or proven human fatalitiesattributable solely to even very high doses of marihuana.Recently, animal studies demonstrated a relatively large marginof safety between the psychoactive dose and the physical andbehavioral toxic and lethal dose. Such studies seemed to indicatethat safe human study could be undertaken over a wide dose range. Low to moderate doses of the drug produce minimal measurabletransient changes in body functions. Generally, pulse rateincreases, recumbent blood pressure increases slightly, andupright blood pressure decreases. The eyes redden, tear secretionis decreased, the pupils become slightly smaller, the fluidpressure within the eye lessens and one study reports that theeyeball rapidly oscillates (nystagmus). A minimal decrement in maximum muscle strength, the presenceof a fine hand tremor, and a decrease in hand and body steadinesshave also been noted. Decreased sensitivity to pain andoverestimation of elapsed time may occur. The effects of marihuana on brain waves are still unclear andinconsistent. Generally, the intoxication produces minimal,transient changes of rapid onset and short duration. Sleep timeappears to increase, as does dreaming. Investigation of the effects of marihuana on a wide variety ofother bodily function indices has revealed few consistentlyobserved changes. These few consistently observed transient effects on bodilyfunction seem to suggest that marihuana is a rather unexcitingcompound of negligible immediate toxicity at the doses usuallyconsumed in this country. The substance is predominantly apsychoactive drug. The feelings and state of consciousnessdescribed by the intoxicated seem to be far more interesting thanthe objective state noted by an observer. Mental Function Marihuana, like other psychoactive substances, predominantlyaffects mental processes and responses (cognitive tasks) and thusthe motor responses directed by mental processes (psychomotortasks). Generally, the degree of impairment of cognitive andpsychomotor performance is dose-related, with minimal effect atlow doses. The impairment varies during the period ofintoxication, with the maximal effect at the peak intoxication.Performance of simple or familiar tasks is at most minimallyimpaired, while poor performance is demonstrated on complex,unfamiliar tasks. Experienced marihuana users commonlydemonstrate significantly less decrement in performance thandrug-naive, individuals. The greater his past marihuana experience, the better theintoxicated individual is able to compensate for drug effect onordinary performance at usual doses. Furthermore, markedindividual variation in performance is noted when all else isheld constant. The effect of marihuana on cognitive andpsychomotor performance is therefore highly individualized andnot easily predictable. Effects on emotional reactions and onvolition are equally variable and are difficult to measure underlaboratory conditions, but can be significant. The Intoxicated State Studies of intoxicated persons have suggested possibleexplanations for the subtle effects on mental processes producedby marihuana, Generally, a temporary episodic impairment ofshort-term memory occurs. These memory voids may be filled withthoughts and perceptions extraneous to organized -mentalprocesses. Past and future may become obscured -as the individualfocuses on filling the present momentary memory lapse. His senseof self -identity may seem altered if he cannot place himself inhis usual time frame. This altered state of mind may be regarded by the individualas pleasant or unpleasant. The important factors of dosage andset and setting play a most important role in this determination.When the nature of the drug-taking situation and thecharacteristics of the individual are optimal. the user is apt todescribe his experience as one of relaxation, sensitivity,friendliness, carefreeness, thoughtfulness, happiness,peacefulness, and fun. For most marihuana users who continue touse the drug, the experience is overwhelmingly pleasurable. Unpleasant Reactions However, when these circumstances are not optimal, theexperience may be unpleasant and an undesirable reaction to themarihuana intoxication occurs. In these instances, anxiety,depression, fatigue or cognitive loss are experienced as ageneralized feeling of ill-being and discomfort. A heavy sluggishfeeling, mentally and physically, is common in inexperiencedmarihuana smokers who overshoot the desired high or in personswho might orally ingest too large a dose. Dizziness, nausea,incoordination, and palpitations often accompany the "toostoned" feeling. Anxiety States "Novice anxiety reactions" or feelings of panicaccount for a majority of unpleasant reactions to marihuana. Whenthe distortion of self image and time is recognized by theindividual as drug-induced and temporary, the experience isviewed as pleasurable. Anxiety -and panic result when thesechanges cause the individual to fear that the loss of hisidentity and self-control may not end, and that he is dying or"losing his mind." These anxiety and panic reactionsare transient and usually disappear over a few hours as thedrug's effects wear off, or more quickly with gentle friendlyreassurance. The large majority of these, anxiety reactions occur inindividuals who are experimenting with marihuana. Most oftenthese individuals have an intense underlying anxiety surroundingmarihuana use, such as fears of arrest, disruption of family andoccupational relations, and possible bodily or mental harm. Oftenthey are older and have relatively rigid personalities with lessdesire for new and different experiences. The incidence of these anxiety reactions may have decreased asmarihuana use has become acceptable to wider populations, as thefears of its effects have lessened and as users have developedexperience in management of these reactions. Psychosis Rare cases of full-blown psychotic episodes have beenprecipitated by marihuana. Generally, the individuals hadprevious mental disorders or had poorly developed personalitiesand were marginally adjusted to their life situation. Often theepisode occurred at times of excessive stress. These episodes arecharacteristically temporary. Psychotherapy and sometimesmedications are useful in prompt control and treatment of thispsychological reaction. In addition, rare nonspecific toxicpsychoses have occurred after extremely high doses. This state ofnonspecific drug intoxication or acute brain syndrome isself-limited and clears spontaneously as the drug is eliminatedfrom the body. Conclusions In summary, the immediate effect of marihuana on normal mentalprocesses is a subtle alteration in state of consciousnessprobably related to a change in short-term memory, mood, emotionand volition. This effect on the mind produces a varyinginfluence on cognitive and psychomotor task performance which ishighly individualized, as well as related to dosage, time,complexity of the task and experience of the user. The effect onpersonal, social and vocational functions is difficult topredict. In most instances, the marihuana intoxication ispleasurable. In rare cases, the experience may lead to unpleasantanxiety and panic, and in a predisposed few, to psychosis. SHORT-TERM EFFECTS The effect of an enormous daily oral dose of the drug (up toabout one hundred thousand times the minimal behaviorallyeffective human dose) was recently studied in rats and monkeysfor three months. A severe, generalized nervous system depressionwas evident the first few days. Evidence of cumulative toxicitywas observed at these doses. Severe central -nervous systemdepression produced fatalities in some rats in the first few daysuntil tolerance developed. Later, extreme hyperactivitydeveloped. The monkeys experienced severe central nervous systemdepression and one group showed mild hyperactivity, but allrapidly returned to normal behavior after the development oftolerance to these effects. Minimal dose-related toxic effects onbodily organs were noted at autopsy at the conclusion of theexperiment. These non-specific findings of unknown meaningincluded bypocellularity of the bone marrow and spleen andhypertrophy of the adrenal cortex. A 28-day study employing intravenous administration of fromone to ten thousand times the minimal effective human dose tomonkeys produced -similar findings clinically. In the high dosegroups delayed deaths from acute hemorrhagic pneumonia werepossibly caused by accumulation of clumps of THC in the lungproducing irritation similar to that seen at the injection sites.No other organ pathology was noted. These animal studiesillustrated that the margin of safety between active dose andtoxic dose was enormous. A few studies have recently been carried out to observe theeffect of a few weeks of daily marihuana smoking in man. Theamount smoked was a relatively large American dose. Frequency ofuse was once to several times daily. During the 21-day Boston free-access study, no harmful effectswere observed on general bodily functions, motor functions,mental functions, personal or social behavior or workperformance. Total sleep time and periods of sleep wereincreased. Weight gain was uniformly noted. No evidence of physical dependence or signs of withdrawal werenoted. In the heaviest smokers, -moderate psychologicaldependence was suggested by an increased negative mood aftercessation of smoking. Tolerance appeared to develop to the immediate effects of thedrug on general bodily functions (pulse rate) andpsychomotor-cognitive performance (time estimation, short-termmemory, and shootinggallery skill) but not to the"high." Marihuana intoxication did not significantlyinhibit the ability of the subjects to improve with practicethrough time on these psychological-motor tasks. Neither immediate nor short-term (21 day) high-dose marihuanaintoxication decreased motivation to engage in a variety ofsocial and goal-directed behaviors. No consistent alteration thatcould be related to marihuana smoking over this period of timewas observed in work performance of a simple task, participationin aspects of the research study, or interest and participationin a variety of personal activities, such as writing, reading,interest and knowledge of current world events, or participationin athletic or aesthetic activities. Marihuana smoking appeared to affect patterns of socialinteractions. Although use of the drug was found to be a groupsocial activity around which conversation and other types ofsocial behavior were centered, it was not uncommon for some orall of the smokers to withdraw from the social interaction andconcentrate on the subjective drug experience. During the first part of the smoking period, both intermittentand daily users demonstrated a marked decrement in totalinteraction. Total interaction continued to diminish amongintermittent users but increased above presmoking levels amongthe daily users during the later parts of the smoking period. Thequality of the interaction was more convivial and lesstask-oriented when marihuana was available to the group. Additionally, an assessment of the effect of marihuana onrisktaking behavior revealed that daily users tended to becomemore conservative when engaging in decision-making underconditions of risk. LONG-TERM EFFECTS Our knowledge about marihuana is incomplete, but certainbehavior characteristics appear to be emerging in regard to longterm American marihuana use which, for the most part, issignificantly less than 10 years. These impressions wereconfirmed in the Boston free-access study. The group of Americanyoung adults studied averaged five years (range 2-17 years) ofintermittent or daily use, of marihuana. No significant physical, biochemical, or mental abnormalitiescould be attributed solely to their marihuana smoking. Someabnormality of pulmonary function was demonstrated in many of thesubjects which could not be correlated-with quantity, frequencyor duration of smoking marihuana and/or tobacco cigarettes. (Oneother investigation recently completed uncovered no abnormalitiesin lung or heart functioning of a group of non-cigarette smokingheavy marihuana users). Many of the subjects were in fair to poorphysical condition, as judged by exercise tolerance. The performance of one-fifth of the subjects on a battery oftests sensitive to brain function was poorer on at least one,index than would have been predicted on the basis of their IQscores and education. But a definite relationship between thepoor test scores and prior marihuana or hallucinogen use couldnot be proven. In the past few years, observers have noted various social,psychological and behavioral changes among young high school andcollege age Americans including many who have used marihuanaheavily for a number of years. These changes are reflected by aloss of volitional goal direction. These individuals drop out andrelinquish traditional adult roles and values. They becomepresent rather than future oriented, appear alienated frombroadly accepted social and occupational activity, and experiencereduced concern for personal hygiene and nutrition. Several psychiatrists believe they have detected clinicallythat some heavy marihuana-using individuals appear to undergosubtle changes in personality and modes of thinking, with aresulting change in life style. In adopting this new life style,a troubled youth may turn toward a subculture where drug use anduntraditional behavior are acceptable. This youthful population resembles in many respects themarihuana smoker described in the Boston study. No evidenceexists to date to demonstrate that marihuana use alone causedthese behavioral changes either directly or indirectly. Manyindividuals reach the same point without prior marihuana use oronly intermittent or moderate use; and many more individuals usemarihuana as heavily but do not evidence these changes. For someof these young people, the drop out state is only a temporaryphase, preceding a personal reorganization and return to a moreconventional life style. If heavy, long-term marihuana use is linked to the formationof this complex of social, psychological and behavioral changesin young people, then it is only one of many contributingfactors. VERY LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF HEAVY AND VERY HEAVYUSE Knowledge of the effects of very heavy, very long-term use ofmarihuana by man is still incomplete. The Commission hasextensively reviewed the world literature as well as ongoingstudies in Jamaica and Greece, and carefully observed very heavy,very long-term using populations in countries in other parts ofthe world, such as Afghanistan and India. These populations smokeand often drink much stronger drug preparations, hashish andganja, than are commonly used in America. From theseinvestigations, some observable consequences are becoming muchclearer. Tolerance and Dependence Some tolerance does occur with prolonged heavy usage; largedrug doses are necessary for the desired effects. Abruptwithdrawal does not lead to a specific or reproducible abstinencesyndrome and physical dependence has not been demonstrated in manor in animals. The very heavy users studied did evidence strongpsychological dependence, but were able to cease use for shortperiods of time. In these users, withdrawal does induce, symptoms characteristic ofpsychological dependence. The anxiety, restlessness, insomnia,and other non-specific symptoms of withdrawal are very similar inkind and intensity to those experienced by compulsive cigarettesmokers. Although the distress of withdrawal exerts a very strongpsychogenic drive to continue use, fear of withdrawal is, in mostcases, not adequate to inspire immediate criminal acts to obtainthe drug. General Body Function In the Jamaican study, no significant physical or mentalabnormalities could be attributed to marihuana use, according toan evaluation of medical history, complete physical examination,chest x-ray, electrocardiogram, blood cell and chemistry tests,lung, liver or kidney function tests, selected hormoneevaluation, brain waves, psychiatric evaluation, andpsychological testing. There was no evidence to indicate that thedrug as commonly used was responsible for producing birth defectsin offspring of users. This aspect is also being studied further. Heavy smoking, no matter if the substance was tobacco organja, was shown to contribute to pulmonary functions lower thanthose found among persons who smoked neither substance. All theganja smokers studied also smoked tobacco. In Jamaica, ganja isalways smoked in a mixture with tobacco; and many of the subjectswere heavy cigarette smokers, as well. In a study of a Greek hashish-using population preliminaryfindings revealed poor dentition, enlarged livers, and chronicbronchitis. Further study is required to clarify the relationshipof these to hashish use, alcohol or tobacco use, or general lifestyle of this user population. Social Functioning Similarly, the Jamaican and Greek subjects did not evidenceany deterioration of mental or social functioning which could beattributed solely to heavy very long-term cannabis use. These individuals appear to have used the drug withoutnoticeable behavioral or mental deviation from their lowersocioeconomic group norms, as detected by observation in theircommunities and by extensive sociological interviews,psychological tests and psychiatric examination. Overall life style was not different from non-users in theirlower socioeconomic community. They were alert and realistic,with average intelligence based on their education. Mostfunctioned normally in their communities with stable families,homes, jobs, and friends. These individuals seem to have survivedheavy long-term cannabis use without major physical or behavioraldefects. Mental Functioning The incidence of psychiatric hospitalizations for acutepsychoses and of use of drugs other than alcohol is notsignificantly higher than among the non-using population. Theexistence of a specific longlasting, cannabis-related psychosisis poorly defined. If heavy cannabis use produces a, specificpsychosis, it must be quite rare or else exceedingly difficult todistinguish from other acute or chronic psychoses. Recent studies suggest that the occurrence of any form ofpsychosis in heavy cannabis users is no higher than in thegeneral population. Although such use is often quite, prevalentin hospitalized mental patients, the drug could only beconsidered a. causal factor in a, few cases. Most of these were,short-term reactions or toxic overdoses. In addition, aconcurrent use of alcohol often played a role in the, episodecausing hospitalization. These findings are somewhat surprising in view of thewidespread belief that cannabis attracts the mentally unstable,vulnerable individual. Experience in the United States has notinvolved a level of heavy marihuana, use comparable to theseforeign countries. Consequently, such long-lasting psychicdisturbances possibly caused by heavy cannabis use have not beenobserved in this country. Motivation and Behavioral Change Another controversial form of social-mental deteriorationallegedly related to very long-term very heavy cannabis use isthe "amotivational syndrome." It supposedly affects thevery heavy using population and is described world-wide as a,loss of interest in virtually all activities other than cannabisuse, with resultant lethargy, amorality, instability and socialand personal deterioration. The reasons for the occurrence ofthis syndrome are varied and hypothetical; drug use is only oneof many components in the socioeconomic and psychoculturalbackgrounds of the individuals. Intensive studies of the Greek and Jamaican populations ofheavy long-term cannabis users appear to dispute the solecausality of cannabis in this syndrome. The heavy ganja andhashish using individuals were from lower socioeconomic groups,and possessed average intelligence but had little education andsmall chance of vocational advancement. Most were married andmaintained families and households. They were all employed, mostoften as laborers or small businessmen, at a level whichcorresponded with their education and opportunity. In general, their life styles were dictated by socioeconomicfactors and did not appear to deteriorate as a result of cannabisuse. The Jamaicans were working strenuously and regularly atgenerally uninteresting jobs. In their culture, cannabis servesas a work adjunct. The users believe the drug provides energy forlaborious work and helps them to endure their routine tasks. In contrast, others have described Asian and Africanpopulations where heavy to very heavy hashish or charas smokingfor a very long time is associated with clear-cut behavioralchanges. In these societies, the smokers are mostly jobless,illiterate persons of the lowest socioeconomic backgrounds. Theygenerally begin to use the drug in their early teens and continueits use up to their 60's. The users prefer to smoke in groups of two to 20, generally ina quiet place out of the reach of non-smokers. Weakness,malnutrition and sexual difficulties, usually impotence, a-recommon. Some of them report sleep disturbances. Most users who have used the drug for 20 to 30 years are lazyand less practical in most of their daily acts and reluctant tomake decisions. However, their ability to perform non-complicatedtasks is as good as non-smokers. Although the smokers think they become faster in their dailywork, a general slowness in all their activities is noticed byothers. This user population is typically uncreative. They makelittle if any significant contribution to the social, medical oreconomic improvement of their community. SUMMARY Once existing marihuana, policy was cast into the realm ofpublic debate, partisans on both sides of the issueover-simplified the question of the effects of use of the, drugon the individual. Proponents of the prohibitory legal systemcontended that marihuana, was a, dangerous drug, while opponentsinsisted that it was a harmless drug or was less harmful thanalcohol or tobacco. Any psychoactive drug is potentially harmful to theindividual, depending on the intensity, frequency and duration ofuse. Marihuana is no exception. Because the particular hazards ofuse differ for different drugs, it makes no sense, to compare theharmfulness of different drugs. One may compare, insofar as theindividual is concerned, only the harmfulness of specificeffects. Is heroin less harmful than alcohol because, unlikealcohol, it directly causes no physical in-jury? Or is heroinmore harmful than alcohol because at normal doses its use is moreincapacitating in a behavioral sense? Assessment of the relative dangers of particular drugs ismeaningful only in a wider context which weighs the possiblebenefits of the drugs, the comparative scope of their use, andtheir relative impact on society at large. We consider thesequestions in the next Chapter, particularly in connection withthe impact on public health. Looking only at the effects on the individual, there, islittle proven danger of physical or psychological harm from theexperimental or intermittent use of the natural preparations ofcannabis, including the resinous mixtures commonly used in thiscountry. The risk of harm lies instead in the heavy, long-termuse of the drug, particularly of the most potent preparations. The experimenter and the intermittent users develop little orno psychological dependence on the drug. No organ injury isdemonstrable. Some moderate users evidence a degree of psychologicaldependence which increases in intensity with prolonged durationof use. Behavioral effects are lesser in stable personalities butgreater in those with emotional instability. Prolonged durationof use does increase the probability of some behavioral andorganic consequences including the possible shift to a heavy usepattern. The heavy user shows strong psychological dependence onmarihuana and often hashish. Organ injury, especially diminuationof pulmonary function, is possible. Specific behavioral changesare detectable. All of these effects are more apparent withlong-term and very long-term heavy use than with short-term heavyuse. The very heavy users, found in countries where the use ofcannabis has been indigenous for centuries, have a compulsivepsychological dependence on the drug, most commonly used in theform of hashish. Clear-cut behavioral changes and a greaterincidence of associated biological injury occur as duration ofuse increases. At present, the Commission is unaware of anysimilar pattern in this country. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-29IA086-000614-B046-230http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncc3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022212 text/html 105438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:21:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:07 GMTContent-length: 105219 Social Impact of Marihuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Chapter III Social Impact of marihuana use "Man is a creature who lives not uponbread alone but principally by catchwords." -Robert LouisStevenson, Virginia Puerisque (1881) Implicit in existing social and legal policy toward marihuanais the view that society suffers in some way from use of thedrug. When the widespread practice of marihuana smoking appearedin the United States in the early decades of the 20th century,the medical, law enforcement, newspaper, and legislativecommunities immediately indicted the drug. They assumed that thedrug posed serious dangers to individual health; but moreimportantly, they viewed it as a menace to the public order.Crime, insanity and idleness were thought to be the inevitableconsequences of its use. That some of these original fears were unfounded and thatothers were exaggerated have been clear for many years. Yet, manyof these early beliefs continue to affect contemporary publicattitudes and concerns. Consequently, one of the Commission'smost important tasks is to evaluate carefully all data relevantto the social impact of marihuana use. We must determine whetherand in what respects social concern is justified. What is mythand what is reality? The literature pertaining to -the presumed effects andconsequences of marihuana use still reveals a wide diversity ofopinion about social impact. Careful scrutiny is inhibited by theprevalence of hearsay, rhetoric and undocumented assertions aboutthe effects and consequences of marihuana use. Nonetheless,evidence is mounting and a number of significant trends haverecently emerged. In the previous Chapter we explored theevidence regarding the nature and scope of contemporary marihuanause, and the effects of the drug on the individual user. Now wemust consider the impact on society of behavior resulting fromuse of marihuana. In dealing with the behavioral consequences of marihuana, use,the Commission has made, a concerted effort to review andevaluate the enormous body of existing popular and scientificliterature, and has itself initiated new empirical research,including national surveys, retrospective studies and controlledlaboratory experiments. Awareness of the difficulties involved in investigating aninherently complex social phenomenon and applying its researchfindings to policy decisions has fostered particular sensitivityto the quality of previous and Commission-sponsored research. Assuch, considerable attention was given to such basic researchquestions as: What behavioral effects are most relevant in assessing theconsequences of marihuana use? What measures produce the most valid data concerning giveneffects? What reliance should be placed on various research techniques,such as self-reporting, controlled experiments, clinicalobservations and statistical relationships? What generalizations can be made from particular populationsstudied? What are the limits of given data in terms of inference.interpredation and attribution of cause? With respect to the Commission's own research program, theprocess of selection and allocation of resources was indeeddifficult, and some areas of inquiry have undoubtedly been eitherneglected or shortchanged. Nonetheless, we believe that thestudies undertaken and information gathered will addsignificantly to our understanding of the conditions andcircumstances under which marihuana use is likely to affectadversely the public safety, public health and welfare, anddominant social order. Marihuana and Public Safety The belief that marihuana is causally linked to crime andother antisocial conduct first assumed prominence during the1930's as the result of a concerted effort by governmentalagencies and the press to alert the American populace to thedangers of marihuana use. Newspapers all over the country beganto publish lurid accounts of "marihuana atrocities." Inthe absence of adequate understanding of the effects of the drug,these largely unsubstantiated stories profoundly influencedpublic opinion and gave birth to the stereotype of the marihuanauser as physically aggressive, lacking in self-control,irresponsible, mentally ill and, perhaps most alarming,criminally inclined and dangerous. The combination of thepurported effects of the drug itself plus the belief that it wasused by unstable individuals seemed to constitute a significantdanger to public safety. Now, more than 30 years later, many observers are skepticalabout the existence of a cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana use and antisocial conduct. MARIHUANA AND CRIME Over the years, there have been several hypotheses about therelationship between marihuana and antisocial conduct. Theearliest view was that marihuana causes or leads to thecommission of aggressive and violent criminal acts such asmurder, rape and assault. These acts are committed, it has beenargued, because marihuana allegedly produces a relaxation ofordinary inhibitions, a weakening of impulse control and aconcomitant increase in aggressive tendencies while the user isunder its influence. Marihuana's alleged criminogenic role is not always limited toviolent or aggressive behavior. Some commentators also postulatethat marihuana leads to or causes non-violent forms of criminalor delinquent conduct, ranging from sexual promiscuity to grandlarceny. Underlying this second causal hypothesis are theassumptions that marihuana frequently impairs judgment, distortsreality and diminishes, at least temporarily, the user's sense ofpersonal and social responsibility. Regular or heavy use over anextended period of time is felt to interfere, perhapsirreversibly, with the orderly development of psychosocial andmoral maturity. As indicated above, however, a growing uncertainty prevailsabout ,the existence of a causal link between marihuana use andantisocial conduct. In fact, recent surveys, including severalsponsored by the Commission, suggest that large segments of theprofessional public, particularly the law enforcement andcriminal justice communities, are no longer willing to assert a,cause-effect relationship but observe, instead, the existence ofa statistical association. The Issue of Cause and Effect The controversy over the cause-effect relationship betweenmarihuana use and criminal, violent or delinquent behavior posesa number of serious problems for the investigators Proponents andopponents of the causal view tend to rely on different kinds ofevidence and to call upon different types of experts, therebydiffering substantially in the kinds of information they acceptas relevant, reliable or valid. Practitioners, such as police and probation officers forexample, frequently cite case examples in which apprehendedoffenders are found to be in possession of marihuana at the timeof arrest. The mere presence of the drug or the fact that anoffender is a known user of marihuana is sometimes deemedsufficient to establish a causal link between the marihuana andthe offense.* Empiricists, on the other hand, would deny that the simplepresence of the drug constitutes a satisfactory demonstration ofa causal relationship between marihuana use and the crime inquestion. They would defer, instead, to the results of empiricalstudies designed explicitly to test the assertion. Essentially,they emphasize that even if some offenders do use marihuana, anequal or larger number of offenders do not, and there arecertainly large numbers of marihuana users in thepopulation-at-large who never engage in the kinds of antisocialconduct deemed to be related to or caused by the use of the drug. Proving any positive and direct relationship, be it causal orotherwise, between two inherently complex social phenomena isfraught with enormous difficulties. The relationship of marihuanause to crime, violence, aggression or juvenile delinquencypresents no exception. Before examining the evidence with respectto the existence of a causal connection, certain basicconsiderations deserve at least brief mention here. To prove, the existence of a positive and direct relationship,one would be required to demonstrate that the alleged offenderwas, indeed, a marihuana, user; that he was under the influenceof the drug at the time he committed the offense; and that thecrime was directly attributable to the effects of the marihuana.The kinds of evidence necessary to establish these facts are noteasy to obtain. First, evidence of the use of marihuana by the accused isgenerally dependent upon either direct admission of use, hearsayevidence, or inferences derived from knowledge of possession(that is, the offender was found to have marihuana on his personor in his possession at the time of arrest). Second, because no chemical tests presently exist outside thelaboratory to identify the presence of marihuana in the body ofthe accused, it is difficult if not impossible to prove that theoffender was definitely under the influence of marihuana when hecommitted the offense. Third, in order to prove that the marihuana represented thesignificant contributory or precipitating variable, all otherfactors possibly related to the offense would have to be examinedand excluded. The problems of validation are further compounded byadditional variations in behavior attributable to: (a) thepharmacological potency of the drug; (b) possible adulteration ofthe marihuana; (c) the interaction of marihuana with other drugssimultaneously ingested; (d) differing individual response tosimilar dosage levels; (e) the time-action function; (f) thecumulative effect of marihuana use; and (g) various social,psychological and situational variables such as set and setting,individual expectations, personal predispositions or preexistingimpulse disorders. Despite the inherent complexities of the issue and thedifficulties in securing reliable and valid evidence, arelatively large body of research is now available pertaining tothe criminogenic effects of marihuana upon the individual and thenature and extent to which the drug constitutes a danger topublic safety. In the following section, we present the availableevidence and assess the strength and direction of the allegedrelationships between marihuana use and violent or aggressivebehavior and also non-violent forms of criminal and delinquentbehavior. *In the widely publicized Licata case of the 1930's. forexample, a 16-year-old cannabis user was charged with the axmurder of his family and the offense was directly attributed tothe effects of marihuana. There was, however. no preciseinformation available regarding the use of marihuana in relationto the crime. Nor. in the various accounts of the case, was theregenerally any reference to the fact that several of the boy'srelatives had previously been committed to mental institutions;that the police hall, about one year prior to the offense (andpresumably before the youth's alleged use of marihuana) attemptedto commit him for his bizarre behavior; or that shortly after thecrime, the boy began to exhibit the symptoms of paranoidschizophrenia. Marihuana and Violent Crime As indicated earlier, the belief that marihuana causes orleads to the commission of violent or aggressive acts firstemerged during the 1930's and became deeply embedded in thepublic mind. Until recently, however, these beliefs weregenerally based on the anecdotal case examples of law enforcementauthorities, a few clinical observations and severalquasi-experimental studies of selected populations comprised ofmilitary offenders, convicted or institutionalized criminals ordelinquents and small groups of college students. Few effortswere made to compare the incidence of violent or aggressivebehavior in representative samples of both user and non-userpopulations. Even in these early observations and investigations, however,no substantial evidence existed of a causal connection betweenthe use of marihuana and the commission of violent or aggressiveacts. Indeed, if any relationship was indicated, it was not apositive and direct causal connection but in inverse or negativestatistical correlation. Rather than inducing violent -or aggressive behavior throughits purported effects of lowering inhibitions, weakening impulsecontrol and heightening aggressive tendencies, marihuana wasusually found to inhibit the expression of aggressive impulses bypacifying the user, interfering with muscular coordination,reducing psychomotor activities and generally producing states ofdrowsiness lethargy, timidity and passivity. In fact, only a small proportion of the marihuana users amongany group of criminals or delinquents known to the authoritiesand appearing in study samples had ever been arrested orconvicted for such violent crimes as murder, forcible rape,aggravated assaultor armed robbery. When these marihuana-usingoffenders were compared with offenders who did not use marihuana,the former were generally found to 'have committed lessaggressive behavior than the latter. In an effort to accumulate data on the relationship betweenmarihuana use and aggressive or violent criminal behavior, theCommission sponsored several studies designed to assess thepurported causal relationship. First, the Commission wanted to tap the unique experience ofthe law enforcement and criminal justice communities.Representative samples of prosecuting attorneys, judges,probation officers and court clinicians were asked their opinionsabout the relationship between marihuana use and the commissionof aggressive or violent criminal acts. When asked to evaluatethe statement that "most aggressive acts or crimes ofviolence committed by persons who are known users of marihuanaoccur when the offender is under the influence ofmarihuana," three-quarters of the judges, probation officersand clinicians indicated either that the statement was probablyuntrue or that they were unsure of its accuracy. Of these threegroups, a greater proportion of clinicians (76.5%) thought thestatement false than did the probation officers (60%)and judges(44.2%). In a separate mail survey of the chief prosecuting attorneysin the 50 states-the group which has often supported the causalhypothesis-52% of the respondents stated that they either did notbelieve or were uncertain of the truth of the proposition thatuse of marihuana leads to aggressive behavior. We have already noted that only a small fraction of theoffender populations in past studies were found to have beenarrested for crimes of violence. Similarly, in aCommission-sponsored study of 1,776 16to-21-year-olds arrested infive New York counties for marihuana law violations between 1965and 1969, onlv a small percentage bad either previously orsubsequently come to the attention of authorities for suchoffenses as assault or robbery. In fact, less than 1% of theoffenders in this sample had been arrested for these offensesprior to their first marihuana arrest, and less than 3% wereknown to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for these offensessubsequent to their marihuana violation. Perhaps more important than professional opinion or theincidence of violent offenses in an offender population, however,is the determination of the extent to which marihuana use isrelated to violent or aggressive behavior in the generalpopulation. In a Commission-sponsored survey, face-to-face interviews wereconducted with a representative sample of 559 West Philadelphiaresidents in order to ascertain the extent of marihuana use inthis heterogeneous population and the relative involvement ofmarihuana users and nonusers in violent criminal behavior. Incorroboration of the earlier findings, the researchers found nosignificant differences in the proportions of users andnon-users; who stated that they had committed any of theaggressive or violent crimes enumerated. Further, no findings indicated that marihuana was generally orfrequently used immediately prior to the commission of offensesin the very small number of instances in which these offense'sdid occur. In contrast, however, the aggressive and violentoffenders in this sample did report with significantly greaterfrequency the use of alcohol within 24 hours of the offense inquestion. These findings should be considered in fight of an earlierWest Coast study of disadvantaged minority-group youthfulmarihuana users, many of whom were raised in a combative andaggressive social milieu similar to that found in several of theWest Philadelphia sampled neighborhoods. The data show thatmarihuana users were much less likely to commit aggressive orviolent acts than were those who preferred amphetamines oralcohol. They also show that most marihuana users were able tocondition themselves to avoid aggressive behavior even in theface of provocation. In fact, marihuana was found to play asignificant role in youth's transition from a "rowdy"to a "cool," non-violent style. The Commission is aware of the claim that a few emotionallyunstable or impulsive individuals have become particularlyaggressive or impulsive under the influence of marihuana. As wehave noted, some newspaper accounts have attributed sensationalhomicides or sexual assaults to marihuana-induced transitorypsychotic states on the part of the user. No evidence exists,however, to indicate that marihuana was responsible forgenerating or creating excessive aggressiveness or impulsivity inindividuals having no prior history of impulse or personalitydisorder. The most that can be said is that in those rareinstances, marihuana may have aggravated a preexisting condition. In sum, the weight of the evidence is that marihuana does notcause violent or aggressive behavior, if anything, marihuanagenerally serves to inhibit the expression of such behavior.Marihuana-induced relaxation of inhibitions is not ordinarilyaccompanied by an exaggeration of aggressive tendencies. No evidence exists that marihuana use will cause or lead tothe commission of violent or aggressive behavior by the largemajority of psychologically and socially mature individuals inthe general population. Marihuana and Non-Violent Crime A second hypothesis reflecting the statements of significantnumbers of government officials is that marihuana plays a majorrole in the commission of other, essentially non-violent, formsof criminal and delinquent behavior. In general, those espousing this more general cause-effectrelationship assume that the drug frequently produces, inaddition to the lowering of inhibitions, impairment of judgment,distortion of reality and at least temporary reduction of a senseof personal and social responsibility. Indeed, the earlierstereotype of the marihuana user was that of an immoral,physically debilitated, psychologically unstable and criminallymarginal man whose state of severely and irreversiblyunderdeveloped psychosocial and moral maturity was said to derivedirectly from his continued use of marihuana. As indicated earlier, neither the inherent complexities of theissue nor the previously inconclusive empirical evidence hasdeterred the formulation and expression of strong opinions aboutthe relationship of marihuana use to crime and delinquency.Opinion in this area, quite apart from the empirical evidence,has long assumed critical importance in the development of socialpolicy. The Commission has addressed the issue in three differentways. One was to assess the state of current public andprofessional opinion relative to the general proposition thatmarihuana causes or leads to the commission of criminal ordelinquent acts. A second approach was to review the professionalliterature addressed to the issue, and a third was to initiateempirical investigations of our own. The opinion surveys found that substantial numbers of personsraised serious questions about the existence of a causalrelationship between marihuana use and criminal or delinquentbehavior. Confusion and uncertainty about the existence of such arelationship have been expressed by both youth and adults,including practicing professionals in the criminal justicesystem. Recent data suggest that some of this confusion may be theresult of a fairly widespread misconception about the addictionpotential of marihuana. To the extent that persons believemarihuana users are physically dependent on the -drug, they mayassume that, like the heroin user, the marihuana user commits hisoffenses in order to support what is perceived as a drug habit;and that, like the heroin model, offenses are committed moreoften in the desperate attempt to obtain the drug rather thanunder its influence following use. There is no evidence that thisis the case, even for those who use the drug heavily. In the Commission-sponsored National Survey, the respondentswere asked whether they agreed or disagreed with the statementthat "many crimes are committed by persons who are under theinfluence of marihuana." Fifty-six percent of the adultpopulation and 41% of the youth indicated agreement. As in theSurvey generally, there was a significant difference of opinionaccording to age in the adult population. While 69% of theover-50 age group agreed with this statement, only aboutone-third of the 18-to-25 age group and the 14-to-17-yearoldsagreed. One of every four youth respondents and 18% of the adultssaid they were "not sure" of the existence of such arelationship between marihuana use and crime. Much greater consensus exists, even between generations,regarding the association of alcohol and crime. While 56% of alladults expressed their belief that many crimes are committed bypersons under the influence of marihuana, 69% of these sameadults believed that alcohol was related in the same way. Only 7%felt unsure about the alcohol crime relationship, in contrast to18% who expressed uncertainty about the relationship betweencrime and marihuana. The Commission also surveyed opinion within the criminaljustice community. A sample of 781 judges, probation officers andcourt clinicians replied to a questionnaire which askedrespondents to indicate whether or not their professionalexperience led them to believe that "use of marihuana causesor leads to antisocial behavior in the sense that it leads one tocommit other criminal or delinquent acts." Of allrespondents, 27% believed this to be the case. Within eachprofessional group, 34% of the judges, 18% of the probationofficers and 2% of the clinicians indicated their agreement. On the assumption that some, proportion, however small, ofmarihuana users might ultimately be arrested for non-drugoffenses, these officials were also asked to assess the relative,truth of the statement that "most non-drug offensescommitted by persons who are known users of marihuana or arefound to have marihuana on their person or in their possessionoccur when the offender is under the influence ofmarihuana." Seventy-one percent of the responding judges,75% of the probation officers and 85% of the court clinicianseither thought the statement false or were unsure of itsaccuracy. Respondents likewise rejected, however, the proposition thatthese crimes perpetrated by marihuana users occur when theoffender is attempting to obtain the drug rather than while underits influence; 65.6% of the judges, 64.6% of the probationofficers and 78.3% of the court clinicians either denied or wereunsure of the truth of this proposition. In short, marihuana, is not generally viewed by participantsin the criminal justice community as a major contributinginfluence in the commission of delinquent or criminal acts. This increasing professional skepticism is buttressed by theweight of research findings. A comprehensive review of theliterature revealed that in the various offender populationsstudied for this purpose, only a small percentage were marihuanausers. In only a handful of cases did researchers report thatcriminal conduct followed the use of marihuana. Generally, therate of self -reported, non-drug crime did not significantlydiffer between users and non-users. Both of the Commission-sponsored studies (the New York andPhiladelphia studies referred to earlier) corroborated thisresearch consensus. In the Philadelphia study, for example, lessthan 10% of the sample were known to the police, and there wereno significant differences among marihuana users and non-users inthe sample who reported the commission of major criminal actswhen statistical controls were applied. Further, most of thefirst offenses committed by users occurred prior to their use ofmarihuana, and only in rare instances did the offensesimmediately follow (within 24 hours) upon the use of marihuana(five cases out of 741 first offenses and 19 cases out of 516most recent offenses). Likewise, the New York study revealed that about one-fifth of-the marihuana law violators arrested between 1965 and 1969 werefound to have previous arrest records. Of those with previousarrests, the great majority of offenses (86%) involved trafficviolations and minor violations of the vagrancy statutes. In but10% of the cases the previous arrests were for assault, robbery,burglary or larceny. In essence, neither informed current professional opinion norempirical research, ranging from the 1930's to the present, hasproduced systematic evidence to support the thesis that marihuanause, by itself, either invariably or generally leads to or causescrime, including acts of violence,, juvenile delinquency oraggressive behavior. Instead the evidence suggests thatsociolegal and cultural variable's account for the apparentstatistical correlation between marihuana use and crime ordelinquency. A Sociocultural Explanation The persistent belief that some relationship exists betweenmarihuana use and crime is not without statistical support.Undoubtedly, the marihuana user of the 1920's and 1930's wasoverrepresented in the nation's jails and penitentiaries and inthe general crime and delinquency statistics. Especially duringthe late 1920's and early 1930's when the nation was preoccupiedwith lawlessness, the translation of this statistical correlationinto a causal hypothesis is not surprising. The increasing incidence of use in the mid-sixties by white,affluent, middle class, high school youth, college students andadults has occasioned a reevaluation of the marihuana user and areexamination of the crime issue. The overwhelming majority ofthe new marihuana offenders have had no previous arrests, andcome from the normally low risk, middle and upper socioeconomicpopulation groups. Recent public opinion surveys suggest that considerable socialdisapproval is attached to the "hippie" life style,unconventional mode of dress and apparent disregard for the lawdisplayed by many of these individuals. Nonetheless, fewerpersons are now willing to classify as criminal those marihuanausers whose only contact with the law has been as a result oftheir marihuana use. Perceptions have undergone a change as aresult of the increased usage of marihuana among youth of thedominant social class. Nonetheless, a statistical associationremains. First, the majority of both marihuana users and offendersother than actual marihuana law violators fall into the14-to-25-year age group. Second, the majority of those arrestedfor marihuana law violations as well as other delinquent orcriminal acts were, and to a much lesser degree, still are, drawnfrom the same "high risk" populations, such as minoritygroups, socially and economically disadvantaged, young, male,inner-city residents. Third, various offender populations subjected to study oftenincluded a number of marihuana users, although it was not themarihuana violations per se but other, more serious criminalconduct that originally brought most of them to the attention ofthe authorities. Finally, during the past five years, marihuanalaw violators have increasingly swelled the crime and delinquencystatistics; in most cases, their only contact with the law hasbeen for these marihuanaspecific offenses. The Philadelphia study corroborated this continuingstatistical association. The simple relationship between usingmarihuana and committing offenses was positive and statisticallysignificant, and there was also a high correlation betweenfrequency of smoking marihuana and committing offenses. Thesedirect associations were reduced to insignificance, however, uponfurther analysis of the data, and other explanations for thecoincidence of marihuana use and crime became evident. Theseincluded: race, education, age, the use of other drugs, andhaving drug-using friends. We conclude that some users commit crimes more frequently thannon-users not because they use marihuana but because they happento be the kinds of people who would be expected to have a highercrime rate, wholly apart from the use of marihuana. In mostcases, the differences in crime rate between users and non-usersare dependent not on marihuana use per se but on these otherfactors. In summary, although the available evidence suggests thatmarihuana use may be statistically correlated with the incidenceof crime and delinquency, when examined in isolation from theother variables, no valid evidence was found to support thethesis that marihuana' by itself, either inevitably, generally oreven frequently causes or precipitates the commission of crime,including acts of violence, or juvenile delinquency. Within this framework, neither the marihuana user nor the drugitself can be said to constitute a danger to public safety. For,as two researchers have so cogently stated for the Commission,"Whatever an individual is, in all of his cultural, socialand psychological complexity, is not going to vanish in a puff ofmarihuana smoke." MARIHUANA AND DRIVING Within the context of public safety another issue which meritsattention is the extent to which drivers under the influence ofmarihuana constitute a hazard on the nation's streets andhighways. Although in recent years increasing attention has beengiven to this issue, at present little empirical evidence existsto inform discussion. To assess the actual and potential impact of marihuana ontraffic safety, a number of basic research questions must beanswered. the extent to which marihuana, users actually drive whileunder the influence of the drug the extent to which marihuana users driving while"high" commit traffic violations and are involved intraffic accidents the amounts of marihuana consumed immediately prior to thecommission of traffic violations or the involvement in trafficaccidents and the drug's role in these events the nature and extent to which marihuana actually impairspsychomotor skills, judgment and driving performance To date, the generalizations made concerning the effects ofmarihuana on driving behavior have generally been based onstatistical studies of traffic violations and accidents andinferences drawn from more general studies of the physiologicaland psychological consequences of marihuana use, such as changesin pulse rate, reaction time, neuromuscular coordination, timeestimation and spatial perceptions. Such studies pose serious limitations in the nature,reliability and validity of the data. The basic problems derivefrom difficulties in identifying and attributing cause. A majorobstacle in such retrospective analysis is the inability toseparate the effects of marihuana from those possibly engenderedby the use of other drugs, such as alcohol, tranquilizers andamphetamines. Finally, conclusive analysis is impossible until areliable technique is developed for measuring the level ofmarihuana present in the body of the driver at the time of hisviolation or accident. Prospective experimental studies of actual reactions to roadconditions and traffic emergency situations would undoubtedlyprovide the most reliable and valid data, but such studies wouldthemselves endanger the public and have not been undertaken.Researchers have relied, therefore, on controlled laboratorysimulator studies and direct interviews with those who haveadmitted to driving while under the influence of marihuana. With respect to the simulator studies , the available evidencesuggests that while, in some cases, marihuana has producedinterference with certain motor or mental abilities which affectdriving behavior, these effects were generally believed to bereadily overcome by the exercise of extreme caution by the driverand a significant reduction in speed. The few driving simulator tests completed to date havegenerally revealed no significant correlations between marihuanause and driving disabilities. Comparison of the simulator scoresof users and nonusers, however, did reveal small butnonsignificant differences in the number of speedometer errorsmade. These simulator studies also examined the comparative effectsof alcohol and marihuana on driving scores. The findings of onestudy, though controversial, suggested that intoxicationresulting from low doses of marihuana was less detrimental todriving performance than was the presence of alcohol at thelegally prohibited blood level of .10%. The methodological limitations of the study raise seriousquestions about the reliability and validity of the findings. Asone critic has noted, "It does not follow automatically thatlack of effect of a drug on the simulated task will correlatewith lack of effect on the actual task." Further , the useof dissimilar doses of alcohol and marihuana has led anothercritic to assert that "finding that a heavy dose of alcoholcaused more impairment than a mild dose of marihuana is neithersurprising nor helpful in assessing the relative effects of thetwo drugs in the relative doses in which they are normallyused." Recent research has not yet proven that marihuana usesignificantly impairs driving ability or performance. TheCommission believes, nonetheless, that driving while under theinfluence of any psychoactive drug is a serious risk to publicsafety; the acute effects of marihuana intoxication, spatial andtime distortion and slowed reflexes may impair drivingperformance. That the risk of injury may be greater for alcoholthan for marihuana matters little. Obviously, Much more research needs to be undertaken in thisarea. Hopefully, recent studies sponsored by the NationalInstitute of Mental Health and other agencies will soon providethe concrete information that is needed. Marihuana, Public Health and Welfare As the feared threat to public safety through violent crimehas diminished in recent years, policy-makers and the public havebegun increasingly to view marihuana and other illicit drug useas a public health concern. The National Survey indicates thatAmerican adults regard drug abuse as the third most pressingproblem of the day, closely following the economy and Vietnam.However, public attitudes reflect considerable confusion aboutthe facts concerning marihuana and drugs in general. This confusion has resulted from too little understanding ofthe motives for drug use as well as inadequate knowledge of theclassification of drugs according to their main effects. Legalpenalties have frequently mirrored this confusion, and theresulting inconsistencies cause, many young people to loseconfidence in adult authority. Even in the medical profession,much uncertainty is evident, and for most of the general publicthere is no clear authority to whom they can turn for guidance. A PUBLIC HEALTH APPROACH The Commission broadly defines public health concerns as allhealth problems which affect people en masse and are therebydifficult to treat on a traditional physician-to-patient basis.This category would include social and economic dependence andincapacity. A health problem which spreads to other susceptiblemembers of the society cannot be controlled by the individualphysician. This view coincides with the concept of preventivemedicine, recognizing that all public health problems must bedealt with on both an individual and societal level. To illustrate, the increasing incidence of deaths due to lungcancer subsequent to chronic, heavy tobacco usage is a majorpublic health concern. In this instance, prevention of smokingand ascertaining the cause of the malignancies, rather than theindividual treatment of each case by a physician, define thepublic health dimension. A major concern exists because thepopulation at risk is large and growing, and the risk of harm isgreat. In addition to the risk of large numbers of the populace beingaffected, the issue of contagion must also be examined. Unlikeinfectious diseases such as influenza and smallpox, where theperson affected " catches" the ailment unintentionally,those individuals who use marihuana choose to come into contactwith it. The contagion model is relevant only insofar as socialpressure from proselytizing friends and social contacts play arole in spreading the use of the, drug. This dimension existswith marihuana, as well as alcohol and tobacco. After assessing the potential harm to the individual andsociety, the size of the population at risk and the contagionaspect, society must determine the nature of the controlmechanism used to deal with the problem, and how nine]) of itshealth resources, manpower and facilities will be allocated tomeet the perceived threat to the public health. Therefore, ananalysis of the relative risk of marihuana use must beundertaken. We must examine not only the effects of the drug onthe individual but also determine which groups are at risk andwhy. Practically all substances consumed by man are potentiallydangerous to the physical or mental health of the individual ifused irresponsibly or by particularly sensitive persons. Certainsubstances are sufficiently complex in their effects thatsocietal control is necessary to reduce risk, for example,fluorides added to the water supply, prescription drugs, and foodadditives. The degree of concern and control varies, depending onrelative public health dangers. The Population At Risk Before the dangers can be assessed, the population at riskmust be defined. Viewing the public health picture on a largescale, the United States in 1972 may still be consideredfortunate with regard to marihuana usage. While it is the thirdmost popular recreational drug, behind alcohol and tobacco, ithas not been institutionalized and commercialized. Most of the Americans who have used marihuana have been merelyexperimenting with it. As noted in Chapter 1, there are 24million Americans who have tried marihuana at one time oranother, with 8.3 million still using it. Of those who have quit,most say they have simply lost interest in it. The same Surveyshows that experience with marihuana peaks in the18-to-25-year-old group and falls off sharply thereafter. A factof some significance is that at least 71% of all adults (18-yearsand older) and 80% of youth (12-to-17-years) have never usedmarihuana at all.* The Survey also indicates that the majority of those youth andadults who continue to use marihuana do so intermittently, thatis, between one and 10 times a month. These individuals areclassified as intermittent marihuana smokers who use the drug forits socializing effects. They are, for the most part, ordinaryAmericans who are either in school or are employed. About 2% of those who have ever used marihuana, or 500,000people, now use the drug heavily. They use the drug several timesa day. These individuals use marihuana for its personal drugeffects in addition to its socializing effects. Generally, theirlife styles, values, attitudes, behaviors and activities areunconventional. Marihuana plays an important role in their lives.Because the risk of psychological, and perhaps physical, harmfrom marihuana increases with the frequency quantity and durationof its use, these heavy marihuana users constitute the greatestat-risk population in the United States today. The heavy marihuana user presents the greatest potentialconcern to the, public health. It is the Commission's opinionthat these heavy marihuana users constitute a source of contagionwithin American society. They actively proselytize others into adrug-oriented way of life. The effectiveness of peer grouppressure has been described earlier in Chapter II We anticipate that this at-risk population would increase innumber should a policy of institutionalized availability beadopted toward marihuana. Although marihuana is readily availableillicitly in the United States today, a policy permitting itslegal distribution could be expected to bring about an increasein users, with some percentage of them becoming heavy users. Itis the availability of the drug, coupled -with a governmentalpolicy of approval or neutrality, that could escalate this groupinto a public health and welfare concern. While this isspeculative, it is a concern which cannot be dismissed. Theexperience with the rise in the use of tobacco and alcohol makesclear the probable consequences of commercial exploitation. Another concern of the Commission is the experience of othercountries which have large heavy user populations. While thepattern of behavior in one country is not automatically similarto a pattern of behavior in another country, the existence ofheavy user populations constitutes a serious public healthconcern which must be avoided in this country. The availabilityof the drug alone does not seem to determine increased usage;supply and governmental inaction appear to tip the balance towardincreased use. The proportion of our population susceptible tothis pattern of use is conjectural but good preventive publichealth requires limiting the number to an irreducible minimum. *In the self-administered instrument, several separatequestions were utilized to elicit the respondent's experiencewith marihuana. This technique permitted an analysis ofconsistency of responses, and also minimized the possibility ofnonresponse. Nevertheless, 14% of the adults and 6% of the youthdid not respond to enough of these questions to ascertain whetherthey had ever tried marihuana or not. Percentage who- Adult Youth Ever used ------------------------------------- 15 14 Never used ------------------------------------ 71 so No response ----------------------------------- 14 6 Confusion and Fact One of the primary sources of confusion surrounding the use ofmarihuana and other psychoactive drugs is the ambiguity of theterm "drug abuse." In many quarters the excessive useof any drug is considered drug abuse, regardless of the effect ofthe drug on the individual or his behavior. In order to clarifythis issue the Commission defines psychoactive drug abuse asfollows: Drug abuse is the use of psychoactive drugsin a way likely to induce mental dysfunction and disorderedbehavior. It should be emphasized that demonstrable pathology of organsystems, including the brain, is not a necessary characteristicof psychoactive drug abuse. There are numerous non-psychoactivedrugs which can induce extensive organ pathology but do notmodify behavior; such drugs leave their imprint primarily on theindividual, not on society. The Commission believes that many ofthe perplexing issues relating to psychoactive drugs, includingmarihuana, can be clarified if drug abuse refers only to theimpact of drug-induced behavior on society. Three types of such drug-induced behavior are consideredunacceptable in most organized societies: (1) aggressivenessleading to violence; (2) loss of psychomotor control; (3) mentalor physical disorder leading to social and economic incapacity ordependency. This is not to say that society is unconcerned about theharmful effects of psychoactive drugs on the individual, or thatsuch effects do not merit the attention of public healthofficials. Cigarette smoking, although affecting primarily theindividual, is surely a matter of public health concern. Webelieve, however, that the term drug abuse, with its attendantsocietal disapprobation, should be reserved for drug taking whichhas a more direct effect on society through disordered behavior. Beyond the confusion surrounding the term drug abuse, arational evaluation of the public health impact of marihuana useis also inhibited by extensive misinformation about the drug.Recently, a great deal of research has increased significantlyour knowledge about marihuana. Further research data arenecessary before ;a conclusive statement about marihuana andpublic health can be made. However, enough is known today todiscuss some of the public perceptions in detail. And sufficientdata are presently available to allow for rationaldecision-making. ASSESSMENT OF PERCEIVED RISKS The Commission believes that marihuana. is perceived by theAmerican public to present the following risks to the publichealth: lethality potential for genetic damage or teratogenicity immediate adverse physical or mental effects long-term physical or mental effects including psychosis and"amotivation" syndrome "addiction" potential * progression to other stronger drugs, especially heroin Lethality The Commission's National Survey revealed that 48% of adultsbelieve that some people have died from marihuana use. A carefulsearch of the literature and testimony of the nation's healthofficials has not revealed a single human fatality in the UnitedStates proven to have resulted solely from ingestion ofmarihuana. Experiments with the drug in monkeys demonstrated thatthe dose required for overdose death was enormous and for allpractical purposes unachievable by humans smoking marihuana. Thisis in marked contrast to other substances in common use, mostnotably alcohol and barbiturate sleeping pills. Of comparative note, 89% of all adults in the same Surveybelieve that some people have died from using alcohol. Thisindicates that public opinion regarding alcohol and its potentiallethality is more accurate than it is for marihuana. At the sametime, factual knowledge regarding the inherent danger in using asubstance, for example alcohol, seemingly does not deter manypersons from using it irresponsibly. Potential For Genetic Damage The thalidomide tragedies of the 1950's have taught us toponder carefully the possibility of genetic damage subsequent toany drug use. The much publicized controversy regarding LSD andsubsequent genetic damage has led investigators to studymarihuana and its possible genetic effects. Although a number ofstudies have been performed, at present no reliable evidenceexists indicating that marihuana causes genetic defects in man. Early findings from studies of chronic (up to 41 years), heavy(several ounces per day) cannabis users in Greece and Jamaicaalso failed to find such evidence. In all its studies, theCommission found no evidence of chromosome damage or teratogenicor mutagenic effects due to cannabis at doses commonly used byman. However, since fetal damage cannot be ruled out, the use ofmarihuana like that of many other drugs, is not advisable duringpregnancy. Immediate Effects The intoxicant effects of marihuana on the mental function ofthe user does have potential health significance both for theindividual and others with whom he may come in contact. Becausemarihuana is a psychoactive drug, it is important to examine theacute toxic effects which may occur in certain predisposedindividuals and which increase with the potency of thepreparation. The Commission has reviewed numerous clinical studiesdescribing acute panic reactions and transient psychotic-likeepisodes which occur as acute effects of the drug intoxication.In addition, a predisposed individual might experienceaggravation of a latent psychotic state or other underlyinginstability. Although severe abnormal psychological states arerare when compared to the total number of marihuana users, lesserproblems are not rare, and they may endanger both the individualand those around him at the time of their occurrence. Theindividual contemplating use is not capable of predicting whetherhe is predisposed by his particular circumstances to anundesirable mental reaction. The undesirable consequencesoccurring while an individual is involved in complex tasks suchas driving or operating machinery or tasks requiring finepsychomotor precision and judgment are all too imaginable. From a public health point of view, the immediate effects ofmarihuana intoxication on the individual's organs or bodilyfunctions are of little significance. By and large these effects,which have been carefully outlined in Chapter 11 of the Report,are transient and have little or no permanent effect upon theindividual. Effects Of Long-Term, Heavy Use To determine the long-term chronic effects of heavy marihuanause, the Commission has carefully reviewed the world literatureand contemporary studies of heavy, chronic (up to 41 years)cannabis users in the world. In addition, lower socioeconomicpopulations in Afghanistan, Greece, and Jamaica have beenexamined. Effects On The Body These recent studies in Greece and Jamaica report minimalphysical abnormalities in the cannabis users as compared withtheir non-using peers. Minimal abnormalities in pulmonary function have been observedin some cases of heavy and very heavy smokers of potent marihuanapreparations (ganja or hashish). However, one study concluded thecause was smoking in general no matter what the substance. Theother study could not express any conclusion because of theabsence of a control population. Such decrements in normalpulmonary capacity may represent early warning signals in thedevelopment of chronic lung disease. They must be considered inany program of early prevention of disease and future disability. No objective evidence of specific pathology of brain tissuehas been documented. This fact contrasts sharply with thewell-established brain damage of chronic alcoholism. Effects On The Mind No outstanding abnormalities in psychological tests,psychiatric interviews or coping patterns have been conclusivelydocumented in studies of cannabis users in other countries of theworld. Further research in this important area is necessarybefore definite conclusions can be drawn relating or linkingmarihuana to mental dysfunction because available psychologicaltests do not measure certain higher mental functions veryaccurately. Cannabis use has long been known to precipitate short-termphychotic-like episodes in predisposed individuals or those whotake excessive doses. Some observers report that the prevalenceof shortterm psychoses as well as the psychotic episodes oflonger duration in heavy cannabis users are compatible with theprevalence rate of psychosis in the general population and,therefore, may not be attributable to cannabis use. In fact, somebelieve that in populations under stress where marihuana iswidely used, occurrence of the acute psychotic-like episodesoccur less often than one would expect in such a population.Other researchers have disagreed with these conclusions, and thematter is still controversial. Effects On Motivation The Commission is deeply concerned about another group ofbehavioral effects that have been described in other nations asbeing associated with the heavy, long-term use of cannabis. Thisbehavioral condition has been termed the "amotivationalsyndrome." An extreme form has been reported in populationsof lower socioeconomic males in several developing nations. Thesereports describe lethargy, instability, social deterioration, aloss of interest in virtually all activities other than drug use.This state of social and economic disability also results inprecipitation and aggravation of psychiatric disorders (overtpsychotic behavior) and possible somatic complications among veryheavy, very long-term users of high potency cannabis products.However, in the populations so far observed in Jamaica, Greece,and Afghanistan, physical and psychosocial deterioration was notreported. The life styles of these populations appeared to beconditioned by cultural and socioeconomic factors. Someresearchers believe cannabis' may serve to keep these individualsstratified at this lower socioeconomic level. The occurrence of a similar, though less intense, syndrome hasbeen identified recently with heavy marihuana use among youngpersons in the Western world, including the United States. Someclinicians have described the existence of a complex of subtlesocial, psychological and behavioral changes related to a loss ofvolitional goal direction in certain individuals, including somelong-term heavy users of marihuana. Such persons appear to orientonly to the present. They appear, alienated from generallyaccepted social and occupational activities, and they tend toshow a reduced concern for personal hygiene and nutrition. Some clinicians believe that this picture is directly causedby the action of marihuana. However , other behavioral scientistsbelieve that among impressionable adolescents, marihuana-inducedsuggestibility may facilitate the rapid adoption of new valuesand behavior patterns, particularly when the drug is taken in asocially alienated subculture that advocates and stronglyreinforces such changes. Whichever interpretation one accepts, the fact is apparentthat the chronic, heavy use of marihuana may jeopardize socialand economic adjustments of the adolescents We believe this isone concern which merits further research and evaluation. On thebasis of past studies, the chronic, heavy use of marihuana, seemsto constitute a high-risk behavior, particularly amongpredisposed adolescents. This consideration is especiallycritical when we consider the adolescent who is in the throes ofa normally turbulent emotional process. The Commission hasreviewed numerous reported studies and heard the testimony ofseveral clinicians dealing with heavy users of marihuana whoexhibit this particular behavior pattern. Although the UnitedStates does not, at the present time, have a large number of suchpersons within its population, the incidence is too frequent toignore. Expanded epidemiologic studies are imperative to obtain abetter understanding of this complex behavior. Addiction Potential Unfortunately, fact and fancy have become irrationally mixedregarding marihuana's physiological and psychological properties.Marihuana clearly is not in the same chemical category as heroininsofar as its physiologic and psychological effects areconcerned. In a word, cannabis does not lead to physicaldependence. No torturous withdrawal syndrome follows the suddencessation of chronic, heavy use of marihuana. Although evidenceindicates that heavy, long-term cannabis users may developpsychological dependence, even then the level of psychologicaldependence is no different from the syndrome of anxiety andrestlessness seen when an American stops smoking tobaccocigarettes. Progression To Other Drugs As noted in Chapter 11, to say marihuana leads to any otherdrug avoids the real issue and reduces a complex set of variablesto an oversimplified premise of cause and effect. If any onestatement can characterize why persons in the United Statesescalate their drug use patterns and become polydrug users, it ispeer pressure. Indeed, if any drug is associated with the use ofother drugs, including marihuana, it is tobacco, followed closelyby alcohol. Study after study which the Commission reviewedinvariably reported an association between the use of tobacco,and, to a lesser extent, of alcohol with the use of marihuana andother drugs. The fact should be emphasized that the overwhelming majorityof marihuana users do not progress to other drugs. They eitherremain with marihuana or foresake its use in favor of alcohol. Inaddition, the largest number of marihuana users in the UnitedStates today are experimenters or intermittent users, and 2% ofthose who have ever used it are presently heavy users. Onlymoderate and heavy use of marihuana is significantly associatedwith persistent use of other drugs. Some persons in our society are interested in experimentingwith a series of drugs, and there is no uniformity regardingwhich drug these multidrug users take first. In some cases, thedrug used is a matter of preference; in others, a matter ofavailability; and in further instances, it matter of groupchoice. Citizens concerned with health issues must consider thepossibility of marihuana use leading to use of heroin, otheropiates, cocaine or hallucinogens. This so-called stepping-stonetheory first received widespread acceptance in 1951 as a resultof testimony at Congressional hearings. At that time, studies ofvarious addict populations repeatedly described most heroin usersas marihuana users also. The implication of these descriptionswas that a causal relationship existed between marihuana andsubsequent heroin use. When the voluminous testimony given atthese hearings is seriously examined, no verification is found ofa causal relationship between marihuana use and subsequent heroinuse. Again, we must avoid polarity on this issue. To assume thatmarihuana use is unrelated to the use of other drugs would beinaccurate. As mentioned earlier, the heavy or very heavymarihuana users are frequently users of other drugs. Thestepping-stone theory holds that the adolescent begins the use ofillicit drugs with marihuana, and later proceeds to heroin in thesearch for greater thrills. The opposing viewpoint holds that thelarge majority of marihuana users never become heroin addicts anddenies the validity of a causal relationship. In the National Survey, among the adult respondents, 70%thought that marihuana makes people want to try stronger drugssuch as heroin; 56% of the youth in the 12-to-17-year-oldcategory agreed with the same statement. These perceptionscontrast with another finding in the same Survey which revealedthat 4% of current marihuana users have tried heroin. On theother hand, very few respondents perceived alcohol and tobacco tobe precipitants of other drug use. Studies of the escalation process demonstrate that the ratesof progression vary from one group to another and from onesegment of the population to another. There is no set proportionof marihuana users who "escalate" to the use of otherdrugs. The other drugs which some marihuana smokers use varyaccording to the social characteristics of the population inquestion. Within some groups, heroin may be the choice; in othergroups, it may be LSD. Marihuana use per se does not dictate whether other drugs willbe used; nor does it determine the rate of progression, if andwhen it, occurs, or which drugs might be used. As discussed inChapter 11, the user's social group seems to have the strongestinfluence on whether other drugs will be used; and if so, whichdrugs will be used. PREVENTIVE PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERNS The hallmark of a good health care delivery system ispreventing as much illness as possible. This objective isachieved by means of immunizations, regular routine checkups, andeducational programs. Education programs regarding marihuana have been notablyineffective, partly due to an exaggeration of the effects ofusing the drug and partly because the effects of the opiates andmarihuana have been compared inaccurately. As a result, manypersons have developed a conscious or unconscious denial ofnearly all dangers associated with marihuana use. Some educatorsbelieve that drug programs merely sharpen the curiosity ofchildren and tempt them to use drugs which they otherwise wouldnot use. Others believe that the responsibility should not belodged with the schools but rather with the home or thecommunity. Because of the uncertainty about the efficacy of these,programs, education programs dealing with drug usage simply donot exist in the school systems of a number of major cities; inothers, token programs are offered in response to the demand thatsomething be done. Health educators have the responsibility tohelp this vulnerable group of Americans become aware of alloptions so that they are able to make enlightened choices. The educational role of physicians and other clinical healthpersonnel should not be underestimated. The National Survey showsthat the public believes young people should receive informationconcerning marihuana first from schools and second from familyphysicians. The health professional has a unique position as bothteacher and confidant to an individual struggling with a"drug abuse" problem. Honest, sincere, and confidentialguidance from a physician may prevent later difficulties to boththe individual and the society. The Commission believes thataction must be taken to inform and support the physician in hisrole as confidant and counsellor to those seeking assistance. Considering the current patterns of marihuana use in theUnited States, the need for treatment and/or rehabilitation doesnot appear necessary for the vast majority of persons who areexperimenting with the drug or using it intermittently. Rather,these persons need to be realistically educated regarding thepotential hazards they face. To this end, a comparison of thepersonal and public health risks of marihuana and those ofheroin, cocaine, amphetamines, and other drugs would be useful. A concern for public health also requires thoughtfulconsideration of the consequences of any change in public policy.We have objectively appraised the present scope of public healthconcerns concluding that the most serious risk lies with thepopulation of heavy users, which is, at this time, quite small inthis country. Now, we must soberly consider the likely effect of adoption ofa social policy of neutrality or approval toward marihuana use.Any legal policy which institutionalizes availability of the drugcarries with it a likely increase in the at-risk population. Thisfactor is not necessarily conclusive in itself , but it doesweigh heavily for the policymaker. Even though the proportion ofheavy users in the total using population might not increase ifsuch a social or legal policy were adopted, the absolute numberof heavy users would probably increase. Thus, we would have anincrease in the at-risk segment of the populace. A greater stresswould thereby be placed on the general health care deliverysystem in all the areas of health concern described earlier. Regardless of emerging social policy, greater emphasis must beplaced on educating our youth regarding the prospective dangersinherent in expanded marihuana use. This anticipatory guidancecan serve to defuse or at least forestall a potentially serioussocial phenomenon. Summary From what is now known about the effects of marihuana, its useat the present level does not constitute a major threat to publichealth. However, this statement should not lead to complacency.Marihuana is not an innocuous drug. The clinical findings ofimpaired psychological function, carefully documented by medicalspecialists, legitimately arouse concern. These studies identifymarihuana-related problems which must be taken into account inthe development of public policy. Unfortunately, thesemarihuana-related problems, which occur only in heavy, long-termusers, have been over generalized and overdramatized. Two percent of those Americans who have ever used marihuanaare now heavy users and constitute the highest risk group. Strongevidence indicates that certain emotional changes have takenplace among predisposed individuals as a result of prolonged,heavy marihuana use. The clinical reports in the literaturedescribing transient psychoses, other psychiatric difficulties,and impairment of cognitive function subsequent to use ofmarihuana and of other drugs do not prove causality but cannot beignored. The causes of these emotional difficulties are much toocomplex to justify general conclusions by the public or thepress. The mass media have frequently promoted such clinicalreports to appear as far reaching events affecting the entirepopulation. The clinician sees only the troubled Population ofany group. In evaluating a public health concern, the essentialelement is the proportion of affected persons in the generalgroup. The people responsible for evaluating public healthproblems must concern themselves with the proportion of peopleout of the total population who are affected by any specificcondition. The highest risk groups should be identified as thesource of primary concern. A recognition that a majority ofmarihuana users are not now a matter of public health concernmust be made so that public health Officials may concentratetheir attention where it will have maximum impact. The concept of relative risk is crucial to an evaluation ofthe impact of marihuana on public health. We believe thatexperimental or intermittent use of this drug carries minimalrisk to the public health, and should not be given overzealousattention in terms of a public health response. We are concernedthat social influences might cause those who would not otherwiseuse the drug to be exposed to this minimal risk and the potentialescalation of drug-using patterns. For this group, we mustdeglorify, demythologize, and deemphasize the use of marihuanaand other drugs. The Commission reemphasizes its concern about the smallminority of heavy, long-term marihuana users who are exposed to amuch greater relative risk of impaired general functioning incontemporary America. Public health officials should concentratetheir efforts on this group. Fortunately, the group has to datenot grown sufficently in size to warrant its being considered amajor public health concern. We retiterate, too, the public health implications of anincrease in the at-risk population. We suspect that such anincrease is most likely if a sudden shift in social policysignificantly increased availability of the drug. One of thefactors we consider in Chapter V when evaluating the varioussocial policy options and legal implementations is the effect ofeach policy on incidence and patterns of use. Regardless of howheavy this particular variable will weigh in that process, wemust state that a significant increase in the at-risk populationcould convert what is now a minor public health concern in thiscountry to one of major proportions. Marihuana And The Dominant Social Order For more than 30 years it has been widely assumed that themarihuana user constitutes a threat to the well-being of thecommunity and the nation. Originally, the users were consideredto be "outsiders" or marginal citizens. Included weresuch people as hustlers, prostitutes, itinerant workers, merchantseamen, miners and ranchhands, water-front day laborers anddrifters, many of whom were drawn from the lower socioeconomicsegments of the population. Concerns about marihuana use expressed in the 1930's relatedprimarily to a perceived inconsistency between the life stylesand values of these individuals and the social and moral order.Their potential influence on the young was especially worrisome.When marihuana was first prohibited, a recurrent fear was thatuse might spread among the youth. And in the late 1930's and1940's, the attraction of young people to jazz music was thoughtto be in part related to marihuana use by this"outsider" population. Throughout this early period, American society, in reaction toits fear of the unfamiliar, translated rumor about thecriminality and immorality of the marihuana user into"unquestioned fact" which, in turn, was translated intosocial policy. From the mid-thirties to the present, however, socialperceptions have undergone significant change in response to theemergence of new and challenging social problems. As marihuana,use has spread to include the affluent, middle class, white highschool and college-age youth as well as minority group members oflower socioeconomic circumstances in urban core areas, theconcept of marginality has become blurred. Also, as the use of marihuana has increased, those individualsformerly labeled as marginal and threatening have been replacedby a more middle class, white, educated and younger population ofmarihuana smokers. A stereotyped user no longer exists, andtherefore, the question now properly focuses on who poses athreat to the dominant order. The Adult Marihuana User Despite the fact that substantial numbers of adults usemarihuana, society does not appear to feel greatly threatened bythis group, probably because included in the group are aconsiderable number of middle class individuals who are regularlyemployed and whose occupational and social status appear to besimilar to those of peers and colleagues who do not usemarihuana. In the course of its fact-finding effort, the Commission hasmet with several groups of socially and economically"successful" marihuana users in the professions of law,medicine, banking, education and business. In most cases, thesepersons, in their external appearances, seemed to be mature andresponsible adults whose social attitudes and behavior did notmark them as radical ideologues or essentially irresponsibleindividuals. For the most part, use of marihuana by adults has been foundto be more directly related to the facilitation of socialinteraction (much like the adult use of alcohol in socialgatherings) than to any other factor. Although their marihuanasmoking behavior is illegal, most adult users are not ordinarilyconsidered by their peers to be criminal nor is their usegenerally likely to result in arrest. Because the adult user generally maintains low visibility, isprimarily a recreational user, is not usually involved in radicalpolitical activity and maintains a life style largelyindistinguishable from his non-using neighbors, he is notordinarily viewed as a threat to the dominant social order. Inshort, aside from his use of marihuana, the adult recreationaluser is not generally viewed as a significant social problem. The Young Marihuana User The widespread use of marihuana by millions of young people ofcollege and high school age has been viewed by many as a directthreat to the stability and future of the social order. Many parents, adults in general, and government officials haveexpressed concern that young people who use marihuana oftenreject the essential values and traditions upon which the societyis founded. Some have suggested that youthful marihuana use is,in itself, an indication of the rejection of responsibility and asign of reckless hedonism which may well interfere with anorderly maturation process. Others see youthful marihuana use aspart of a pattern of conduct which produces dropping out,underachievement and dependency. In short, the mass character of youthful marihuana use hasbeen frequently interpreted as a rejection of theinstitutionalized principles of law and a lack of concern forindividual social responsibility, which threatens the social andpolitical institutions. Implicit in this view is the assumption that a young personwho uses marihuana in spite of the law cannot be expected toassume an individually and socially responsible, adult role. Thestrength of this fear is drawn largely from the vocal and visible"counterculture" to which marihuana is often tied. Notsurprisingly, the concerns posed by an alternate youthful lifestyle are extended to the drug itself. Threats to the social order are often seen, for example, inthe character of youthful leisure time activities, such asattendance at rock concerts, occasioned by the high mobility andaffluence of today's youth. They are also seen in the new modesof speech and dress and in the seemingly casual manner of theirday-to-day living. Equally troublesome for many, however, is theidea of intentional intoxication for purposes of recreation. Such conduct and the more casual attitude toward sexualrelationships as well as participation in radical politics haveprovoked increasing concern throughout the adult society. TheNational Survey illustrates the extent to which the older adultperceives youthful marihuana use as part of a much larger patternof behavior which bodes ill for the future of the nation. First, the older the adult respondent, the more likely he wasto picture the marihuana user as leading an abnormal life. Only9% of the over-50 generation agreed with the statement that"most people who use marihuana lead a normal life."Nineteen percent of the 35to-49 age group and 29% of the26-to-34-year-olds were of the same belief. Conversely, half ofthe young adults (18-to-25) considered most marihuana usersnormal. This fact is not surprising since many of theircontemporaries are marihuana users. Second, the marihuana user, as envisioned by adults, istypically a youthful dropout from society. He doesn't like to bewith other people, is uninterested in the world around him, isusually lazy and has an above-average number of personalproblems. Third, the less optimistic the adult respondent was about thenation's youth, the more likely he was to oppose alteration ofthe marihuana laws and to envision major social dislocations ifthe laws were changed. Fifty-seven percent of the adultpopulation in general agreed with the statement, "ifmarihuana were legal, it would lead to teenagers becomingirresponsible and wild." Among those adults who mostdisapproved of youthful behavior in general, 74% agreed with thequoted statement. Similarly, 84% of the non-approving adultsfavored stricter laws on marihuana. As we discussed in Chapter I, marihuana's symbolic role in aperceived generational conflict has brought marihuana use intothe Category of a social problem. Today's youthful marihuana useris seen as a greater threat to the social order than either themarginal user of earlier times or the adult user of the present.Since the concerns about marihuana today relate mostly to youth,the remainder of this section will focus on these youth-relatedissues. 'THE WORLD OF YOUTH Youth of today are better fed, better housed, more mobile,more affluent, more schooled and probably more bored with theirlives than any generation which has preceded them. Adults have difficulty understanding why such privileged youngpeople should wish to offend by their language and appearance andspend so much effort trying to discredit those institutions ofsociety which have made possible the privileges which those youthenjoy. Many adults perceive the present level of youthfuldiscontent to be of a greater intensity than has been true ofpast generations. Marihuana has become both a focus and a symbol of thegeneration gap and for many young people its use has become, anexpedient means of protest against adult values. Adults in positions of authority, parents, teachers, policyofficials, judges, and others often view marihuana use as thesign of youth's rejection of moral and social values and of thesystem of government under which they live. The problem is thatboth youth and adults tend to make pronouncements and arefrequently unable to reason together in logical fashion. Insteadthey overstate their positions in such a way that effectiveresolution of their differences becomes very difficult. In effect, each group takes the rhetoric of the other at facevalue. For youth, however, marihuana use plays many roles, onlyone of which is a symbolic assault on adult authority and values. Marihuana use, for many young people, has become a part of aritual. It takes on the aspect of participating in a sharedexperience which, for some if not all, is enjoyable in itself.For many, it becomes an even more interesting experience becauseit is forbidden. Some of the rituals concerned with the purchase, storage,preparation, and use of marihuana take on a mystique similar tothe time of Prohibition when people went through certain ritualsnecessary to get a drink in a speak-easy. The three knocks and"Joe sent me" cues have been replaced by thenot-so-secret handshakes, the new vocabulary of youth and otherexclusionary devices to delineate the "in" group. The use of marihuana is attractive to many young people forthe sense of group unity and participation which develops aroundthe common use of the drug. This sense tends to be intensified bya sense of "common cause" in those circumstances whereusers are regarded as social or legal outcasts. They know, too, that many of their peers who share themarihuana experience and also share the designation of lawbreakerare, in reality, productive and generally affirmative individualswho are interested neither in promoting the downfall of thenation nor in engaging in acts which would harm the generalwell-being of the community. In short, many youth have found marihuana use to be apleasurable and socially rewarding experience. They have foundthat the continuance of this behavior has brought them morepleasure than discomfort, more reward than punishment. Youth have increasingly come to see law enforcement activitydirected at marihuana use as an unreasonable and unjustifiablerejection of their generation. Most of these youth have grown upwith a positive image of the police as protectors of society.Now, many are confronted with the possibility of police intrusioninto their private lives and the threat of a criminal record. Theunfortunate result, in many instances, has been a blanketrejection and distrust of both the agents and institutions ofgovernment. In part, marihuana use as a social behavior is an unintendedbyproduct of the formal and informal educational process. Somepersons even suggest that youthful drug usage is a"success" in terms of the educational and socializationprocess. Our society values independence of thought,experimentation, and the empirical method, often reinforcing thisattitude by such advertising cliches as "make up your ownmind," "be your own man...... judge for yourself." Although experimentation with regard to drugs should not beconsidered a "success, the Commission does believe that theeducational efforts necessary to discourage this curiosity, whichmay be valuable in other matters, have not succeeded. Weunderstand why teenagers and young adults encouraged over theyears to make up their own minds have not been restrained byexaggerated accounts of marihuana's harmful effects, or by themore recent assertions that a true evaluation of marihuana usesrequires more research. The Scottish verdict of "notproven" does little to restrain youthful curiosity. In the previous Chapter, we emphasized the difference betweenthe vast majority of experimenters and intermittent users and thesmall group of moderate and heavy users who generally use drugsother than marihuana as well. The former do not differsignificantly from non-users on many indices of socialintegration. Various studies indicate that they maintain normalpatterns of living and social interaction, and are employed,competent citizens. On the other hand, there undoubtedly are a number of personswho have used marihuana and have exercised poor judgment,performed inadequately, or behaved irresponsibly while under thedrug's influence, thus jeopardizing themselves or others. Thefact remains, however, that a certain number of these personswere immature and irresponsible individuals even prior tomarihuana use, who would be expected to have poor or impairedjudgment whether or not marihuana was involved. The marihuana user is not, for the most part, a socialisolationist or a severely disturbed individual in need oftreatment or confinement. Most users, young or old, demonstratean average or above-average degree of social functioning,academic achievement and job performance. Their general image ofthemselves and their society is not radically different from thatof their non-marihuana-using peers. The majority of both groupstends to demonstrate equal interest in corporate concerns. Based upon present evidence, it is unlikely that marihuanausers will become less socially responsible as a result of theirmarihuana use or that their patterns of behavior and values willchange significantly. WHY SOCIETY FEELS THREATENED Society appears to be concerned about marihuana use primarilybecause of its perceived relationship to other social problems.We noted in the discussion of marihuana and public health thatthe focus of social concern should be the heavy users and thepossibility that their numbers will increase. Here we considerthe perceived impact of marihuana use upon the institutions andproclaimed goals of the society. Dropping Out Many parents have a genuine fear that marihuana use leads toidleness and "dropping out." During the 1960's,marihuana use, as well as the use of other psychoactive drugs,became equated with unconventional youth life styles. When anumber of young people adopted unconventional life styles, manyadults tended to view long hair, unkempt appearance and drugs assymbols of counterculture. They concluded that anyone who allowed his hair to grow orgave little attention to his clothing or appearance was probablya drug user with little or no motivation to achieve and nointerest in conventional goals. A number of researchers and clinicians have observed the useof marihuana or hashish in other societies, particularly amongpoor, lower class males. Some have observed that many of theseindividuals are generally unmotivated and ordinarily appear toshow little aspiration or motivation to improve their way oflife, regardless of whether they are judged by the standards ofthe more prosperous members of their own society or by middleclass standards of contemporary American society. One of the problems with this type of analysis is that itfails to perceive the social and cultural realities in which thephenomenon takes place. In the Middle East and in Asia wherehashish is used, the societies, in all instances, are highlystratified with people in the lower classes having virtually nosocial or economic mobility. Poverty, deprivation and diseasewere the conditions into which these people were born and inwhich they remain, regardless of whether they use cannabis. Inthis context, a person's resignation to his status in life is notlikely to be caused or greatly influenced by the effects ofcannabis. Any society will always have a certain number ofpersons who, for various reasons, are not motivated to strive forpersonal achievement or participate fully in the life of thecommunity. Therefore, the determination is difficult to makewhether cannabis use influences a person to drop out and, if itdoes, to what extent. Some individuals possess particular personality as well aspsychosocial characteristics which in specified instances couldproduce amotivation or dropping out. However, little likelihoodexists that the introduction of a single element such asmarihuana use would significantly change the basic personalityand character structure of the individual to any degree. Anindividual is more likely to drop out when a number ofcircumstances have joined at a given point in his lifetime,producing pressures with which he has difficulty in coping. Thesepressures often coincide with situations involving painful ordifficult judgments resulting from a need to adjust to thepressures of the social environment. Many young people, particularly in the college population, areshielded in their earlier years from experiences which might beemotionally stressful or unpleasant. Some young people, sosheltered, are neither equipped to make mature and independentjudgments nor prepared to enjoy the new-found freedom of theuniversity or college in a mature and responsible way. Some ofthese students are often unable to cope with social or academicadversity. After being sheltered for so long, some of these youngpeople may be easily attracted to experiences which promise newexcitement and to fall under the influence of a peer group whosevalues and living patterns may be inimical to a productive,healthy and continuous process of personal growth and maturity.In these instances, marihuana serves as the medium by which theseindividuals encounter social and psychological experiences withwhich they are ill-equipped to cope. Certain numbers of these young people have demonstrated whatis described as amotivation long before the smoking of marihuanabecame fashionable. Adolescence is often a particularly difficultperiod of searching in many directions at the same time. Inaddition to seeking a concept of "self" the adolescentis, at the same time, attempting to comprehend the nature of theworld around him and to identify his status and role in society. Different individuals, with different backgrounds,socialization patterns, belief systems and levels of emotionalmaturity cope with the period of transition from childhood toadulthood in different ways., For a small number, dropping outmight be one of these coping mechanisms whether or not they usemarihuana. For others, the response to the difficult adjustmentsof adolescence takes other forms, some of which are more,acceptable, "normal" and easier for adults tounderstand. The young person who does not find it possible to cope withthe pressures of his adolescent developmental period in waysconvenient to the understanding of adult society should not berejected, stigmatized or labeled. He requires both support andunderstanding and the opportunity to participate in roles whichhave meaning for him and in ways in which he feels comfortable.For a certain number of young people, marihuana and the mystiqueof the experience eases this passage by helping them share theirfeelings, doubts, inadequacies and aspirations with peers withwhom they feel safe and comfortable. Dropping Down Apart from the concern over youthful dropping out andidleness, there is also widespread concern about "droppingdown" or underachieving. Parents frequently express fear that marihuana will undermineor interfere with academic and vocational career development andachievement by focusing youthful interests on the drug and thoseassociated with the drug subculture. Some parents makeconsiderable sacrifices for their children to go to school, andthe fears that marihuana might undermine the academic, emotionaland vocational development of their young are quiteunderstandable. The Commission reviewed a number of studies related tomarihuana use by high school and college youth. No conclusiveevidence was found demonstrating that marihuana by itself isresponsible for academic or vocational failure or "droppingdown," although it could be one of many contributoryreasons. Many studies reported that the majority of young peoplewho have used marihuana received average or above-average gradesin school. In part, underachievement is related to a view of what oneindividual judges to be the achievement capacity of another. Thisjudgment is often made without concern for what the individualhimself feels about his potential, his interests and his goals.Perceptions about achievement also frequently fail to take intoconsideration the individual feelings about the goals of hispeers and the values of the larger society, including therelative prestige and status attached to various academicprograms, occupations and professions. Youth and Radical Politics Aside from the issue of unconventional life styles and theconcerns evoked by them, the other major concern of the sixtieswhich related to youth and drugs was radical politics. During the latter half of the decade, youthful anti-war groupswere organized on many of the nation's college campuses and highschools. These groups could be divided into two segments. Thelargest segment consisted of concerned, sometimes confused,frustrated and well-meaning petition signers and demonstrators.Within this large group there was a small coterie of individualswho constantly sought to turn the demonstration into aconfrontation and to protest for peace by means of violence. Thesecond segment consisted of organizations of individuals whosestated purpose was to undermine the social and politicalstability of the society through violent means. What must be clearly understood, however, is that among theyoung people, and some not so young, who protested against thewar in Vietnam, only a minority were bent on violence andmanipulated and corrupted these otherwise peaceful demonstrationsfor their own purposes. At the various gatherings, a number of the young peopleprotesting in these mass groups did smoke marihuana. We willnever know how many were initiated to marihuana use during thecourse of these peace demonstrations. The fact remains, however,that in the large campins, such as those in Washington, marihuanawas involved in two ways. First, there was the "normal"use in which the smoking was part of the social experience.Individuals came together and smoked, in part, to acknowledge andstrengthen group solidarity. Second, another quite differentaspect of the marihuana use at these gatherings said, in effect,"we know it's illegal but go and arrest all of us for doingit. . . ." This aspect can perhaps best be characterized asa symbolic challenge to authority. Unfortunately, however, the media, particularly television andsome of the news magazines, sometimes portrayed the image of agroup of young people plotting the overthrow of the nation byviolent means while under the influence of marihuana. In thoserelatively few instances where explosives and other violent meanswere employed, the evidence points to a cold and calculated planwhich was neither conceived nor executed under the influence ofmarihuana. As a result of these protests and demonstrations, therefore,radical politics has been seen by many as a mechanism throughwhich large numbers of young people would be introduced tomarihuana as well as to other drugs. Radical political activityor mass political protest is viewed by some as a threat to thewelfare of the nation and is assumed to be aided and encouragedby our enemies. The involvement of large numbers of youth in politicalactivism and the concomitant public concern about drug use havebeclouded the issue of marihuana use and have led to a broadeningof the concerns about marihuana on the part of adults. Some of the radical movement's leaders abetted this tendencyby pointing out the alleged irrationality and unfairness of themarihuana laws to recruit members to their ranks. Not surprisingis the fact that 45% of the adult respondents in the NationalSurvey felt that marihuana is often promoted by people who areenemies of the United States. Nor is it surprising that thisbelief is a function of age. While 22% of all young people(12-to-17 years of age) and 26% of young adults (18-to-25 years)identified marihuana with national enemies, more than one-half(58%) of those persons 50 years and older did so. Youth and the Work Ethic Of the many issues related to youth and the use of marihuana,one that greatly troubles many adults, is youthful attitudestoward work. The work ethic in our society is based on a beliefthat work is a good and necessary activity in and of itself. The traditional view holds that work is not only a right andmoral act but that it keeps people from mischief and from wastingtime on harmful recreational pleasures. The rationale for thisthesis is that work in American society has served as the primarymeans by which persons acquired the treasured symbols of society. In fact, throughout much of our history, with the exception ofthe small number who inherited or married wealth, no ethicalalternative to work existed. In recent years, the increasedemphasis placed upon leisure time activities has resulted inshorter work weeks, longer vacation periods and more paidholidays. Among the concerns of the adults about today's youthfulattitudes toward work and leisure are that young people seem toenjoy their recreational pursuits so much that they forget thatto a considerable degree their enjoyment is paid for by the laborof others. Many young people do not express the same level of concern astheir parents did about preparing themselves for a career and"getting ahead in the world." In part, this attitude isattributable to the fact that increasingly, the results of thislabor are not tangible, material goods. Service occupationsgenerally do not produce such tangible products, and even inmanufacturing industries the individual worker is usually tooremote from the product to feel any pride or interest in it. Inboth instances, the traditional symbol of the "manhood"of work, a tangible product, is no longer present. In sum, society has become increasingly disturbed by certainattitudes of today's youth which seem to stress pleasure, fun,and enjoyment without a counterbalancing concern for adisciplined and sustained work effort. Nevertheless, the numberof young people who view work as unimportant is small whencompared to the total number of young people. The Commission hasfound no evidence to suggest that the majority of youth areunwilling or incapable of productive and disciplined workperformance. In fact, the great majority of young people areperforming their tasks in industry, the professions and educationquite effectively. Although many young people delay entry into the work force toenjoy the fruits of our prosperous society, this delay does notmean they will not one day contribute their best efforts to thecontinued growth and advancement of the nation. The Changing Social Scene The present confusion about the effects of youthful marihuanause upon the dominant social order is caused by a variety ofinterrelated social concerns, many of them emotionally chargedissues, including anti-war demonstrations, campus riots, hippielife styles, the rising incidence of crime and delinquency andthe increased usage of all illicit drugs. The focus of concernabout marihuana is aggravated by the data overload mentioned inChapter 1, by the outpouring of incidental information about thedrug and its effects in a form and volume far beyond the capacityof the readers or listeners to assimilate or interpret. Ratherthan informing the public, much of the data disseminated hasproduced frustration and misinterpretation of the informationpresented. Adult society, including parents and policy-makers, finds itdifficult to comprehend and account for many of the attitudes andbehavior of the young, including the use of marihuana. In manycases the adults are still influenced by the myths of an earlierperiod which overstated the dangers of the drug. At a time ofgreat social change and turbulence, the tendency to depend on the"traditional wisdom," and its moral justification, is astrong one. Just as youth must try to understand and appreciate thestrengths of the institutions of our society, adults must try tounderstand the times through the eyes of their children. Wheremarihuana is concerned, society must try to understand its rolein the lives of those who use it. The key to such understandinglies in the changes which have taken place in society withinrecent years and the effects these changes have had on succeedinggenerations of youth. The increased use of marihuana is only oneof these effects. One focal point in discussion between generations is thecontrast between the use of marihuana and the use of alcohol.Many young people perceive that marihuana is less dangerous thanalcohol in terms of its addiction potential and long-termphysical and psychological consequences. Many believe also thatmarihuana - and other psychoactive drugs make it possible toexpand their perceptions and see this as a perfectly legitimateobjective. Viewed against the background of the profound changes ofrecent years in the fields of economics, politics, religion,family life, housing patterns, civil rights, employment andrecreation, the use of marihuana by the nation's youth must beseen as a relatively minor change in social patterns of conductand as more of a consequence of than a contributor to these majorchanges. When the issue of marihuana use is placed in this context ofsociety's larger concerns, marihuana does not emerge as a majorissue or threat to the social order. Rather, it is mostappropriately viewed as a part of the whole of society's concernsabout the growth and development of its young people. In view of the magnitude and nature of change which oursociety has experienced during the past 25 years, the thoughtfulobserver is not likely to attribute any of the major socialproblems resulting from this change to marihuana use. Similarly,it is unlikely that marihuana will affect the future strength,stability or vitality of our social and political institutions.The fundamental principles and values upon which the societyrests are far too enduring to -go up in the smoke of a marihuanacigarette. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-30IA086-000614-B046-254http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncchp4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022227 text/html 63284HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:22:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:40 GMTContent-length: 63066 Social Response to Marihuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter IV social response to marihuana use "I find the great thing in this world is not so muchwhere we stand, as in what direction we are moving: To reach theport of heaven, we must sail sometimes with the wind andsometimes against it-but we must sail and not drift, nor lie atanchor." Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the Breakfast Table(1858) A general interpretation of the National Survey indicates thatroughly one-quarter of the American public is convinced thatcriminal sanctions should be withdrawn entirely from marihuanause. Another fourth of the public is equally convinced thatexisting social and legal policy is appropriate, and wouldordinarily jail possessors, with the exception of young firstoffenders. Approximately half of the citizenry is confused aboutwhat marihuana means and ambivalent about what society ought todo about its use. This half of the population is unenthusiasticabout classifying the marihuana user as a criminal, but isreluctant to relinquish formal control over him. In considering social and legal policy alternatives, theCommission has analyzed the pattern of social response tomarihuana use. The Initial Social Response As we noted in Chapter I, the initial social reaction tomarihuana use was shaped by the narcotics policy adopted by theFederal Government. In the early legislation, marihuana wasofficially characterized as a narcotic on the basis of the widelyshared assumption that it was a habit-forming drug, leadinginevitably to a form of dependence. Although the medicalcommunity was aware that marihuana was distinguishable from theopiates in that it did not produce physical dependence, nofunctional distinction was drawn; it was assumed that most userswere psychologically compelled to continue using the drug. As onepsychiatrist noted in 1934, the marihuana "user wants torecapture over and over again the ecstatic, elated state intowhich the drug lifts him . . . The addiction to cannabis is asensual addiction: it is in the services of the hedonisticelements of the personality." The notion of psychological dependence is still ill-defined,and was understood even less in the early days of Americanmarihuana use. The Commission has concluded that the automaticclassification of marihuana as "addictive" was derivedprimarily from an underlying social perception of the substrataof society which used the drug: aliens, prostitutes, and personsat the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder. Additional characteristics of the opiates were alsotransferred to marihuana. Particularly important in this regardwas the association of marihuana with aggressive behavior andviolent crime. One district attorney in New Orleans, wheremarihuana use was particularly common, wrote in 1931: It is an ideal drug to cut off inhibitions quickly . . . Atthe present time the underworld has been quick to realize thevalue of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelicts tothat of a master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint, and toits influence may be attributed many of our present day crimes.It has been the experience of the Police and ProsecutingOfficials in the South that immediately before the commission ofmany crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged inby criminals so as to relieve themselves from the naturalrestraint which might deter them from the commission of criminalacts, and to give them the false courage necessary to commit thecontemplated crime. By 1931, those states in which marihuana use was at all commonhad formally responded with a total eliminationist policy. Theygenerally amended the preexisting narcotics legislation toinclude marihuana. Meanwhile, in 1929, the Federal Governmentalready had classified marihuana officially as a"habit-forming drug along with the opiates and cocaine, inthe legislation which established two federal "farms"for treating narcotics addicts in Fort Worth, Texas, andLexington, Kentucky. During the 1930's, the remaining states criminalized marihuanause by adopting the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, in which the drugwas included (optionally) in the definition of narcotic drugs.Then, in 1937, Congress adopted the Marihuana Tax Act, completingthe initial period of official response to marihuana use. A difference of opinion among historians still exists as towhy policymakers thought national legislation was necessary atthat time. Whatever the reason, however, Congress respondedswiftly, without much attempt to learn the facts about the drugand its use. The assumptions underlying that legislation weresummarized in the Report of the House Ways and Means Committee: Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed and allpower of directing and controlling thought is lost. Inhibitionsare released. As a result of these effects, it appeared fromtestimony produced at the hearings that many violent crimes havebeen and are being committed by persons under the influence ofthis drug. Not only is marihuana used by the hardened criminalsto steel them to commit violent crimes, but it is also beingplaced in the hands of high-school children in the form ofmarihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Cases were citedat the hearings of school children who have been driven to crimeand insanity through the use of this drug. Its continued useresults many times in impotency and insanity. When Congress escalated penalties for narcotics offenses in1951 and again in 1956, marihuana was included, with thefollowing effects: Possession Minimum sentence First offense ------------------------------------------ 2years Second offense ---------------------------------------- 5years Third and subsequent offense --------------------------- 10years Fine ------------------------------------------------- $20,000 Sale Minimum sentence First offense ------------------------------------------ 5years Second and subsequent offense --------------------------- 10years Sale to minor by adult ---------------------------------- 10years Parole or probation were made unavailable to all except firstoffenders in the possession category. The perceptions of 1937 were perpetuated in the comments ofSenator Price M. Daniel, Chairman of the Senate subcommitteeconsidering the 1956 Act, although by now an important new factorhad been added: Marihuana is a drug which starts most addicts in the use ofdrugs. Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some ofthe worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to thehabit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then tothe final destruction of the persons addicted. The Change With the adoption of marihuana use by middle and upper classcollege youth in the mid-60's, the exaggerated notion of thedrug's dangers and the social tension so widespread during thisperiod combined to reopen the question of the impact of marihuanause. But governmental policy held to the appropriateness ofexisting law. Arrests, prosecutions, convictions and sentences ofimprisonment all increased at both the federal and state levels.Marihuana arrests by the U.S. Bureau of Customs increasedapproximately 362% from fiscal year 1965 to 1970. Arrests by theBureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, an agency which concernsitself primarily with sale, rose 80% from 1965 to 1968. Becausemajor responsibility for enforcing the possession laws lies atthe state level, state arrests rose dramatically (1,000%) duringthe five years from 1965 to 1970. Although the data compiled bythe Federal Bureau of Investigation are not comprehensive, theFBI sample tracks the continuing increase of state arrests (Table6). Table 6.-STATE MARIHUANA ARRESTS Year Arrests Percentage increase 1965 18,815 1966 31,119 65.39 1967 61,843 98.73 1968 95,870 55.02 1969 118,903 24.02 1970 188,682 58.68 In the wake of this upsurge in marihuana arrests, the criminaljustice system faced a far from usual "criminal"population. Nonetheless, judging from federal figures, the numberof people prosecuted, convicted, and incarcerated did risesubstantially as prosecutors and judges attempted to carry outthe law. Beginning in 1966, however, the proportion of defendantsultimately convicted declined gradually, as did the percentage ofdefendants who were incarcerated, and the average length of theirsentences. This response reflected an attempt to -mitigate theharshness of the law as applied to this new user population. By1968, the trend toward leniency seemed to have temporarilyleveled off, before it accelerated again in 1969 (Table 7). Paralleling the vigorous law enforcement effort between 1965and 1968 was a punitive reaction in the schools and large numbersof students using marihuana were suspended, expelled or referredto the police. Similarly, the military's first reaction to thesurge of marihuana use took the form of court-martial,administrative punishment, or discharge from the service. Table 7.-DISPOSITION OF FEDERAL MARIHUANA ARRESTS Year Total defendants Percent convicted Percent incarcerated Average length of sentence (in months) 1964 85 49 1965 523 90 52 58.2 1966 746 87 45 53.7 1967 941 80 38.5 51.0 1968 1,433 79 39.4 51.2 1969 2,189 76 34.3 52.6 1970 2,082 73 27.4 46.7 1971 3,323 60 28.5 39.9 The family, however, suffered the most from the suddenconflict between accepted norms and this expression of youthfulindependence. The use of drugs, particularly marihuana, became asignificant barrier between parent and child. Many young peopleadopted marihuana as a symbol of their uneasiness with society'sprevailing norms. As noted in Chapter 1, the sudden increase in marihuana useprecipitated extensive research by the medical and scientificcommunities. By 1969, a consensus emerged holding that many ofthe earlier beliefs about the effects of marihuana wereerroneous. Available U.S. data seemed to indicate that dependenceon the drug was rare, as was the incidence of psychosis amongmarihuana users. Particularly important was the recognition thatthere was little, if any, convincing proof that marihuana causedaggressive behavior or crime. As such findings accumulated,public attention was drawn increasingly to the consequences ofexisting policy: soaring arrests, convictions and in some states,lengthy sentences. Policy-makers, in social institutions and government, as wellas the public began to believe that the harshness of the criminalpenalties was far out of proportion to the dangers posed by thedrug. As users were incarcerated, newspapers and televisionstations often brought the matter to public attention,particularly when the arrested youngster came from a prominentfamily. Official response to this development was twofold: a trendtoward leniency in marihuana cases within the legal system, and arecognition by policy-makers of widespread uncertainty regardingthe effects of marihuana. Reflecting the first response, the courts, prosecutors andpolice applied existing law more leniently, and the law-makers inmost states and at the federal level changed the letter of thelaw, reducing the penalties for possession of marihuana,generally to a misdemeanor (up to a year in jail). In theprocess, they repealed the mandatory minimums which had been ofmajor concern to the judiciary. By June 1970, 24 states and the District of Columbia hadreduced the penalties, although 34 states and the District stillclassified marihuana as a narcotic. Meanwhile, on the federallevel, Congress had been considering the Nixon Administration'scomprehensive proposal to overhaul the national government'spatchwork of drug legislation. Since the passage of the Harrison Narcotics Act in 1914,federal drug laws had taken the form of tax measures, an approachcompelled for constitutional reasons. The Marihuana Tax Act of1937 followed the same format. The result, however, was a complexset of offenses involving order forms and registrations. When theSupreme Court declared certain aspects of the Tax Actunconstitutional in 1969, revision of the law became essential.Taking up the challenge, the Administration proposed a majorpiece of legislation which tightened control over pharmaceuticaldistributions and also reappraised the penalty structure fornarcotics and dangerous drug offenses. Possession of all drugs, including marihuana, was reduced to amisdemeanor. Special treatment for first offenders was provided,allowing expungement of the record upon satisfactory completionof a probationary period. Casual transfers of marihuana weretreated in the same manner as possession. After a series ofwide-ranging hearings, Congress passed the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act, and on October 27, 1970, thePresident signed it into law. After passage of the new federal drug law, the Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws adopted a Uniform ControlledSubstances Act, conforming in structure and emphasis to thefederal law. Although the Uniform Act specifies no penalties, theCommissioners recommended that possession of all drugs be amisdemeanor. At this writing, 42 of the states and the District of Columbiaclassify possession as a misdemeanor or have adopted specialprovisions so classifying possession of small amounts ofmarihuana. In half of the remaining eight jurisdictions, thecourts have discretion to sentence possessors as misdemeanants. In 11 jurisdictions, casual transfers are treated in the samemanner as possession, and in 27 jurisdictions, conditionaldischarge is available to certain classes of offenders. The second characteristic of the 1969-70 official response wasits acknowledgment of uncertainty. No longer perceived as a majorthreat to public safety, marihuana use had now become primarilyan issue of private and public health. Scientific researcherswere asked to define the nature and scope of the health concern.In a sense, lawmakers took the minimum official action dictatedby social and scientific realities, but were uncertain where togo from there. The need to know more about the effects of thedrug, particularly its chronic, long-term effects, became thecore of official response. Many states appointed special task forces and commissions toreport on marihuana and drug abuse in general. Congress directedthe Department of Health, Education and Welfare to file annualReports on Marihuana and Health and, in the Comprehensive DrugAbuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970, established thisCommission. The Current Response In addition to an objective appraisal of the effects ofmarihuana use, this Commission was directed to evaluate theefficacy of existing law. The marihuana laws were and still arethe focus of much public debate. We have recognized from theoutset that a meaningful evaluation of the law is dependent uponan understanding of objectives and the social context in whichthe law operates. Particularly important in this connection arethe attitudes and practices of society's non-legal institutionsand the general direction of public opinion. In order to comprehend the entire range of contemporary socialresponse, the Commission launched a threefold inquiry. First, wedesigned a series of projects designed to ascertain opinion andbehavior within the criminal justice system. Included were ananalysis of all marihuana arrests during the last six months of1970 in six metropolitan jurisdictions, a similar study of allfederal marihuana arrests during 1970, an opinion survey of alllocal prosecuting attorneys, and a similar survey of attitudesamong a representative sample of Judges, probation officers, andcourt clinicians. We next focused on the practice and opinion of the medical,clerical, educational, and business communities. To this end, wesolicited written responses from representative groups, invitedvarious spokesmen to testify before us, made numerous fieldvisits to secondary schools, colleges and universities andsurveyed opinion in free clinics and university health services.We also launched a study of drug use and abuse in industry whichwill be covered in our second Report on drug abuse. Finally, we commissioned the National Survey of public opinionabout marihuana to which we have previously referred. THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM How does the criminal justice system respond when an enormousincrease in an illegal conduct, of a primarily private nature,makes full enforcement of the law impossible, and when there iswidespread doubt about the rationale for making the conductillegal? This question guided our analysis of the responses andopinions from members of the criminal justice system. Law Enforcement Behavior On the basis of a detailed study of all federal marihuanaarrests during 1970 and of a sample of state arrests during thelast half of 1970 in Cook County, Illinois; Dallas, Texas; Omaha,Nebraska; Tucson, Arizona; San Mateo County, California; and theWashington, DC Metropolitan Area, we present the followingfindings. FEDERAL The federal authorities make little or no effort toseek out violators of laws proscribing possession of marihuana.The Federal Government ceded responsibility for enforcement ofpossession laws to the states several years ago. However, in thecourse of general enforcement activity, the Federal authoritiesdo make possession arrests. If a person is arrested at theFederal level for possession or casual transfer of small ormoderate amounts of marihuana, the case generally is eitherdropped or turned over to the states for prosecution. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs does notconcentrate much of its energy on marihuana. By its own estimate,approximately 6% of its investigative efforts are directed atmarihuana offenses. Most BNDD marihuana arrests occur as a resultof the agency's general investigation into the commercialdistribution of all drugs. The overwhelming majority of all federal marihuana arrestsoccur at or near the borders, as the Bureau of Customs, sometimesin cooperation with the Border Patrol of the Immigration andNaturalization Service, attempts to interdict the importation ofthe drug. State At the state level, where enforcement of the possession lawsis focused, about 93% of the arrests in our sample were for thisoffense. Yet, there was little formal investigative effort toseek out violators of the possession laws. Instead, 69% of allmarihuana arrests arose from spontaneousor accidental situationswhere there had been no investigation at all. Well over half ofthese spontaneous arrests occurred when police stopped anautomobile and saw or smelled marihuana. The remainingspontaneous arrests occurred when police stopped persons on thestreet or in a park and discovered marihuana. In an additional 16% of the cases, the marihuana arrestresulted from police follow-up of a phoned tip or similar lead.In less than 11% of all the cases was there any significantpolice involvement. (Scope of investigation was unknown in about4% of the cases). Because of this enforcement pattern, arrests were concentratedamong the young. Typically the arrestee was a white male, inschool or employed in a blue collar job, without a prior record.Of those arrested at the state level: * 58% were under 21; 30% were between 21 and 26; 10% were over26 (2% unknown) * 85% were male; 15% were female * 77% were white; 21% were black; 2% were Spanish speaking * 27% were students, 2% were military; 28% were employed inblue collar jobs; 15% were employed in white collar jobs; 11%were unemployed (16% unknown) * 44% had not been arrested previously; 31% had been arrestedpreviously (in 25% of the cases, the extent of prior contact wasunknown) ; only 6% of the arrestees had been previouslyinearcerated Such arrestees generally possessed only small amounts ofmarihuana. Of our entire sample of 3,071 arrests: 67% were for possession of less than one ounce (18% were for less than one gram; 23% were for between one and 5 grams; 26% were for between 5 and 30 grams) 7% were for possession of between one ounce and 4 ounces 8% were for possession of over 4 ounces 13% were for possession of unknown quantities 3 % were for transfer of less than one ounce 3% were for transfer of over one ounce,* Offenders at the state level were generally arrested ingroups. * 29 % were arrested alone * 24% were arrested with one other person * 43% were arrested with two or more other persons (4%unknown) Faced with this population of offenders, the criminaljustice System responded often by dismissing or diverting to anoncriminal institution the young first-offense possessor ofsmall amounts. Adult Cases At least 48% of the cases were terminated in the defendant'sfavor: The police themselves disposed of l0% of the cases, refrainingfrom filing charges, or diverting the case, to some otherinstitution. The prosecution declined to file complaints in an additional7% of the cases. An additional 28% of the cases were dismissed in the course ofpretrial judicial proceedings. In 3% of the cases, the defendant was acquitted at trial. *Because the figures have been rounded off, the total is notalways 100%. Juvenile Cases At least 70% of the cases were terminated in the youth'sfavor: The police themselves disposed of 21% of the cases, refrainingfrom referring the youth to juvenile authorities or diverting thecase to some other agency. An additional 48% of the cases were dismissed either becausethe juvenile officer responsible for filing a delinquencypetition refused to do so, or because the judge dismissed thecase prior to trial. in 1% of the cases, the juvenile was found innocent. Of the entire sample of arrests, both adult and juvenile, 33%of those apprehended were ultimately sentenced,, after pleadingguilty or being found guilty. (Since 11% of the 3,071 cases -werestill pending at the time of our study, and disposition wasunknown in 2% of the cases, the figure may be as high as 40% ofall arrests). Of those convicted for possession of marihuana, 24% wereincarcerated, usually for a year or less. Most of the remainingpersons were put on probation, although some were fined only. Bycomparison, of those convicted of sale (5% of the convictedindividuals), 65% were incarcerated, usually for over a year. In short, in the 2,610 cases where disposition was final andwas available to 6% of those apprehended were ultimatelyincarcerated. From this analysis of enforcement behavior. it appears thatthe law enforcement community has adopted a policy ofcontainment. Although effort is sometimes expended to seek outprivate marihuana use, the trend is undoubtedly to invoke, themarihuana possession laws only when the behavior (possession)comes out in the open. We were told by police officials in somecities, for example, that arrests are made only when marihuanause is flaunted in public. The salient feature of the present law has become the threatof arrest for indiscretion. The high percentage of cases which,after arrest, are disposed of by dismissal or informal diversionattests to the ambivalence of police officials, prosecutors andjudges about the appropriateness of existing law. Anyoneprocessed through the entire system does run a risk ofincarceration, especially when the individual had a prior recordand the offense was sale or possession of a significant amount. Law Enforcement Opinion Prosecutorial opinion toward the existing system suggests botha containment objective and a, flexible, response. As toprosecution policy: 31% of the prosecutors state that they would not prosecuteanyone one arrested at a private, social gathering of marihuanausers who are passing a cigarette. Large numbers of prosecutors admit that they consider factorsother than strength of the evidence in deciding whether or not toprosecute a possession case; 41% cite age, 38% cite lack of priorrecord, 36% consider the amount of marihuana seized and 26% takeinto account the family situation of the accused; 31% thought oneor another of these non-legal factors was most important in hisdecision 29% of the prosecutors acknowledge that they use informalprobation in lieu of prosecution in some cases. As to the efficacy of existing law, a majority of theprosecutors agree that the marihuana laws do not deter, or deteronly minimally: Persons under 30 from initiating use (53%) Users from using regularly (56%) Users from transferring small amounts for little or noremuneration (55%) From the studies made by the Commission of enforcementpractices, we consider this to be a realistic assessment. Conversely, however, the prosecutors agree that the laws havea significant effect in deterring users from smoking marihuanaopenly (62%) and persons over 30 from initiating use (44%). We also asked the district attorneys for their views on anappropriate legal policy concerning marihuana use. Their opinionstend to fall in three groups. One group, representing about 25%of the prosecutors, favors the status quo, and does not want anyfurther reduction in penalties. A fifth of the prosecutorsconclude, on the basis of their experience, that possession ofmarihuana, and perhaps sale of the drug, should be removedentirely from the criminal justice system. The remaining prosecutors, a majority, is willing to considermitigation of the harshness of the law either by legislation orby benign exercise of discretion, but is reluctant to relinquishformal, criminal control. These prosecutors doubt the deterrentvalue of the law and are willing to be lenient in appropriatecases, but they believe some use of the legal system is necessaryto prevent all increase in marihuana use. Underlying these opinions are diverse attitudes aboutmarihuana use and the efficacy of existing law. For example,prosecutors who doubt the efficacy of existing law and reject the"escalation" and "aggressive behavior"hypotheses, are generally willing to modify the laws by theirenforcement policies and by legislative reform (Table 8). The same general pattern of practice and opinion emerges atthe judicial and dispositional level. Only 13% of the respondingjudges would jail an adult for possession of marihuana and only4% said they would incarcerate a minor. Lesser proportions ofprobation officers and clinicians would imprison adults (8% and1%) and minors (2% and %). Conversely, 11% of the Judges, 15.5%of the probation officers and 63.5% of the clinicians noted thatthey would assess no penalty for possession by adults. Forminors, the proportions are 3%, 5%, and 35% respectively. Table 8.-DISTRICT ATTORNEYS, OPINIONS Percent who Percent who Percent who believe the believe believe marihuana Percent Change favored marihuana marihuana laws do not who utilize leads to leads to deter persons informal hard drug aggressive under 30 probation use behavior from initi- ating use None 87.1 47 51.3 28.5 Reduction of possession penalties 68.8 35.1 63.2 34.3 Preclusion of incarceration. . 64.7 33 59 33.2 Decriminalization of possession of small amounts 41.5 21.9 67.2 37.4 Legalization of marihuana. .. 32.2 11.1 69 37.8 How to read table: 87.1%, of the prosecutors who favor nochange in existing law believe that marihuana leads to the use ofhard drugs; in contrast, 32.2% of the prosecutors who favorlegalization believe that marihuana leads to the use of harddrugs. With regard to appropriate legal policy, the judges exhibitthe same inclination as the prosecutors to look for alternativeswithin a formal control system which would avoid the use ofcriminal penalties. We asked essentially the same question in twoways and received similar responses (Table 9). The judges, as a group, are less enthusiastic about criminalcontrol than the prosecutors, but are equally unwilling torelinquish formal control. By contrast, the probation officersand clinicians, who have more personal contact with theseoffenders and are perhaps more intensively aware of the controlpotential of the criminal justice systern, are highly skepticalabout formal control (Tables 10, -and 11). In conclusion, as one proceeds through the criminal justicesystem, from district attorneys to court clinicians, the peopleresponsible for the functioning of that system seem to bedecreasingly enthusiastic about the appropriateness of criminalcontrol and decreasingly insistent on any technique for formalcontrol. Table 9.*-JUDGES, OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 11 Control outside 24.3 control Informal social 22 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 21 Expungement of 57.9 formal Other 11 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 25 Control within 11.5 control criminal justice system 'Because of a small percentage of non-responses, figures donot always total 100%. How to read table: When asked to identify the appropriatemeans of control for adult users, 33% of the judges opted forinformal control (1 1% would rely on personal choice and 22%,would rely on informal social control). Similarly, when askedabout the appropriate statutory scheme for possession, 24.3% ofthe judges preferred control outside the criminal justice system,a functional equivalent of "informal control." Table 10.*-PROBATION OFFICERS' OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 21 Control outside 35.5 control Informal social 32.7 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 11.8 Expungement of 54.5 formal Other 10 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 15.5 Control within 9 control criminal justice system *Because of a small number of non-responses, the figures donot always total 100%. To supplement our survey of behavior and opinion within thecriminal justice system, we also solicited the views of theAmerican Bar Association. The President of the A13A in turn urgedthe respective Committees of the Association to submit theirviews to us. The two Committees directly concerned with the drugarea, the Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Reform of the SectionoNn Individual Rights Table ll.*-CLINICIANS, OPINIONS Types of Means of control Percent Statutory schemes Percent control for adult users who for possession who favored favored Informal Personal choice 61.7 Control outside 74 control Informal social 21 criminal justice control system Non-criminal Required treatment 1 Expungement of 22.6 formal Other 10 criminal record control Criminal Criminal law 3.5 Control within 0 control criminal justice system 'Because of a small number of non-responses, the figures donot always total 100%. and Responsibilities, and the Committee on Drug Abuse of theSection on Criminal Law, were in essential agreement regardingthe appropriate course of action. Both Committees expressed doubt about the wisdom andlegitimacy of existing policy and about the, capacity of thecriminal justice system to deal with marihuana use. They bothurged the Commission to recommend the removal of criminalpenalties from possession of the drug for personal use and casualnon-profit transfers. Both Committees suggested that a regulatoryapproach to distribution of the drug be given seriousconsideration. THE NON-LEGAL INSTITUTIONS Law enforcement authorities, given available and prospectiveresources, cannot possibly enforce the existing marihuana lawsfully. The best they can do is keel) marihuana use contained andout of sight. In addition, many officials within the criminaljustice system are reluctant to enforce the marihuana laws, beingeither uncommitted to the usefulness of this particular law oropposed to the law itself. The net result is for the legal systemto leave much of the responsibility for social control to othersocial institutions such as family, schools, churches, and themedical profession. Since these other institutions themselveshave relied heavily on the legal system for control, caution andconfusion now dominate the social response to marihuana use. The diminishing severity of the law enforcement response maynot have occurred if the other institutions of society hadcontinued to regard the marihuana user as a criminal. However,many of these institutions have come to view the marihuana userprimarily in social or medical terms, and to recommend a form ofsocial control in accord with their respective self-interests ororientations. In many cases, the ,attitudes of these otherinstitutions mirror that of the criminal justice system:uncertainty about the proper role of formal legal control. The Family The most important institution for instilling social norms isthe family. Parental attitudes generally parallel public opinion,and specific responses in our National Survey suggest aninclination among parents and non-parents to deal with youthfulmarihuana users through discussion and persuasion rather thanharsh or punitive measures. When asked what action they wouldtake upon discovering that one of their teenage children wassmoking marihuana with friends, 47% of the adults responded thatthey would use persuasion and reason. Twenty-three percentfavored a punitive approach. Interestingly, 9% of the lattergroup felt so strongly about the matter that they were willing toreport their own child to the police. A considerable number, 35%indicated that they were uncertain about what to do, or failed torespond to this multiple response question. The non-punitive trend was also apparent when the adults wereasked what they would do if their teenage child was arrested fora marihuana offense. A substantial number (58%) indicated theywould attempt to extricate their child from the situation, manynot wishing their child to have a police record, while 34%expressed the sentiment that the child's arrest would help himlearn a lesson. The Schools Marihuana use continues to increase among high school andcollege students. The National Survey reveals that 30% of thehigh school juniors and seniors have used marihuana. The NationalSurvey also reveals that 44% of those currently attending collegeat the graduate or undergraduate levels have used it, while othersurveys indicate this figure is significantly higher in somemajor universities. Not surprisingly, there has been, during the last two years,ail appreciable change in the attitudes of school administrators,faculty and even of the boards of education and trustees towardmarihuana use, Administrators at the secondary and college levelsare generally more relaxed and tolerant toward marihuana, usethan they were during the mid-1960's, when support for a punitiveresponse was common. After the initial shock of widespread usedissipated, many school officials came to believe that strongdisciplinary action, including suspension and arrest, wascounterproductive. In addition, as the evidence accumulated thatmarihuana, was not as dangerous as had once been thought,parental and community pressures were sometimes brought to bearon school administrators to be less punitive and moreunderstanding of marihuana use. At the secondary level, the policies very somewhat from stateto state and even within states. Nevertheless, school boardsgenerally seem to have become less enthusiastic about suspensionand arrest as an appropriate response to marihuana use. Oneschool administrator in Philadelphia noted sarcastically that ifall users were suspended or arrested, the high schools wouldbecome empty cells, with their entire clientele turned out ontothe streets. A West Coast official emphasized that student alcohol use wasa much more serious problem than marihuana use; he even suggestedthat legalization of marihuana might reduce alcohol use among theyoung. The Commission ascertained that no suspensions formarihuana use had occurred during 1971 in the entire schoolsystem of a southern metropolitan area. Although securityofficers in that system did make 20 arrests, they were all forselling marihuana and other drugs. At the secondary level, then, increased reliance is beingplaced on persuasion rather than discipline, as a means ofdiscouraging marihuana use. Drug education programs, now beinginstituted in almost every school system, often includeinformation about alcohol and tobacco. We will explore thevarious pedagogical techniques employed in such programs and willattempt to evaluate them in our next Report. At the college level, the response is even more lenient. Inmany cases official neutrality or even protection against policeintervention substitutes for the restraint common at thesecondary level. Under formal or informal arrangements with locallaw enforcement officials, many schools bar on-campus arrests formarihuana use. Apparently they have concluded that enforcement ofthe marihuana laws causes more harm. than does use of the drug.In some cases, college authorities have substituted their ownpolicy for society's official policy. The Commission learned atone of its hearings in Chicago, for example, that a majorMidwestern university explicitly declared that students would besubject to university disciplinary action if they were found inpossession of more than one week's supply of marihuana. Control at the college level is usually considered a medicalConcern and is handled either through the university healthcenters or free clinics. The trend toward leniency is alsoapparent in the policy responses of the representative sample ofuniversity health service and free clinic physicians. whoseprofession presumably brings them into contact with thepopulation most it risk from marihuana. Among personnel of thefree clinics, 62% of the respondents favor legalization; 5% wouldcontinue the present policy, and the remainder would eitherreduce penalties (11%) or await further research (22%). Even among the "establishment-oriented" healthservice personnel, similar attitudes prevail. Nineteen percentwould continue the present policy, and 16% would legalize. Of theremaining 55% (10% did not respond), 38% would reduce, penaltiesand 17% would await further research. This pattern of views bearsa striking resemblance to that of the prosecuting attorneys, andindeed of the public at large. The large majority indicatesuneasiness with the present system and opposition tolegalization, but is uncertain about exactly what to do. The Churches The nation's churches play a major role in the process bywhich society's norms and values are transmitted to the young.Moral education, through individual and family counseling bychurch personnel, is influential in the process of socialcontrol, particularly for adolescents. Consequently, theCommission sought to learn the attitudes, responses andrecommendations of the clergy. The larger societal uncertainty about the social and moralimplications of marihuana use is also reflected in the attitudesof religious institutions. For example, Dr. Thomas E. Price,speaking for the National Council of Churches of Christ in theU.S.A. before the Commission, referred to marihuana as a"tightly drawn moral knot." This uncertainty has ledmany religious groups to minimize a punitive and repressiveresponse to marihuana use in their official statements and formalprograms. Instead, they have concentrated on educational andrehabilitative programs. Many church spokesmen have urged a reconsideration of socialand legal policy. The range of their suggestions for changereflects, once again, widespread uncertainty. Some ask for someform of "adequate" punishment or supervision so as todiscourage marihuana use. Others say "reform orelimination" of penalties for possession would beappropriate. And there are those who suggest legalization withsome government regulation. Some church spokesmen have defendedexisting policy, recommending only that the law be more strictlyand uniformly enforced. The Medical Community In contrast to the mixed opinions of other segments ofsociety, the medical profession has a rather broad consensus atthe present time. In a series of responses from various medicalsocieties, associations and committees, we found certainrecurrent themes. Every medical group emphasized the need formore research into the effects of marihuana. There was uniformemphasis on how marihuana, as a "drug," affects heart,head, blood, brain and so on, but not on how it affects societyas a behavior. The consensus was that marihuana, the drug, posessome danger for the individual, physically or psychologically.The only major disagreement is about the degree of such danger. The second recurrent theme was that marihuana shoulddefinitely not be legalized. Legalization would imply sanction,medical groups said, with a probable, increase in use as aresult. One doctor compared legalization with the failure ofProhibition: "The fact [that] Prohibition was a failuredoesn't make alcoholism a good thing and the six million or so(alcoholics) we have are no bargain. Therefore, since there is nolegitimate use for marihuana it seems rather silly to legalizeits use to initiate a second headache." Another reasoncommonly given by physicians for opposing legalization is thatsuch a step should be taken if and when it is proven thatmarihuana is not dangerous. The third common theme of medical opinion was a call for amore. lenient approach toward users, again a position reflectedin almost every quarter of society. One officer of a publichealth association told a convention: " (Our committee)deplores the strong punitive measures suggested by some becausewe feel that a jail sentence for the offense of smoking marihuanais not likely to solve the problem of eliminating marihuana use.On the contrary, a prison sentence is likely to do great damageto a young person's personality as well as to his futurecareer." Another group called for prosecutors to usediscretionary powers in handling youthful first offenders. When discussing penalties, the medical community begins totake, a look at marihuana use as a form of social behavior ratherthan simply a drug which produces certain physical andpsychological effects. One doctor wrote: "Because marihuanain present patterns of use is, by and large, a relativelyinnocuous drug and because its use has many motivations fromsimple curiosity to symbolism of hostility to the'establishment', the legal penalties in many jurisdictionsthroughout the United States are excessively punitive." Summary Social institutional spokesmen now commonly recognize thatcontrol of marihuana is only partially a law enforcement problem.Opinions cluster around the propositions that society should notbe punitive on the one hand, but should not make the drugavailable, at least for now. Beyond these points, however,uncertainty prevails. There is no common vision of an appropriatesocial control policy. Each institution is going about the business of control in itsown way. Parents emphasize mutual communication. The secondaryschools emphasize health education. The colleges recognizepersonal freedom so long as it does not jeopardize theeducational enterprise. Churches emphasize uncertainty about themoral implications of marihuana use. The medical fraternitystresses the need for further research into the healthconsequences of marihuana use. Uncertainly is the commondenominator. THE PUBLIC RESPONSE For most Americans marihuana use is not an abstractphenomenon. Fifteen percent of the adult population, the NationalSurvey revealed, has tried the drug and 44% of the non-tryingadults personally know someone who has used the drug. Fourteenpercent of the youth have tried the drug and 58% of thenon-triers personally know someone who has used the drug. Indeed,six percent of the non-trying youth indicated that half or moreof their friends used marihuana. The public is also aware of the consequences of the existingsystem and concerned about its impact. Ninety-seven percent ofthe adults know that selling marihuana is against the law. Only afew less, 94%, know that possession is against the law. In fact,one fourth of the adults know someone who has been arrested on apossession charge. Ninety-two percent of the youth know that saleis prohibited, and four out of five know that possession isagainst the law. Fifty-three percent of the 16- and 17-year-oldsactually know someone who has been arrested for possession. Acutely aware of the legal consequences of use, the public isalso cognizant of the difficulties encountered by the criminaljustice system in its attempt to enforce a widely-violated law,Adults were asked whether they mostly agreed or mostly disagreedwith a series of 12 selected propositions regarding thedesirability of maintaining or altering the present system ofmarihuana control. The two propositions which received the mostsupport relate to problems inherent in the existing laws. Eighty-three percent of the adults mostly agreed with thestatement that "because of marihuana a lot of young peoplewho are not criminals are getting police records and being put injail." And 76% agreed that "laws against marihuana arevery hard to enforce because most people use it in private." Marihuana use is more personal than most public issues, but itis also more confusing. Bombarded in recent years -withcontradictory "findings" and statistics about theeffects of marihuana, and with conflicting arguments about publicpolicy, the public tends to believe everything, whether pro orcon. Particularly important in this regard is the widespreadacceptance of beliefs which have little basis in fact. Approximately half of the adult public believes that"many crimes are committed by persons who are under theinfluence of marihuana," and that "some people havedied from using it." Seven of every 10 adults believe that"marihuana makes people want to try stronger things likeheroin." Although the probability that a person believesthese statements increases with age, a significant percentage ofall groups are represented. The underlying confusion is strongly indicated in thecontradictory attitudes toward various reasons for maintaining orchanging the law. For example, 43% of the adults thought, in thecontext of an argument for making marihuana legal, that "itshould be up to each person to decide for himself, like withalcohol or tobacco." Yet 75% of the adults agreed, in thecontext of an argument for keeping the laws the way they are,that "there are already too many ways for people to escapetheir responsibilities. We don't need another one." Youth tend to be less convinced than adults that marihuana usemay be fatal to the user, or cause him to commit crime or leadhim to use other drugs; but young people as a group also arenoticeably more uncertain about these matters. One of every fouryoung people indicated that they were unsure whether marihuanacaused death or crime, and one of every six expressed uncertaintyregarding the progression to other drugs. Similarly, young peoplewere more than twice as likely as adults to have "noopinion" about the various propositions regarding the needfor legal change. Public attitudes toward marihuana exhibit both doubt andtension. On the one hand, we note an acute awareness of the legalconsequences of marihuana use and an appreciation of the adverseimpact of processing users through the criminal justice system.On the other hand, we note some misconceptions about the dangersof marihuana and confusion about the consequences of changing ormaintaining the present system. Public responses on the basic questions of social and legalpolicy reflect the underlying ambivalence. The overwhelmingmajority of the public does not want to treat the marihuana userharshly. This attitude appeared repeatedly through the entireSurvey. When asked "For the good of the country, which ofthe following courses of action would be the best thing to doabout [marihuana use] ?" the public responded in thefollowing manner: Percentage Youth Adults* 12-17 Handle the problem mostly through the police and courts: the process of arrest, conviction, punish- ment ------------------------------------------ 37 90 Handle the problem mostly through medical clinics: the process of diagnosis, treatment, care ----------- 51 48 Don't worry about the use of marihuana, but spend time andmoney on preventing and solving other crimes No opinion --------------------------------------- 5 20 *Some adults gave more than one answer. Adults and youth were also asked to look at marihuana use fromthe perspective of the system, and to identify the appropriatepenalty for possession of marihuana. Both groups were reluctantto put users in jail, especially for a first offense.Eighty-three percent of the adults and 64% of the youth would notincarcerate a youthful first offender; 54% of the adults and 41 %of the youth would not even give the young offender a policerecord (Table 12). Table 12.-ADULTS' VIEWS ON POSSESSION PENALTIES If defendant is teenager If defendant is adult Penalty First Previous First Previous offense conviction offense conviction (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) No penalty 20 Total 6 Total 13 Total 7 Total Fine (no police record).. 34 83 11 37 28 64 6 24 Probation 29 20 23 11 Jail sentence Up to a week 8 Total 20 Total 11 Total 14 Total Up to a year 3 13 24 56 12 32 24 70 More than a year 2 12 9 32 No opinion 4 7 4 6 YOUNG PEOPLES, (age 12-17) VIEWS ON POSSESSION PENALTIES If defendant is teenager If defendant is adult Penalty First Previous First Previous offense conviction offense conviction (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) No penalty 13 Total 6 Tota I 11 Tota 1 7 Total Fine (no police record).. 28 64 9 35 21 50 7 27 Probation 23 20 18 13 Jail sentence Ur, to a week 8 Total 13 Tota 1 16 Total 12 Tota I Up to a year 6 19 21 51 11 36 18 59 More than a year 5 17 9 29 No opinion 17 14 14 14 Interestingly, the youth population as a whole was lesslenient than the adult population as a whole. Within each group,however, the older teenagers and young adults were the mosttolerant in all respects. These statistics suggest that the I public generally prefersleniency when responding to questions specifically directed tomarihuana use. But when asked about "control" or"the law" in general, the response often appears quiteharsh. For example, when asked to consider a range of fivealternative control schemes, most adults tended to resist change. Thirty-one percent of the adults thought that making marihuanalegally available through regulated channels (like alcohol) wasacceptable but 67% thought it was unacceptable. Although 23%thought the removal of criminal sanctions from possession wasacceptable, 74% thought this approach was unacceptable. On theother hand, 56% of the adults thought that the existing lawswere, acceptable; yet 41% found the present law unacceptable.Finally, 72% thought "stricter laws" would beacceptable, while only 26% thought such a change would beunacceptable. Indeed 43% thought stricter laws were the"ideal solution" and 62% thought this was the best ofthe alternatives. These responses seem to be contradictory. We are puzzled aboutwhat the respondents thought they meant when they expressed apreference for stricter laws. They probably did not mean stricter penalties for possession.Such an interpretation would be entirely inconsistent withresponses to questions aimed directly at appropriate policytoward users. Under existing law some states still treat firstoffenders as felons and most states treat multiple offenders asfelons. But, only a third of the adult respondents would put anadult multiple offender in jail for more than a year. The preference for stricter laws might be interpreted to meanheavier penalties for sale, or better enforcement of existingproscriptions against trafficking. Two-thirds of the adults didindicate that they preferred heavier penalties for sale than forpossession. But penalties for selling for profit are alreadyquite heavy in every jurisdiction. We suspect that a majority of the public, including many ofthose favoring "stricter laws," is actually disturbedabout the increase in marihuana use and would like a system whichwould work better than the existing system to discourage use. Amajority of the adult public seeks a better system of control,albeit one which is not punitive toward the user. Apparentlyuneasy about the individual and social consequences of thepresent system, the large center of public opinion is nonethelessreluctant to relinquish formal control. This insistence on maintenance of formal controls over theuser rests upon two interrelated factors: respect for law andfaith in the efficacy of legal control. First, the public doesnot believe the, legal order should wither away simply becausemany people choose to violate the laws against marihuana use.Obedience, of the, law is highly valued in our society. This factor is illustrated clearly by the widespread publicdisagreement with the following arguments for changing the law:76% of the adults disagreed with the statement that "youngpeople would have more respect for the law if marihuana were madelegal;" and four out of five adults disagreed with thestatement that "so many people are using marihuana that itshould be made legal." Second, most adults believe that legal remedies, even thoughnot punitive, are necessary to discourage use of the drug. Thisbelief is tied largely to their understanding of the effects ofthe drug and is reflected in the response to the question about"the best way" to handle the use of marihuana. As wenoted earlier, 51% of the public thought that marihuana use oughtto be handled as a medical problem. Also, the substantial majority of people who are reluctant toincarcerate possessors do prefer the imposition of fines withouta police record or probation. Both of these alternatives retainformal control over the user and indicate faith in the deterrentvalue of the law. The public responses in this respect bear astriking resemblance to those of the judges and probationofficers, who repeatedly indicated a preference for non-punitiveformal control. This interpretation of dominant opinion was drawn fromostensibly inconsistent responses to a long series of questionson appropriate social and legal policy. A substantial minority ofthe public, however, exhibited a consistent pattern of responseto all questions. About a quarter of the public is convinced thatthe criminal sanction should be withdrawn entirely from marihuanause. Another quarter of the public prefers the criminal approach,even for the user. In sum, the existing system is not supported by the consensusof public opinion that once existed. There is a consensus thatpunitive measures are generally inappropriate. There is also apredominant opinion that the legal system should not abandonformal control. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-31IA086-000614-B046-301http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncrec.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022253 text/html 120846HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:22:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:53:24 GMTContent-length: 120627 Marihuana and Social Policy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy "The difficulty in life is the choice." George Moore (1900) A constant tension exists in our society between individualliberties and the need for reasonable societal restraints. It iseasy to go too far in either direction, and this tendency isparticularly evident where drugs are concerned. We have guided our decision-making by the belief that thestate is obliged to justify restraints on individual behavior.Too often individual freedoms are submerged in the passions ofthe moment, and when that happens, the public policy may bedetermined more by rhetoric than by reason. Our effort has beento minimize the emotional and emphasize the rational in thisReport. Drugs In a Free Society A free society seeks to provide conditions in which each ofits members may develop his or her potentialities to the fullestextent. A premium is placed on individual choice in seekingself-fulfillment. This priority depends upon the capacity of freecitizens not to abuse their freedom, and upon their willingnessto act responsibly toward others and toward the society as awhole. Responsible behavior, through individual choice, is boththe guarantor and the objective of a free society. DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The use of drugs is not in itself an irresponsible act.Medical and scientific uses serve important individual and socialneeds and are often essential to our physical and mentalwell-being. Further, the use of drugs for pleasure or othernon-medical purposes is not inherently irresponsible; alcohol iswidely used as an acceptable part of social activities. We do think the use of drugs is clearly irresponsible when itimpedes the individual's integration into the economic and socialsystem. A preference for individual productivity and contributionto social progress in a general sense still undergirds theAmerican value structure, and we emphasize the policy-maker'sduty to support this preference in a public policy judgment. At the same time, in light of the emerging leisure ethic andthe search for individual meaning and fulfillment noted inChapter 1, we cannot divorce social policy from the questionsraised by the recreational use of drugs. Productivity andrecreation both have a place in the American ethical system. Theyare not inconsistent unless the individual's use of leisure timeinhibits his productive role in society. Drugs should be servants, not masters. They become masterswhen they dominate an individual's existence or impair hisfaculties. To the extent that any drug, including alcohol,carries with it risks to the well-being of the user and seriouslyundermines his effectiveness in the society, that drug becomes amatter of concern for public policy. An essential step in the process of policy-formation is adetermination of the circumstances under which use of any givendrug' poses such risks. For some drugs, the risks may be so greatthat all permissible measures should be taken to eliminate use.For other drugs, such risks may be present only under certainspecific circumstances, in which case society may defer toresponsible individual choice on the matter of recreational usebut take appropriate steps to minimize the incidence andconsequences of dysfunctional use. In our Report next year, forwhich studies are already underway, we will consider from thisperspective the whole range of drugs now used for non-medicalpurposes. A Social Control Policy for Marihuana In formulating a Marihuana policy, our strongest concern iswith irresponsible use, whether it be too often, too much,indiscriminate, or under improper circumstances. The excessive orindiscriminate use of any drug is a serious social concern; andthis is particularly true of marihuana since we still know verylittle about the effects of long term, heavy use. We have littledoubt that the substantial majority of users, under any socialcontrol policy, including the existing system, do not and wouldnot engage in irresponsible behavior. In identifying the -appropriate social control policy formarihuana, we have found it helpful to consider the followingpolicy options: I Approval of Use. II Elimination of Use. III Discouragement of Use. IV Neutrality Toward Use. APPROVAL OF USE Society should not approve or encourage the recreational useof any drug, in public or private. Any semblance of encouragementenhances the possibility of abuse and removes, from apsychological standpoint, an effective support of individualrestraint. For example, so long as this society (not only the government,but other institutions and mass advertising as well) in effectapproved of the use of tobacco, the growing medical consensusabout the dangers of excessive use did not make a significantimpression on individual judgment. With the Surgeon General'sReport on Tobacco in 1964, Smoking and Health, a very real changehas occurred in the way society now thinks about cigarettes. The institutions of society definitely add their influences tothe variety of social pressures which persuade individuals to useany kind of drugs. Rational social policy should seek to minimizesuch social pressures, whether they come from peers, from themedia, from social custom, or from the user's sense ofinadequacy. Official approval would inevitably encourage somepeople to use the drug who would not otherwise do so, and wouldalso increase the incidence of heavy or otherwise irresponsibleuse and its complications. On this basis we reject policy optionnumber one, approval of use. ELIMINATION OF USE For a half-century, official social policy has been not onlyto discourage use but to eliminate it (option number two). Withthe principal responsibility for this policy assigned to lawenforcement, its implementation reached its zenith in the late1950's and early 1960's when marihuana-related offenses werepunishable by long periods of incarceration. This policy grew outof a distorted and greatly exaggerated concept of the drug'sordinary effects upon the individual and the society. On thebasis of information then available, marihuana was not adequatelydistinguished from other problem drugs and was assumed to be asharmful as the others. The increased incidence of use, intensive scientificreevaluation, and the spread of use to the middle and uppersocioeconomic groups have brought about the informal adoption ofa modified social policy. On the basis of our opinion surveys andour empirical studies of law enforcement behavior, we areconvinced that officialdom and the public are no longer aspunitive toward marihuana use as they once were. Now there exists a more realistic estimate of the actualsocial impact of marihuana use. School and universityadministrators are seldom able to prevent the use of marihuana bytheir students and personnel and are increasingly reluctant totake disciplinary action against users. Within the criminaljustice system, there has been a marked decline in the severityof the response to offenders charged with possession ofmarihuana. In our survey of state enforcement activities, only 11% of allmarihuana arrests resulted from active investigative activity,and most of those were in sale situations. For the most part,marihuana enforcement is a haphazard process; arrests occur onthe street, in a park, in a car, or as a result of a phone call.Among those arrested, approximately 50% of the adults and 70% ofthe juveniles are not processed through the system; their casesare dismissed by the police, by the prosecutors or by the courts.Ultimately less than 6% of all those apprehended areincarcerated, and very few of these sentences are for possessionof small amounts for personal use. In the law enforcement community, the major concern is nolonger marihuana but the tendency of some users to engage inother irresponsible activity, particularly the use of moredangerous drugs. Official sentiment now seems to be a desire tocontain use of the drug as well as the drug subculture, and tominimize its spread to the rest of the youth population. Lawenforcement policy, both at the Federal and State levels,implicitly recognizes that elimination is impossible at thistime. The active attempt to suppress all marihuana use has beenreplaced by an effort to keep it within reasonable bounds. Yetbecause this policy still reflects a view that marihuana smokingis itself destructive enough to justify punitive action againstthe user, we believe it is an inappropriate social response. Marihuana's relative potential for harm to the vast majorityof individual users and its actual impact on society does notjustify a social policy designed to seek out and firmly punishthose who use it. This judgment is based on prevalent, usepatterns, on behavior exhibited by the vast majority of users andon our interpretations of existing medical and scientific data.This position also is consistent with the estimate by lawenforcement personnel that the elimination of use isunattainable. In the case of experimental or intermittent use of marihuana,there is room for individual judgment. Some members of oursociety believe the decision to use marihuana is an immoraldecision. However, even during Prohibition, when many people wereconcerned about the evils associated with excessive use ofalcohol, possession for personal use was never outlawed federallyand was made illegal in only five States. Indeed, we suspect that the moral contempt in which some ofour citizens hold the marihuana user is related to other behavioror other attitudes assumed to be associated with use of the drug.All of our data suggest that the moral views of the overwhelmingmajority of marihuana users are in general accord with those ofthe larger society. Having previously rejected the approval policy (option numberone), we now reject the eliminationist policy (option numbertwo). This policy, if taken seriously, would require a greatincrease in manpower and resources in order to eliminate the useof a drug which simply does not warrant that kind of attention. DISCOURAGEMENT OR NEUTRALITY The unresolved question is whether society should try todissuade its members from using marihuana or should deferentirely to individual judgment in the matter, remaining benignlyneutral. We must choose between policies of discouragement(number three) and neutrality (number four). This choice is adifficult one and forces us to consider the limitations of ourknowledge and the dynamics of social change. A number ofconsiderations, none of which is conclusive by itself, point atthe present time toward a discouragement policy. We will discusseach one of them separately. 1. User Preference Is Still Ambiguous Alcohol and tobacco have long been desired by large numberswithin our society and their use is deeply ingrained in theAmerican culture. Marihuana, on the other hand, has only recentlyachieved a significant foothold in the American experience, andit is still essentially used more by young people. Again, theunknown factor here is whether the sudden attraction to marihuanaderives from its psychoactive virtues or from its symbolicstatus. Throughout this Commission's deliberations there was arecurring awareness of the possibility that marihuana use may bea fad which, if not institutionalized, will recede substantiallyin time. Present data suggest that this is the case, and we donot hesitate to say that we would prefer that outcome. To theextent that conditions permit, society is well advised tominimize the number of drugs which may cause significantproblems. By focusing our attention on fewer rather than moredrugs, we may be better able to foster responsible use anddiminish the consequences of irresponsible use. The more prudent course seems to be to retain a social policyopposed to use, attempting to discourage use while at the sametime seeking to deemphasize the issue. Such a policy leaves uswith more options available when more definitive knowledge of theconsequences of heavy and prolonged marihuana use becomesavailable. 2. Continuing Scientific Uncertainty Precludes Finality In 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, society was cognizantof the effects of alcohol as a drug and the adverse consequencesof abuse. But, because so many people wished to use the drug,policy-makers chose, to run the risk of individual indiscretionand decided to abandon the abstentionist policy. There are manytoday who feel that if the social, impact of alcohol use had thenbeen more fully understood, a policy of discouragement ratherthan neutrality would have been adopted to minimize the negativeaspects of alcohol use. Misunderstanding also played an important part when thenational government adopted an eliminationist, marihuana policyin 1937. The policy-makers knew very little about the effects orsocial impact of the drug; many of their hypotheses werespeculative and, in large measure, incorrect. Nevertheless, the argument that misinformation in 1937automatically compels complete reversal of the action taken atthat time is neither reasonable nor logical. While continuingconcern about the effects of heavy, chronic use is not sufficientreason to maintain an overly harsh public policy, it is still asignificant argument for choosing official discouragement inpreference to official neutrality. 3. Society's Value System Is In a State of Transition As discussed in Chapter 1, two central influences incontemporary American life are the individual search for meaningwithin the context of an increasingly depersonalized society, andthe collective search for enduring American values. In ChapterIV, we noted that society's present ambivalent response tomarihuana use reflects these uncertainties. For the reasons discussed in the previous Chapters, a suddenabandonment of an official policy of elimination in favor of oneof neutrality toward marihuana would have a profoundreverberating impact on social attitudes far beyond the one issueof marihuana use. We believe that society must have time toconsider its image of the future. We believe that adoption of adiscouragement policy toward marihuana at this time wouldfacilitate such a reappraisal while official neutrality, underpresent circumstances, would impede it. 4. Public Opinion Presently Opposes Marihuana Use For whatever reasons, a substantial majority of the Americanpublic opposes the use of marihuana, and would prefer that theirfellow citizens abstain from using it. In the National Survey,64% of the adult public agreed with the statement that"using marihuana is morally offensive` (40% felt the sameway about alcohol). Although this majority opinion is not by any means conclusive,it cannot be ignored. We are well aware of the skeptics in withwhich marihuana user, and those sympathetic to their wishes, viewthe policy making process; and we are particularly concernedabout the indifference to or disrespect for law manifested bymany citizens and particularly the youth. However, we are also apprehensive about the impact of a majorchange in social policy on that larger segment of our populationwhich supports the implications of the existing social policy.They, too, might lose respect for a policy-making establishmentwhich appeared to bend so easily to the wishes of a"lawless" and highly vocal minority. This concern for minimizing cultural dislocation must, ofcourse, be weighed against the relative importance of contraryarguments. For example, in the case of desegregation in theSouth, and now in the North, cult-Lire shock had to be acceptedin the light of the fundamental precept at issue. In the, case.of marihuana, there is no fundamental principle supporting theuse of the drug, and society is not compelled to approve or beneutral toward it. The opinion of the majority is entitled togreater weight. Looking again to the, experience with Prohibition, when anabstentionist policy for alcohol was adopted on the nationallevel in 1918, its proponents were not blind to the vociferousopposition of a substantial minority of the people. By the late1920's and early 1930's, the ambivalence of public opinion towardalcohol use and the unwillingness of large numbers of people tocomply with the new social policy compelled reversal of thatpolicy. Even many of its former supporters acknowledged itsfutility. With marihuana, however, the prevailing policy of eliminatinguse had never been opposed to any significant degree until themid-1960's. Unlike the prohibition of alcohol, which had been thesubject of public debate off and on for 60 years before it wasadopted, present marihuana policy has not until now engaged thepublic opinion process, some 50 years after it first began to beused. Majority sentiment does not appear to be as flexible as itwas with alcohol. 5. Neutrality Is Not Philosophically Compelled Much of what was stated above bespeaks an acute awareness bythe Commission of the subtleties of the collective consciousnessof the American people, as shown in the National Survey. There isa legitimate concern about what the majority of the non-usingpopulation thinks about marihuana use and what the drugrepresents in the public mind. The question is appropriatelyasked if we are suggesting that the majority in a free societymay impose its will on an unwilling minority even though, as itis claimed, uncertainty, speculation, and a large degree ofmisinformation form the basis of the predominant opinion. If wehave nothing more substantial than this, the argument goes,society should remain neutral. To deal with this contention, one must distinguish betweenends and means. Policy-makers must choose their objectives with asensitivity toward the entire social fabric and a vision of thegood society. In such a decision, the general public attitude isa significant consideration. The preferred outcome in ademocratic society cannot be that of the policy-makers alone; itmust be that of an informed public. Accordingly, the policy-makermust consider the dynamic relationship between perception andreality in the public mind. Is the public consensus based on areal awareness of the facts? Does the public really understandwhat is at stake? Given the best evidence available, would thepublic consensus remain the same? Assuming that dominant opinion opposes marihuana use, thephilosophical issue is raised not by the goal but by how it isimplemented. At this point, the interests of the unwilling becomeimportant. For example, the family unit and the institution ofmarriage are preferred means of group-living and child-rearing inour society. As a society, we are not neutral. We officiallyencourage matrimony by giving married couples favorable taxtreatment; but we do not compel people to get married. If itshould become public policy to try to reduce the birth rate, itis unlikely that there will be laws to punish those who exceedthe preferred family size, although we may again utilizedisincentives through the tax system. Similarly, this Commissionbelieves society should continue actively to discourage peoplefrom using marihuana, and any philosophical limitation isrelevant to the means employed, not to the goal itself. FOR THESE REASONS, WE RECOMMEND TO THE PUBLIC AND ITSPOLICY-MAKERS A SOCIAL CONTROL POLICY SEEKING TO DISCOURAGEMARIHUANA USE, WHILE CONCENTRATING PRIMARILY ON THE PREVENTION OFHEAVY AND VERY HEAVY USE. We emphasize that this is a policy for today and the immediatefuture; we do not presume to suggest that this policy embodieseternal truth. Accordingly, we strongly recommend that oursuccessor policy planners, at an appropriate time in the future,review the following factors to determine whether an alteredsocial policy is in order: the state of public opinion, theextent to which members of the society continue to use the drug,the developing scientific knowledge about the effects and socialimpact of use of the drug, and the evolving social attitudetoward the place of recreation and leisure in a work-orientedsociety. In our second Report next year, we will carefully reviewour findings to see if our perceptions have changed or if societyhas changed at that time. Implementing The Discouragement Policy Choice of this social control policy does not automaticallydictate any particular legal implementation. As we noted inChapter 1, there is a disturbing tendency among participants inthe marihuana debate to assume that a given statement of thedrug's effects, its number of users or its social impact compelsa particular statutory scheme. Law does not operate in a social vacuum, and it is only one ofthe institutional mechanisms which society can utilize toimplement its policies. Consequently, the evaluation ofalternative legal approaches demands not only logic but also adelicate assessment of the mutual relationship between the lawand other institutions of social control, such as the church, thefamily and the school. THE ROLE OF LAW IN EFFECTIVE SOCIAL CONTROL Social control is most effectively guaranteed by the exerciseof individual self-discipline. Elementary social psychologyteaches us that restraint generated within is infinitely moreeffective and tenacious than restraint imposed from without. One of the participants at our "Central Influences"Seminar observed: When people grow up into a society, the principal aim is to internalize drives-that is, I assume they come up 'with certain drives which can be satisfied in many ways and you're trying to internalize, ways of satisfying those drives which will be compatible with life in a community and also satisfying to the individual. The external restraints can only complement this, they cannot possibly substitute for it. The supplemental effect of external restraints, particularlylegal restraints, must also be weighed against the nature of thecontrol sought. It was put this way at our Seminar: Think of the social welfare function as a mountain-the hill ofthe Lords really. Large parts of it are something of a plateau;that is you can be all sorts of places on it and be safe. Youdon't have to maximize. This is an economist's fallacy. You canhave all sorts of variations, you can be Socialists, Capitalists,Mormons, Adventists and get away with it-even Liberals. But thereare cliffs, and you can fall off of them. This is what we areworrying about today. We are nervous about these cliffs. The "no-no's"-as the kids call them-are the fenceson these cliffs. That is, we have set up taboos and say there's acliff there. Now -one of the problems socially is that we set up"no-no's" where there are no cliffs. There are nocliffs and people jump over these [fences] and they say, "Nocliffs! See no cliffs!" [Then, over other fences-and]chop-chop-chop-crash! See, it's just as dangerous to set upfences without any cliffs as not have fences where there arecliffs. To this functional consideration of external restraint, wemust also add the philosophical faith in the responsible exerciseof individual judgment which is the essence of a free society. Toillustrate, a preference for individual productivity underliesthis society's opposition to indiscriminate drug use, the factthat so few of the 24 million Americans who have tried marihuanause it, or have used it, irresponsibly, testifies to the extentto which they have internalized that value. The hypothesis that widespread irresponsibility would attendfreer availability of marihuana suggests not that a restrictivepolicy is in order but rather that a basic premise of our freesociety is in doubt. We note that the escalation thesis, used asan argument against marihuana rather than as a tool forunderstanding individual behavior, is really a manifestation ofskepticism about individual vulnerabilities. For example,one-half of the public agreed with the statement that "ifmarihuana were made legal, it would make drug addicts out ofordinary people." At the same time, we do feel that the threat of excessive useis most potent with the young. In fact, we think all drug useshould continue to be discouraged among the young, because ofpossible adverse effects on psychological development and becauseof the lesser ability of this part of the population todiscriminate between limited and excessive use. Social policy implementation in this regard is extraordinarilydifficult. For example, although existing social policies towardtobacco, alcohol and marihuana alike oppose their use by theyoung, those policies are far from being fully effective. Forexample: Tobacco The National Survey (1971) indicates that of young people age12-to-17, 50 % have smoked at one, time or another; 15% smoke now; and At least 8% smoke at least a half a pack a day. In a 1970 sample of smoking habits in the 12-to-18 populationconducted for the National Clearinghouse for Smoking and Health,it was found that: 18.5% of the boys and 11.9% of the girls were regular smokers; and About 8% of the boys and 5% of the girls smoked more than a half a pack a day. Alcohol The National Survey also ascertained the drinking patternduring the previous month of young people aged 12-to-17, findingthat: At least 23% had used beer during that month, at least 14% had used wine and at least 12% had used hard liquor; and 6% had used beer five or more days during the months 3% had used wine five or more days, and 3% had used hard liquor five or more days. Marihuana Of the 12-to-17 population, the Survey found that: 15% of this population had tried marihuana; At least 6 % still use it; and Less than 1% use it once a day or more The inclination of so many young people to experiment withdrugs is a reflection of a so-called successful socializationprocess on one hand, and of society's ambivalence to the use ofdrugs on the other. This entire matter will occupy much of ourattention in the coming year, but it is essential that we make afew anticipatory comments now. This nation tries very had to instill in its childrenindependence, curiosity and a healthy self-assurance. Thesequalities guarantee a dynamic, progressive society. Where drugsare concerned, however, we have relied generally onauthoritarianism and on obedience. Drug education has generallybeen characterized by overemphasis of scare tactics. Somesegments of the population have been reluctant to inform for fearof arousing curiosity in young minds. Where drugs are concerned,young people are simply supposed to nod and obey. - This society has always been and continues to be ambivalentabout the non-medical (in the strict sense) use of drugs. Andthis ambivalence does not escape our children. If we can come togrips with this issue, we might convince our youth that thecuriosity that is encouraged in other aspects of our culture isundesirable where drugs are concerned. The law is at best a highly imperfect reflection of drugpolicy. The laws proscribing sale of tobacco to minors arelargely ignored. Prohibitions of sale of alcohol to minors areenforced sporadically. As to marihuana, there are areasthroughout this nation where possession laws are not enforced atall. In other sections, such proscriptions are strictly enforced,with no apparent decrease in marihuana use. As a guiding doctrine for parents and children, the law iscertainly confusing when it imposes widely varying punishments indifferent states, and even in different courts of the same state,all for use of the same substance, marihuana. That marihuana usecan be treated as a petty offense in one state and a felony inanother is illogical and confusing to even the most sincere ofparents. The law is simply too blunt an instrument to manifest thesubtle distinctions we draw between the motivations and thecircumstances of use. At the same time, legal status carries acertain weight of its own, and other institutions must takeaccount of the law in performing their functions. In legally implementing our recommended social policy, we seekto maximize the ability of our schools, churches and families tobe open and honest in discussing all drugs, including marihuana.The law must assist, not impede. In this respect, we note withconcern the counterproductive tendency in our society to seeksimple solutions to complex problems. Since the statutory law isa simple tool, the tendency in our society to look to the law forsocial control is particularly strong. We have discussed the four basic social policy objectives ofelimination, discouragement, neutrality and approval of marihuanause and have selected discouragement of use, with emphasis onprevention of heavy and very heavy use, as our generalized aim.We have considered three legal responses, each with a wide rangeof alternatives: 1. Total Prohibition. 2. Partial Prohibition. 3. Regulation. TOTAL PROHIBITION The distinctive feature of a total prohibition scheme is thatall marihuana-related behavior is prohibited by law. Under thetotal prohibition response now in force in every state and at thefederal level, cultivation, importation, sale, gift or othertransfer, and possession are all prohibited acts. In 11 statesand the District of Columbia, simply being present knowingly in aplace where marihuana is present is also prohibited; and manystates prohibit the possession of pipes or other smokingparaphernalia. For our purposes, the key feature of the totalprohibition approach is that even possession of a small amount inthe home for personal use is prohibited by criminal law. From the very inception of marihuana control legislation, thisnation has utilized a policy of a total prohibition, far morecomprehensive than the restrictions established during theprohibition of alcohol. Until recent years, society was operating under aneliminationist policy. The exaggerated beliefs about the drug'seffects, social impact, and user population virtually dictatedthis legal approach. During this entire, period, totalprohibition was sought through the use of heavier and heavierpenalties until even first-time possession was a felony in everyjurisdiction, and second possession offenses generally received amandatory minimum sentence without parole or probation. Yet thelast few years have seen society little by little abandoning theeliminationist policy in favor of a containment policy. Under the total prohibition umbrella, this containment policyhas been implemented by a unique patchwork of legislation,informal prosecutorial policy and judicial practice. Possessionis now almost everywhere a misdemeanor. Although some term ofincarceration remains as a penalty for possessors, it isgenerally not meted out to young first offenders or to possessorsof small -amounts. Instead, most such offenders are dismissed orinformally diverted to agencies outside the criminal system bythose within the system who are trying to help them avoid thestigma of a criminal record. Offenders who are processed within the criminal justice systemgenerally receive fines and/or probation. In many jurisdictions,enforcement officials make little or no effort to enforcepossession proscriptions, concentrating instead on majortrafficking. Possessors are generally arrested only when they areindiscreet or when marihuana is found incident to questioning orapprehension resulting from some other violation. From oursurveys, state and federal, we have found that only minimaleffort is made to investigate marihuana possession cases. Such a tendency is a reflection of the adoption of acontainment policy. By acting only when marihuana appears aboveground, enforcement officials are helping to keep its useunderground. The shift away from the elimination policy has beenmatched by a similar shift in legal implementation, but thedistinctive feature of the total prohibition scheme stillremains: all marihuana-related behavior, including possession forpersonal use within the home, is prohibited by criminal law. Is such a response an appropriate technique for achieving thesocial control policy we outlined above? The key question for ourpurposes is whether total criminal prohibition is the mostsuitable or effective way to discourage use and whether itfacilitates or inhibits a concentration on the reduction andtreatment of irresponsible use. We are convinced that totalprohibition frustrates both of these objectives for the followingreasons. 1. Application of the Criminal Law to Private Possession IsPhilosophically Inappropriate With possession and use of marihuana, we are dealing with aform of behavior which occurs generally in private where a personpossesses the drug for his own use. The social impact of thisconduct is indirect, arising primarily in cases of heavy orotherwise irresponsible use and from the drugs symbolic aspects. We do not take the absolutistposition that society is philosophically forbidden fromcriminalizing any kind of "private" behavior. Thephrase "victimless crimes," like "public, healthhazard, has become a rhetorical excuse for avoiding basic socialpolicy issues. We have chosen a discouragement policy on thebasis of our evaluation of the actual and potential individualand social impact of marihuana use. Only now that we have done socan we accord appropriate weight to the nation's philosophicalpreference for individual privacy. On the basis of this evaluation we believe that the criminallaw is too harsh a tool to apply to personal possession even inthe effort to discourage use. It implies an overwhelmingindictment of the behavior which we believe is not appropriate.The actual and potential harm of use of the drug is not greatenough to justify intrusion by the criminal law into privatebehavior, a step which our society takes only 'with the greatestreluctance. 2. Application of the Criminal Law Is ConstitutionallySuspect The preference for individual privacy reflected in the debateover the philosophical limitations on the criminal law is alsomanifested in our constitutional jurisprudence. Although nocourt, to our knowledge, has held that government may notprohibit private possession of marihuana, two overlappingconstitutional traditions do have important public policyimplications in this area. The first revolves around the concept that in a free society,the legislature may act only for public purposes. The"police powers" of the states extend only to the"public health, safety and morals." In the period ofour history when the people most feared interference with theirrights by the government, it was generally accepted that thisbroad power had an inherent limitation. For example, earlyprohibitions of alcohol possession were declared unconstitutionalon the basis of reasoning such as that employed by the SupremeCourt of Kentucky in 1915 in the case of Commonwealth v.Campbell: It is not within the competency of government to invade theprivacy of the citizen's life and to regulate his conduct inmatters in which alone is concerned, or to prohibit him anyliberty the exercise which will not directly injure society. Noting that the defendant was "not charged with havingthe liquor in his possession for the purpose of selling it, oreven giving it to another," and that "ownership andpossession cannot be denied when that ownership and possession isnot in itself injurious to the public," the Kentucky courtconcluded that: The right to use liquor for one's own comfort, if they useit without injury to the public, is one of the citizen's naturaland inalienable rights.... We hold that the police power-vagueand wide and undefined as it is-has limits. . . . Even the perceived dangers of opium were not enough toconvince some members of the judiciary that the government couldprohibit possession. It is historically instructive to considerthese words, penned in 1890, by Judge Scott in Ah Lim vTerritory: I make no question but that the habit of smoking opium maybe repulsive and degrading. That its effect would be to shatterthe nerves and destroy the intellect; and that it may tend to theincrease of the pauperism and crime. But there is a vastdifference between the commission of a single act, and aconfirmed habit. There is a distinction to be recognized betweenthe use and abuse of any article or substance.... If this actmust be held valid it is hard to conceive of any legislativeaction affecting the personal conduct, or privileges of theindividual citizen, that must not be upheld.... The prohibitedact cannot affect the public in any way except through theprimary personal injury to the individual, if it occasions himany injury. It looks like a new and extreme step under ourgovernment in the field of legislation, if it really was passedfor any of the purposes upon which that character of legislationcan be sustained, if at all. As a matter of constitutional history, a second tradition, theapplication of specific provisions in the Bill of Rights, hasgenerally replaced the notion of "inherent"limitations. The ultimate effect is virtually the same, however.The Fourth Amendment's proscription of "unreasonablesearches and seizures" reflects a constitutional commitmentto the value of individual privacy. The importance of the FourthAmendment to the entire, constitutional scheme was eloquentlydescribed by Justice Brandeis in 1928 in the case of Olmstead vU.S.: The makers of our Constitution undertook to secureconditions favorable to the pursuit of happiness. They recognizedthe significance of man's spiritual nature, of his feelings andhis intellect. They knew that only a part of the pain, pleasureand satisfaction of life are to be found in material things. Theysought to protect Americans in their beliefs, their thoughts,their emotions and their sensations. They conferred, as againstthe Government, the right to be let alone-the most comprehensiveof rights and the right most valued by civilized men. Although the Fourth Amendment is itself a proceduralprotection, the value of privacy which it crystallizes is oftenread in conjunction with other important values to setsubstantive limits on legislative power. The Supreme Court, inthe case of Griswold vs. Connecticut, held in 1965 thatConnecticut could not constitutionally prohibit the use of birthcontrol devices by married persons. Although the Justices did notagree completely on the reasons for their decision, JusticeDouglas stated in the opinion of the Court: The present case, then, concerns a relationship lyingwithin the zone of privacy created by several fundamentalconstitutional guarantees. And it concerns a law which, inforbidding the use of contraceptives rather than regulating theirmanufacture or sale, seeks to achieve its goals by means ofhaving a maximum destructive impact upon that relationship. Sucha law cannot stand in light of the familiar principle, so oftenapplied by this Court, that a "governmental purpose tocontrol or prevent activities constitutionally subject to stateregulation may not be achieved by means which sweep unnecessarilybroadly and thereby invade the area of protected freedom."(citation omitted) Would we allow the police to search the sacredprecincts of marital bedrooms for telltale signs of the use ofcontraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to the notions ofprivacy surrounding the marriage relationship. Four years later, the Supreme Court, in Stanley v. Georgia,held that even though obscenity is not "speech"protected by the First Amendment, a state cannot constitutionallymake private possession of obscene material a crime. The Court'sreasoning is revealed in the following language: [The] right to receive information and ideas, regardless oftheir social worth, (citation omitted), is fundamental to ourfree society. Moreover, in the context of this case- aprosecution for mere possession of printed or filmed matter inthe privacy of a person's own home-that right takes on an addeddimension. For also fundamental is the right to be free, exceptin very limited circumstances, from unwanted governmentalintrusions into one's privacy ... While the judiciary is the governmental institution mostdirectly concerned with the protection of individual liberties,all policy-makers have a responsibility to consider ourconstitutional heritage when framing public policy. Regardless ofwhether or not the courts would overturn a prohibition ofpossession of marihuana for personal use in the home, we arenecessarily influenced by the high place traditionally occupiedby the value of privacy in our constitutional scheme. Accordingly, we believe that government must show a compellingreason to justify invasion of the home in order to preventpersonal use of marihuana. We find little in marihuana's effectsor in its social impact to support such a determination.Legislators enacting Prohibition did not find such a compellingreason 40 years ago; and we do not find the situation any morecompelling for marihuana today. 3. Total Prohibition Is Functionally Inappropriate Apart from the philosophical and constitutional constraintsoutlined above, a total prohibition scheme carries with itsignificant institutional costs. Yet it contributes very littleto the achievement of our social policy. In some ways it actuallyinhibits the success of that policy. The primary goals of a prudent marihuana social control policyinclude preventing irresponsible use of the drug, attending tothe consequences of such use, and deemphasizing use in general.Yet an absolute prohibition of possession and use inhibits theability of other institutions to contribute actively to theseobjectives. For example, the possibility of criminal prosecutiondeters users who are experiencing medical problems from seekingassistance for fear of bring attention to themselves. Inaddition, the illegality of possession and use createsdifficulties in achieving an open, honest educational program,both in the schools and in the home. In terms of the social policy objective of discouraging use ofthe drug, the legal system can assist that objective in threeways: first, by deterring people from use; second, by symbolizingsocial opposition to use; and finally, by cutting off supply ofthe drug. The present illegal status of possession has not discouragedan estimated 24 million people from trying marihuana or anestimated eight million from continuing to use it. Our survey ofthe country's state prosecuting attorneys shows that 53% of themdo not believe that the law has more than a minimal deterrenteffect in this regard. Moreover, if the present trend towardpassive enforcement of the marihuana law continues, the lawultimately will deter only indiscreet use, a result achieved aswell by a partial prohibition scheme and with a great deal morehonesty and fairness. A major attraction of the law has been its symbolic value.Yet, society can symbolize its desire to discourage marihuana usein many other, less restrictive ways. The warning labels oncigarette packages serve this purpose, illustrating that even aregulatory scheme could serve a discouragement policy. DuringProhibition, the chosen statutory implementation symbolizedsociety's opposition to the use of intoxicating beverages; yet,most jurisdictions did not think it necessary to superimpose aproscription of possession for personal use in the home. Finally, prohibiting possession for personal use has nosubstantive relation to interdicting supply. A possession penaltymay make enforcement of proscriptions against sale a littleeasier, but we believe this benefit is of minimal importance inlight of its costs. The law enforcement goal repeatedly stated at both the federaland state levels has been the elimination of supply and theinterdiction of trafficking. These avowed aims of law enforcementmake sense, since they are the most profitable means of employingits manpower and resources in this area. Indeed, the time consumed in arresting Possessors isinefficiently used when contrasted with the same amount of timeinvested in apprehending major dealers. Although a credibleeffort to eliminate supply requires prohibitions of importation,sale and possession-with intent-to-sell, the enforcement of aproscription of possession for personal use is minimallyproductive. As noted, most law enforcement officials, district attorneysand judges recognize the ineffectiveness of the possessionpenalty. as a deterrent. Its perpetuation results in the makingof what is commonly referred to as "cheap" cases thathave little or no impact on deterring sale. The marihuana supply system can be viewed as pyramid with themajor bulk of marihuana entering the system at top of the pyramidand then descending to the base which represents the userpopulation. Common sense dictates where law enforcement shoulddevote its efforts. To remove the profit from the trafficrequires arresting sellers, not users. The oft-heard argumentthat the police need possession penalties to compel users toreveal their sources is not convincing. "Turninginformants" at the base of the pyramid is of marginal valueand limited utility in reaching upwards toward the apex. Further,the National Survey showed that 60% of the users don't"buy" marihuana but get it from a friend. The volume oftraffic in the drug at these levels is at best minimal. In short, personal possession arrests and even casual sales,which account for more than 95% of the marihuana arrests at thestate local level, occur too low in the chain of distribution todiminish supply very effectively. In addition to the misallocation of enforcement resources,another consequence of prohibition against possession forpersonal use is the social cost of criminalizing large numbers ofusers. Our empirical study of enforcement of state and federalmarihuana laws indicates that almost all of those arrested arebetween the ages of 18 and 25, most have jobs or are in school,and most have had no prior contact -with the criminal justicesystem. The high social cost of stigmatizing such persons ascriminals is now generally acknowledged by the public at large aswell as by those in the criminal justice system. According to the National Survey, 53% of the public wasunwilling to give young users a criminal record and 87% objectedto putting them in jail. The nation's judges expressed anoverwhelming disinclination to sentence and convict users formarihuana possession. Of these judges only 13% thought it wasappropriate to incarcerate ail adult for possession and only 4%would jail a juvenile for marihuana possession. Thisdisinclination is reflected in the low percentage of arrestedusers who are convicted, and the even lower percentage who arejailed. Even among the nation's prosecutors, a substantial majorityfavor the present trend toward avoiding incarceration for firstoffenders. Most jurisdictions have devised informal proceduresfor disposing of cases in lieu of prosecution. Our empiricalstudy shows that 48% of the adult cases, and 70% of the juvenilecases, were dropped from the system at some point between arrestand conviction. The picture displayed is one of a largeexpenditure of police manpower to enforce a law most participantsfurther along the line are not anxious to apply. Other disturbing consequences of laws proscribing possessionfor personal use are the techniques required to enforce them.Possession of marihuana is generally a private behavior; in orderto find it, the police many times must operate on the edge ofconstitutional limitations. Arrests without probable cause,illegal searches and selective enforcement occur often enough toarouse concern about the integrity of the criminal process. Yet another consequence of marihuana possession laws is theclogging of judicial calendars. President Nixon has noted thatone of the major impediments to our nation's efforts to combatserious crimes is the fact that the judicial machinery moves soslowly. Swift -arrests, prosecution, trial and sentence wouldsignificantly improve the deterrent effect of law. Yet thejudicial system is overloaded with petty cases, with publicdrunkenness accounting for about 50% of all non-traffic offenses. In his March 1971 address to the National Conference on theJudiciary, President Nixon said: What can be done to break the logjam of justice today, toensure the right to a speedy trial-and to enhance respect forlaw? We have to find ways to clear the courts of the endlessstream of "victimless crimes" that get in the way ofserious consideration of serious crimes. There are more importantmatters for highly skilled judges and prosecutors than minortraffic offenses, loitering and drunkenness. To this list we would add marihuana possession, which accountsfor a rising percentage, of judicial caseloads. In Chicago alone,during the last half of 1970, there were more than 4,000possession arrests. A final cost of the possession laws is the disrespect whichthe laws and their enforcement engender in the young. Our youthcannot understand why society chooses to criminalize behaviorwith so little visible ill-effect or adverse social impact,particularly when so many members of the law enforcementcommunity also question the same laws. These young people havejumped the fence and found no cliff. And the disrespect for thepossession laws fosters a disrespect for all law and the systemin general. On top of all this is the distinct impression among the youththat police may use the marihuana laws to arrest people theydon't like for other reasons, whether it be their politics, theirhair style or their ethnic background. Whether or not suchselectivity actually exists, it is perceived to exist. For all these reasons, we believe that the possession offenseis of little functional benefit to the discouragement policy andcarries heavy social costs, not the least of which is disrespectand cynicism among some of the young. Accordingly, even under ourpolicy of discouraging marihuana use, the better method ispersuasion rather than prosecution. Additionally, with the saleand use of more hazardous drugs on the increase, and crimes ofviolence escalating, we do not believe that the criminal justicesystem can afford the time and the costs of implementing themarihuana possession laws. Since these laws are not mandatory interms of achieving the discouragement policy, law enforcementshould be allowed to do the job it is best able to do: handlingsupply and distribution. A criminal fine or similar penalty for possession has beensuggested as a means of alleviating some of the more glaringcosts of a total prohibitory approach yet still retaining thesymbolic disapproval of the criminal law. However, most of theobjections raised above would still pertain: the possibilities ofinvasion of personal privacy and selective enforcement of the lawwould continue; possessors would still be stigmatized ascriminals, incurring the economic and social consequences ofinvolvement with the criminal law; the symbolic status ofmarihuana smoking as an anti-establishment act would beperpetuated. On the other hand, a fine most likely would deter use no morethan does the present possibility of incarceration. It wouldcontinue to impede treatment for heavy and very heavy use andwould persist in directing law enforcement away from the policy'sessential aim which is to halt illegal traffic in the drug. For all these reasons, we reject the total prohibitionapproach and its variations. REGULATION Another general technique for implementing the recommendedsocial policy is regulation. The distinguishing feature of thistechnique is that it institutionalizes the availability of thedrug. By establishing a legitimate channel of supply -anddistribution, society can theoretically control the quality andpotency of the product. The major alternatives within thisapproach lie in the variety of restraints which can be imposed onconsumption of the drug and on the informational requirements towhich its distribution can be subject. We have given serious consideration to this set ofalternatives; however, we are unanimously of the opinion thatsuch a scheme, no matter how tightly it might restrictconsumption, is presently unacceptable. 1. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme at this Time WouldInevitably Signify Approval of Use In rejecting the total prohibition approach, we emphasized thesymbolic aspects. In essence, we do not believe prohibition ofpossession for personal use is necessary to symbolize a socialpolicy disapproving the use. Theoretically, a tightly controlledregulatory schemes with limited distribution outlets, significantrestraints on consumption prohibition of advertising andcompulsory labeling, could possibly symbolize such disapproval.Our regulatory policy toward tobacco is beginning to slowly toreflect a disapproval policy toward Cigarette smoking.Nonetheless, given the social and historical context of such amajor shift in legal policy toward marihuana, we are certain thatsuch a change would instead symbolize approval of use, or atleast a position of neutrality. The Commission is concerned that even neutrality toward use asa matter of policy could invest an otherwise transient phenomenonwith the status of an accepted behavior. If marihuana smokingwere an already ingrained part of our culture, this objectionwould be dispelled. However, we do not believe that this is thecase,. We are inclined to believe, instead, that the presentinterest in marihuana is transient and will diminish in time ofits own accord once the major symbolic aspects of use aredeemphasized, leaving among our population only a relativelysmall coterie of users. With this possibility in mind, we arehesitant to adopt either a policy of neutrality or a regulatoryimplementation of our discouragement policy. The law wouldinevitably lose its discouragement character and would becomeeven more ambiguous in its rationale and its enforcement. The effect of changing a social policy direction may be seenwith tobacco policy. In recent years, society has ostensiblyadopted a policy of discouraging cigarette smoking. This newpolicy has been implemented primarily in the information areathrough prohibition of some forms of advertising and throughcompulsory labeling. Yet, the volume, of cigarettes usedincreased last year. We believe that the failure of the newpolicy results from the fact that it supplants one that formerlyapproved use. This set of circumstances argues against any policywhich would be regarded as approval of use, including aregulatory scheme. It is always extremely difficult to transforma previously acceptable behavior into a disapproved behavior. 2. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme Might Generate aSignificant Public Health Problem We noted above that institutionalizing availability of thedrug would inevitably increase the incidence of use, even thoughthat incidence might otherwise decrease. Of greater concern isthe prospect that a larger incidence of use would result in alarger incidence of long term heavy and very heavy use of potentpreparations. There are -now approximately 500,000 heavy users of lesspotent preparations in this country, representing about 2% ofthose who ever tried the drug. Even if the prevalence of -heavyuse remained the same in relation to those who ever used, thisat-risk population would inevitably increase under a regulatoryscheme. If the emotional disturbances found in very heavy hashishusers in other countries were to occur in this country, theadverse social impact of marihuana use, now slight, wouldincrease substantially. We have acknowledged that society, nonetheless, chose to runsuch a risk in 1933, when Prohibition was repealed. But alcoholuse was already well-established in this society, and noalternative remained other than a regulatory approach. In lightof our suspicion that interest in marihuana is largely transient,it would be imprudent to run that risk for marihuana today. 3. Adoption of a Regulatory Scheme Would Exacerbate SocialConflict and Frustrate a Deemphasis Policy A significant segment of the public on both sides of the issueviews marihuana and its "legalization" in a highlysymbolic way. Any attempt to adopt a regulatory approach nowwould be counterproductive in this respect. The collision ofvalues resulting from such a dramatic shift of policy wouldmaintain the debate at a highly emotional level and wouldperpetuate the tendency to perceive marihuana use as a symbol ofthe struggle between two conflicting philosophies. 4. Not Enough Is Known About Regulatory Models In This Area Advocates of legalization of marihuana are often inclined topropose a licensing scheme or an "alcohol model"without offering a specific program of regulation taking all thevariables into account. Responsible policy planning cannot be socursory. Consequently, we have given serious study to the manyissues presented by such a scheme and to the nation's experiencewith other drug licensing schemes. On the basis of our inquiry,we are convinced that such a step should not be taken unless arealistic assessment of the efficacy of existing schemes andtheir potential application to marihuana indicates it would besuccessful. Such an assessment raises a number of disturbingquestions. The regulatory approaches which this nation has used in thecases of alcohol and tobacco have failed to accomplish two oftheir most important objectives: the minimization of excessiveuse and the limitation of accessibility to the young. Despite thewarning and restraints on distribution and consumption, more than50 million Americans smoke cigarettes regularly, and more thannine million Americans are "problem" drinkers. We havepreviously cited data indicating how many of our children beginhabits which have been legally forbidden to them. Since the younguser and the chronic user of marihuana are of primary concern toour public health officials, the lack of success with alcohol andtobacco discourages an assumption that the regulation of supplywould minimize use by the younger generation. Another important purpose of a regulatory scheme is to channelthe product through a controlled system of supply anddistribution. In that way the quality and quantity of thesubstance can be regulated. The efficacy of such a scheme asapplied to marihuana is questionable. Cannabis can be grown easily almost anywhere in the UnitedStates with little or no human assistance. Even if a legitimatesource of supply were established, it is likely that many personswould choose to ignore the legitimate source and grow their own,the purity of which would not be in question. If such a practicewere illegal, the necessity for a concerted governmentaleradication program is raised, which would involve a monumentallaw enforcement effort. According to the U.S. Department ofAgriculture, there are presently an estimated five million acresof wild marihuana growing in this country and an undeterminednumber of acres under cultivation. Yet, if such a practice were not forbidden, therevenue-raising, product-control and consumption-restrictionfeatures of a regulatory scheme would be threatened. Instructiveto note is the fact that intensive regulation of alcoholicbeverage production 'has not eliminated illicit production.During 1970, in fact, 5,228 illegal stills were destroyed by theAlcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Division of the U.S. Treasury and5,279 persons were arrested. In 1971, 3,327 illegal stills weredestroyed and 5,512 persons were arrested. Another disturbing question is raised by the issue of potencyregulation. Most advocates of legalization stipulate potencylimitations as one feature of their scheme. Presumably they wouldlimit the THC content of the regulated product. This is not aneasy undertaking. Especially when cannabis is so easily grown anda black market is so easily created, we are dubious about thesuccess of a regulatory scheme distributing only a product withlow THC content. Again, attention must be paid the prospect ofincreased hashish use under a regulatory scheme; merelystipulating potency control is not sufficient. As we noted inChapter II, the heavy, long-term use of hashish is a source ofmajor concern to the Commission from both private and publichealth standpoints. These are a few of the problems confronting the policy-makerif be seeks to devise an effective regulatory system ofdistribution for what is, in fact, a universally common plant.Our doubts about the efficacy of existing regulatory schemes,together with an uncertainty about the permanence of socialinterest in marihuana and the approval inevitably implied byadoption of such a scheme, all impel us to reject the regulatoryapproach as an appropriate implementation of a discouragementpolicy at the present time. Future policy planners might well come to a differentconclusion if further study of existing schemes suggests afeasible model; if responsible use of the drug does indeed takeroot in our society; if continuing scientific and medicalresearch uncovers no long-term ill effects; if potency controlappears feasible and if the passage of time and the adoption of arational social policy sufficiently desymbolizes marihuana sothat availability is not equated in the public mind withapproval. PARTIAL PROHIBITION The total prohibition scheme was rejected primarily because nosufficiently compelling social reason, predicated on existingknowledge, justifies intrusion by the criminal justice systeminto the private lives of individuals who use marihuana. TheCommission is of the unanimous opinion that marihuana use is notsuch a grave problem that individuals who smoke marihuana, andpossess it for that purpose, should be subject to criminalprocedures. On the other hand, we have also rejected theregulatory or legalization scheme because it wouldinstitutionalize availability of a drug which has uncertainlong-term effects and which may be of transient social interest. Instead we recommend a partial prohibition scheme which wefeel has the following benefits: Symbolizing a continuing societal discouragement of use; Facilitating the deemphasis of marihuana essential toanswering dispassionately so many of the unanswered questions; Permitting a simultaneous medical, educational, religious, andparental effort to concentrate on reducing irresponsible use andremedying its consequences; Removing the criminal stigma and the threat of incarcerationfrom a widespread behavior (possession for personal use) whichdoes not warrant such treatment; Relieving the law enforcement community of the responsibilityfor enforcing a law of questionable utility, and one which theycannot fully enforce, thereby allowing concentration on drugtrafficking and crimes against persons and property; Relieving the judicial calendar of a large volume of marihuanapossession cases which delay the processing of more seriouscases; and Maximizing the flexibility of future public responses as newinformation comes to light. No major change is required in existing law to achieve all ofthese benefits. In general, we recommend only a decriminalizationof possession of marihuana for personal use on both the state andfederal levels. The major features of the recommended scheme arethat: production and distribution of the drug would remaincriminal activities as would possession with intent to distributecommercially; marihuana would be contraband subject toconfiscation in public places; and criminal sanctions would bewithdrawn from private use and possession incident to such use,but, at the state level, fines would be imposed for use inpublic.* Specifically, we recommend the following statutory schemes. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FEDERAL LAW Under the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Actof 1970, Congress provided the following scheme with respect tomarihuana, by which was meant only the natural plant and itsvarious parts, not the synthetic tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) : Cultivation, importation and exportation, and sale or distribution for profit of marihuana are all felonies punishable by imprisonment for up to five years for a first offense and by up to 10 years for a second offense (the available penalty is doubled for sale to a minor). Possession of marihuana with intent to distribute is a felony punishable by imprisonment for up to five years for the first offense and by up to 10 years for a second offense. Possession of marihuana for personal use is a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in jail and a $1,000 fine for first offense and by up to two years in jail and a $2,000 fine for second offense (expungement of criminal record is available for first offenders). Transfer of a small amount of marihuana for no remuneration is a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in jail and a $1,000 fine for first offense and by up to two years in jail and a $2,000 fine for second offense (Congress singled out marihuana in this way to allow misdemeanor treatment of casual transfers and permitted first offender treatment, as allowed for possession for personal use). The Commission recommends only the following changes infederal law: POSSESSION OF MARIHUANA FOR PERSONAL USE WOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE, BUT MARIHUANA POSSESSED IN PUBLIC WOULD REMAIN CONTRABAND SUBJECT TO SUMMARY SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE. CASUAL DISTRIBUTION OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NO REMUNERATION, OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING PROFIT WOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE. The Commission further recommends that federal law besupplemented to provide: A PLEA OF MARIHUANA INTOXICATION SHALL NOT BE A DEFENSE TO ANY CRIMINAL ACT COMMITTED UNDER ITS INFLUENCE, NOR SHALL PROOF OF SUCH INTOXICATION CONSTITUTE A NEGATION OF SPECIFIC INTENT. * Commissioners Rogers, Congressman from Florida, and Carter,Congressman from Kentucky, agree with the Commission's selectionof a discouragement policy and also agree that criminalizationand incarceration of individuals for possessing marihuana fortheir own use is neither necessary nor desirable as a means ofimplementing that policy. At the same time, both Commissioners feel that the contrabandconcept is not a sufficiently strong expression of socialdisapprobation and would recommend in addition a civil fine forpossession of any amount of marihuana in private or in public. Both Commissioners feel that the civil fine clearly symbolizessocietal disapproval and is a simple mechanism for lawenforcement authorities to carry out. If a person is found by alaw enforcement officer to be in possession of marihuana, theofficer would issue such person a summons to appear in court on afixed day. Although a warrant would not issue for Research of aprivate residence unless there were probable cause to believe acriminal offense was being committed, a police officerlegitimately present for other reasons could issue a civilsummons for violation of the "possession" proscription. Commissioners Rogers and Carter believe that the legal systemmust be utilized directly to discourage the person from usingmarihuana rather than being utilized only indirectly as In thecase of contraband. This civil fine would not be reflected in a police record, norwould it be considered a criminal act for purposes of future jobconsideration, either in the private sector or for governmentservice. Agreeing with the other Commissioners that the casualtransfers of marihuana for no profit should be treated in thesame manner as possession for one's own use, Congressmen Rogersand Carter do not agree that it should extend to transfersinvolving remuneration. They prefer the limiting language of theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 whichdoes not include the term "or insignificant remuneration notinvolving a profit." Apart from the addition of the civil fine to the contrabandrecommendation in the respects set out above, Congressmen Carterand Rogers are in complete agreement with the statutoryrecommendations set out in the Report. Commissioner Ware concurs completely with the statements madeby Congressmen Rogers and Carter but wishes to reemphasize thatthe social policy and legal scheme adopted is applicable only tomarihuana and should not be construed to embrace otherpsychoactive drugs. The policy set forth in this Report, subjectto the already noted comments of the two CongressionalCommissioners, makes sense for marihuana on the basis of what isknown about the drug and in the absence of any conclusive showingwhich would verify some of the anecdotal law enforcementtestimony heard by the Commission regarding criminal behaviorexhibited while under the influence of marihuana. Commissioner Ware feels that some penalty short ofcriminalizing the user, such as a civil fine or some type ofintensive drug education, will act as a positive deterrent towardminimizing the incidence of marihuana use especially among theyoung. Further, he is opposed to the use of any drug for theexpress purpose of getting intoxicated, and includes alcoholwithin this category. The Commissioner feels that what is neededis an internalizing of discipline among our citizenry, with thelegal system assisting this process through the use ofdisincentives. Commissioners Hughes, Senator from Iowa, and Javits, Senatorfrom New York, feel that the Commission has taken a major, highlylaudable step in recommending that the private use of marihuanabe taken out of the criminal justice system. They concur in itsthreshold judgment that overall social policy regarding this drugshould seek to discourage use, while concentrating primarily onthe prevention of irresponsible use. They disagree, however, withthree specific recommendations relating to the implementation ofthis discouragement policy. First, they would eliminate entirely the contraband provisionfrom the partial prohibitory model adopted by the Commission.They want it eliminated first because its legal implications areconfusing and the subject of disagreement even among lawyers.Whether or not possession of a given substance is criminal,possession of material designated as contraband makes thatpossession unlawful. Also, marihuana designated as contrabandwould be subject to government search and seizure, even thoughthe underlying possession is no longer criminal. Theprovision-which does not apply to marihuana held for personal usewithin the home is considered by both Commissioners to be anunnecessary "symbol" of the discouragement policy. Itwill not foster elimination of the misunderstanding and mistrustwhich is a hallmark of our current marihuana policy. Commissioner Hughes and Javits seek to eliminate it alsobecause as a practical matter it serves no useful law enforcementpurpose within the overall partial prohibitory model. Ifmarihuana held for personal use within the home is notcontraband, why should marihauna held for personal use withinone's automobile be contraband? The area of operation of thecontraband provision is extremely narrow. If one possesses morethan one ounce of marihuana in public, it may be seized withoutregard to the contraband doctrine since such possession is acriminal violation. Since the contraband provision does not apply to marihuanapossession and use in private, the only effective area covered bythe contraband provision is the area of possession in public ofless than one ounce. The Commission has chosen to remove thestigma of the criminal sanction in this kind of case. To imposeinstead a contraband provision, which it is argued is in thenature of a civil "in rem" seizure which does notoperate against the person, is to cloud the issue and to weakenthe force of the basic decriminalization. A persuasivejustification simply has not been made. Both Commissioners seek to eliminate it also because theybelieve that the voice of the Commission should be loud and clearthat the preservation of the right of privacy is of paramountimportance and cannot be casually jeopardized in the pursuit ofsome vague public or law enforcement interest which has not beendefined and justified with clarity and precision. The second area of disagreement with the Commission'srecommendations concerns the casual distribution of marihuana andthe not-for-profit sale. As understood: (1) The totally donative transfer is not subject to criminalpenalty, regardless of where it takes place. (2) The transfer of small amounts for insignificantremuneration not involving a profit is not subject to criminalpenalty (except if it is accomplished in public, in which case itis subject to criminal sanction), but (3) The transfer of"large amounts" for "significant"remuneration not involving a profit is subject to criminalpenalty. Footnote 4 on page 158 of the Report, the Commission refers toa Report of The Senate Judiciary Committee on the ComprehensiveDrug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. In substance, itimplies that within the meaning of the Act, transfers of -morethan one or two marihuana cigarettes in return for 50 cents orone dollar to cover cost are not intended to be covered as casualtransfers, but rather are to be treated as unlawful sales. Commissioners Hughes and Javits feel that the Commission hasfailed to set forth a clear standard which will adequately informthe public of their obligations under the law. The recommendationand its discussion in the Report are confusing and fail toprovide the individual with sufficient guidance to allow him toact without having to dodge in and out of illegality. It alsoundermines a basic, stated objective of the Commission i.e., toconcentrate the weight of the criminal sanction upon significantsupply and distribution activities, rather than upon casualconsumption. Moreover, proscribing even the most casual not-for-profittransfers when they occur in public is, in their opinion, wrong.Such transfers are necessarily incident to private possession anduse. To hold that they should be subject to criminal sanction islogically inconsistent with the Commission's rationale andrecommendation on decriminalization of such private activities. Instead, both Commissioners recommend that all not-for-profitsales be excluded from the criminal sanction. It Is fundamentalthat there be a clear separation between the serious, commercial,profit-making-seller, or "pusher" as he is known, andthe individual who merely splits the cost of a reasonable supplyof the drug with his friends or acquaintances. Thirdly, exception is taken to the retention of the criminalsanction on public possession of more than one ounce. Theindividual who buys an ounce and a half would be a criminal whenhe buys on the corner, when he puts it in his pocket, when hegets in his car and drives home, when he is on his doorstep, butnot when he crosses the threshold of his home. Commission policyshould direct the attention of the law enforcement community tothe person who sells the drug for profit, and not to the personwho uses the drug privately. If an individual has more than a few ounces in his possession,and there is probable cause to believe that he intends to sell itfor profit, that activity is already covered under theCommission's recommendation that possession with intent to sellis illegal. Therefore, there is no need to further proscribesimple public possession. All the component parts of the recommended policy of theCommission should be consistent with its objective ofnon-interference with casual transfers and possession and usewhich is essentially and fundamentally private and personal. The contraband device, the not-for-profit sale, and publicpossession of some reasonable amount which should be presumed tobe necessarily incident to private use should all be removed fromthe ambit of legal sanction. To do so would be to strike down"symbols" of a public policy which had never beenadequately justified in the first instance. Such steps would inno way jeopardize the firm determination of the Commission thatthe use of marihuana ought to be discouraged. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR STATE LAW Under existing state marihuana laws, cultivation distributionand possession with intent to distribute are generally feloniesand in most states possession for personal use is a misdemeanor.The Commission strongly recommends uniformity of state laws and,in this regard, endorses the basic premise of the UniformControlled Substances Act drafted by the National Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws. The following are ourrecommendations for a uniform statutory scheme for marihuana, bywhich we mean, as under existing federal law, only the naturalcannabis plant and its various parts, not the synthetictetrahydrocannabinol (THC) Existing Law CULTIVATION, SALE OR DISTRIBUTION FOR PROFIT AND POSSESSIONWITH INTENT TO SELL WOULD REMAIN FELONIES (ALTHOUGH WE DORECOMMEND UNIFORM PENALTIES). Private Activities POSSESSION IN PRIVATE OF MARIHUANA FOR PERSONAL USE WOULD NOLONGER BE AN OFFENSE. DISTRIBUTION IN PRIVATE OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NOREMUNERATION OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING A PROFITWOULD NO LONGER BE AN OFFENSE. Public Activities POSSESSION IN PUBLIC OF ONE OUNCE OR UNDER OF MARIHUANA WOULDNOT BE AN OFFENSE, BUT THE MARIHUANA WOULD BE CONTRABAND SUBJECTTO SUMMARY SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE. POSSESSION IN PUBLIC OF MORE THAN ONE OUNCE OF MARIHUANA WOULDBE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF $100. DISTRIBUTION IN PUBLIC OF SMALL AMOUNTS OF MARIHUANA FOR NOREMUNERATION OR INSIGNIFICANT REMUNERATION NOT INVOLVING A PROFITWOULD BE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF $100. PUBLIC USE OF MARIHUANA WOULD BE A CRIMINAL OFFENSE PUNISHABLEBY A FINE OF $100. DISORDERLY CONDUCT ASSOCIATED WITH PUBLIC USE OF ORINTOXICATION BY MARIHUANA WOULD BE A MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY UPTO 60 DAYS IN JAIL, A FINE OF $100, OR BOTH. OPERATING A VEHICLE OR DANGEROUS INSTRUMENT WHILE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA WOULD BE A MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY UP TOONE YEAR IN JAIL, A FINE OF UP TO $1,000, OR BOTH, AND SUSPENSIONOF A PERMIT TO OPERATE SUCH A VEHICLE OR INSTRUMENT FOR UP TO 180DAYS. A PLEA OF MARIHUANA INTOXICATION SHALL NOT BE A DEFENSE TO ANYCRIMINAL ACT COMMITTED UNDER ITS INFLUENCE NOR SHALL PROOF OFSUCH INTOXICATION CONSTITUTE A NEGATION OF SPECIFIC INTENT. A PERSON WOULD BE ABSOLUTELY LIABLE IN CIVIL COURT FOR ANYDAMAGE TO PERSON OR PROPERTY WHICH HE CAUSED WHILE UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF THE DRUG. DISCUSSION OF FEDERAL RECOMMENDATIONS The recommended federal approach is really a restatement ofexisting federal policy. From official testimony and recordevaluation, we know that the federal law enforcement authorities,principally the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsand the Bureau of Customs, do not concentrate their efforts onpersonal possession cases. The avowed purpose of both Bureaus isto eliminate major traffickers and sources of supply. For themost part, the federal agencies have left possession enforcementto the states. Underlying this approach is a need -to maximizethe use of enforcement resources for major priorities and allowthe states, in exercising their "police powers," toassume the responsibility for local activities, includingpossession for personal use. By withdrawing the criminal sanction from possession forpersonal use we are, in effect, codifying official policy. Inaddition, such a scheme follows the model chosen for alcohol inthe Volstead Act, and also revives the approach taken by Congressin the Drug Abuse Control Amendments (DACA) of 1965. We are inagreement with the original thrust of DACA, when Congress broughtpreviously uncontrolled drugs, LSD, barbiturates andamphetamines, under control but did not assess criminal penaltiesfor possession for personal use. Instead, Congress placed on the prosecution the burden ofproof that the possession was for purposes of sale. Regardless ofwhether or not Congress was wise in imposing a penalty in 1968for possession for personal use, a subject we will consider inour next Report, we think the original DACA concept isenlightened where marihuana is concerned. At the same time, present federal law classifies marihuana ascontraband, and this feature should be maintained. The contrabandconcept serves the discouragement policy in two ways: it assiststhe removal of supply from the market and it symbolizes acontinuing societal opposition to use. Accordingly, if a personis found in possession of marihuana in public and the governmentis unable to prove any intent to sell, it may nevertheless seizethe marihuana and confiscate it is contraband. The contraband provision would apply only to possession inpublic and would not extend to possession for personal use in thehome. During Prohibition, the Federal Government and most of thestates employed a similar statutory limitation. For example, theVolstead Act provided that a private dwelling could not besearched "unless it is being used for the unlawful sale ofintoxicating liquor. . . ." I The impact of this contrabandconcept is that marihuana possessed or found in public can besummarily seized by law enforcement officials and forfeited tothe state for subsequent destruction .2 The criminal justicesystem is not involved in the process. The individual receives norecord of any kind; he simply loses the economic value of themarihuana.3 With regard to the casual distribution of small amounts ofMarihuana for no remuneration or insignificant remuneration notinvolving a profit we are following the approach taken in theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 whichin essence treats such casual transfers as the functionalequivalent of possession. In doing so, Congress recognized thatmarihuana is generally shared among friends and that not allpeople who distribute marihuana are "Pushers."* ' 39. Unlawful P0ssession of liquor or property designed formanufacture thereof ; search warrants. It shall be unlawful tohave or possess any liquor or property designed for themanufacture of liquor intended for use in violating this chapteror which has been so used, and no property rights shall exist inany such liquor or property. A search warrant may issue asprovided in [sections 611 to 631 and 633 of Title 181 and suchliquor, the containers thereof, and such property so seized shallbe subject to such disposition as the court may make thereof. ifit is found that such liquor or property was so unlawfully heldor possessed, or had been so unlawfully used, the liquor, and allproperty designed for the unlawful manufacture of liquor, shallbe destroyed, unless the court shall otherwise order. No searchwarrant shall issue to search any private dwelling occupied assuch unless it is being used for unlawful sale of intoxicatingliquor, or unless it is in part used for some business purposesuch as a store, shop, saloon, restaurant, hotel, or boarding'house. 'Me term "private dwelling" shall be construedto include the room or rooms used and occupied not transientlybut solely as a residence in an apartment house, hotel orboarding house. The property seized on any such warrant shall notlie taken from the officer seizing the same on any writ ofreplevin or other like process. (Oct. 28, 1919, e. 85, Title 11, 25, 41 Stat. 315) 'The federal and state provisions presently in force regardingthe seizure and forfeiture of an automobile transportingmarihuana would no longer be applicable. They would still remainin force for other controlled drugs classified as contraband. 3 See the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter, Ware, Hughesand Javits expressed in the footnote on pages 151-156. The accuracy of Congress' appraisal is underscored by theNational Survey. When people who had used marihuana were askedhow they first obtained the drug, 61% of the adults and 76% ofthe youth responded that it had been given to them. Only 4% ofthe adults and 8% of the youth said that they had bought it. Whenasked who their source had been, 67% of the adults and 85% of theyouth responded that it had been a friend, acquaintance or familymember. The close association between the concepts of casual transferand personal possession is also underscored by the fact that 56%of the prosecutors in our survey thought that the present law didnot deter casual transfer at all or deterred it only minimally. With regard to importation and exportation, we recommend nochange in existing law and make the following observations.First, the United States must maintain its international standingand, as a member of the community of nations, this country shoulddo everything in its power to restrict the exportation ofmarihuana to other countries and to penalize such internationaltraffic. As to importation of marihuana, the most effective way todiscourage use is to cut off supply at the top of the pyramid.Recognizing that most of the marihuana consumed in the UnitedStates comes from abroad, we feel that the Bureau of Customs atthe borders should have all necessary authority to halt andinterdict supplies intended for consumption in this country.There has been a long-standing practice of excepting ports andborders from procedural rules applying within the United States.One example is that Customs officials are allowed to searchwithout the showing of probable cause, even though such a showingis mandatory for searches conducted within the United States. Wecan see a legitimate reason for continuing this policy. *In considering this relationship, the Senate, in the Reportof the Committee on the Judiciary of the United States Senateregarding S. 3246 (a precursor bill to the new Federal law)stated: The language "distributes a small amount of marihuana forno remuneration or insignificant remuneration not involving aprofit" as contained in section 501 (c) (4) is intended tocover the type of situation where a college student makes aquasi-donative transfer of one or two marihuana cigarettes andreceives 50 cents or a dollar in exchange to cover the cost ofthe marihuana. Transfers of larger quantities in exchange for larger amountsof money, or transfers for profit, are not intended to be coveredby this section, but rather are to be covered by section 501 (c)(2) which deals 'with unlawful distribution. This languagesketches a prototype situation which the Committee had in mind;however, the wording of the Federal Act and of ourrecommendations is not intended to establish inflexible rules.The objective in both provisions is to distinguish betweencommercial sellers and casual distributors. Ultimately the courtswill have the responsibility of drawing this distinctionaccording to the evidence in individual cases. The recommendedprovision intentionally establishes a loose standard not tied tospecific amounts of marihuana or money. See also the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter, Ware,Hughes and Javits expressed in the footnote on pages 151-156. DISCUSSION OF STATE RECOMMENDATIONS The states have primary responsibility for enforcing theexisting proscriptions against possession for personal use. Theirpresent efforts are designed mainly to keep marihuana usecontained, and in private. Such an enforcement policy isconsistent with our social policy approach, and is an appropriateexercise of the states' obligations to maintain public order. Sowhile we see no need for criminal sanctions against possessionfor personal use or against casual transfers, we recommend anumber of provisions for confining marihuana use to the home. The first point is that even marihuana possessed for personaluse is subject to summary seizure and forfeiture if it is foundin public. This concept is now applicable under federal law whichwe commend also to the states. In our view, the contrabandfeature symbolizes the discouragement policy and will exert a,major force in keeping use private. Another means of symbolizing the discouragement policy whichhas been suggested is the imposition of a civil fine on thosepossessing marihuana outside the home for personal use.* Undersuch an approach, a fine would be levied and processed outsidethe criminal justice system. Essentially, possession of marihuanawould be the equivalent of a traffic offense in thosejurisdictions where such an offense is not criminal. Such a scheme would accomplish little more than that achievedunder a partial prohibition scheme. Warrants would presumably notbe issued for searches of private residences, and possessionoffenses would be detected only by accident or if the offenderuses the drug in public. The more direct way to confront suchbehavior is a penalty against public use. A further problem with the civil fine approach lies in thearea, of non-payment of the fine. With traffic tickets, or withcivil fines levied against industrial polluters, society cancompel compliance by withdrawing its permission to engage inregulated activity. For example, it can revoke the motorists'license to drive or the polluters' license to do business withinthe state. In short, the state has remedies beyond the criminallaw to achieve its policy goal. The same would not be true forthe marihuana user and enforceability of the statute wouldultimately require court action. *See the views of Commissioners Rogers, Carter and Wareexpressed in the footnote on pages 151-153. As we have suggested, a central feature, of our statutoryapproach at the state, level would be a vigorously enforcedprohibition of public use. No intoxicant should be used inpublic, both because it may offend others and because the user isrisking irresponsible behavior if he should be under itsinfluence in public. Moreover, where marihuana is concerned,continuing societal disapproval requires that the behavior occuronly in private if at all. Public use, under the proposed scheme,would therefore be punishable by a fine of $100. We also recognize the need for some prophylactic measure foranticipating distribution, even though there may be no intent tosell for profit. To this end, and in order to deter public use,possession and transfer, we have drawn a line at one ounce ofmarihuana. Possession in public of more than this amount would bepunishable by a fine of $100. For these same reasons, we believe the states should prohibitall transfers outside the home, whether or not for remuneration.A transfer for profit would be a felony, as under present law. Acasual transfer of a small amount would be punishable by a fineof $100. Taken together, the contraband feature, the proscriptions ofpublic use and public possession of more than an ounce (even iffor personal use) and the prohibition of public transfers willreflect the discouragement policy underlying the entire, scheme. The remaining set of recommendations alms at irresponsiblebehavior under the influence of marihuana. Whatever the preciselegal scheme employed, these provisions should be included. First, the "drunk and disorderly" statutes presentlyin force in the states are useful tools for maintaining publicorder. We would suggest similar statutes in the case ofmarihuana, punishing offenders by up to 60 days in jail, a fineof $100, or both. Law enforcement authorities must have a meansto halt antisocial behavior exhibited incidental to marihuanause. The second aspect of irresponsible behavior is the operationof automobiles, other vehicles, or any potentially dangerousinstrument while under the influence of marihuana. Such behavioris gross negligence in itself, risking harm to othersunnecessarily. In addition to penalizing a person who"drives under the influence" as a serious misdemeanant,we would impose absolute civil liability on anyone who harms theperson or property of another while under the influence ofmarihuana. Finally, no one should be able to limit his criminalaccountability by alleging that he was under the influence ofmarihuana at the time of the crime. Under both federal and statelaw, the defendant should not be able to negate the mentalelement of "specific intent," which some offensescarry, by pleading that he was under the influence of marihuanaand was therefore unable to have formed such an intent. Unlikemany users of heroin, the user of marihuana is not physicallydependent on the drug. The use of the drug is usually a matter ofchoice. Although we believe on the basis of available evidencethat there is no causal connection between marihauna use andcrime, we would under no circumstances allow a person to escapethe consequences of his actions by hiding behind the cloak ofmarihuana use. DISCUSSION OF POTENTIAL OBJECTIONS Having discussed our recommended scheme at the federal andstate levels, we think it useful to answer some objections weanticipate will be raised. Possible objections are: 1. Partial prohibition is not a sufficient reflection of thediscouragement policy. 2. Partial prohibition is logically inconsistent. 3. A possession penalty is necessary for effective enforcementof sale proscriptions. 4. Partial prohibition won't "work" for marihuanaany more than it did for alcohol. 5. A possession offense is essential as a device for detectingproblem users. 6. Retention of a possession offense is required by ourinternational obligations. 7. A firm distinction should be drawn between less potent andmore potent preparations. 1. The Partial Prohibition Approach Is a SufficientReflection of the Discouragement Policy To those who would argue that a criminal sanction against useis a necessary implementation of an abstentionist policy, we needonly respond that this country has not generally operated on thatassumption. We would be astounded if any person who lived duringthe 1920's was not aware of a definite governmental policyopposed to the use of alcohol. Yet, only five states prohibitedpossession for personal use during Prohibition. The failure ofthe 18th Amendment, the Volstead Act and 43 state prohibitionacts to criminalize private possession certainly did not signifyofficial approval of or neutrality toward alcohol use. As we pointed out in Chapter 1, our nation has not generallyseen fit to criminalize private drug-related behavior; only inthe narcotics area was possession made a crime and marihuana wasbrought within the narcotics framework because of unfoundedassumptions about its ill effects. We think it is time to correctthat mistaken departure from tradition with respect to marihuana.As during Prohibition, the drug will remain contraband, and itsdistribution will be prohibited. Even as late as 1965, an abstentionist drug policy was notthought to require prohibition for personal use. At that time,Congress enacted the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, bringing LSD,amphetamines and barbiturates under federal control. Nationalpolicy was clearly opposed to use of the hallucinogens and thenon-prescription use of amphetamines and barbiturates, yetCongress did not impose a penalty for possession. Whether or notCongress' subsequent decision in 1968, to impose such a penaltywas appropriate is an issue we will cover in our next Reportafter analyzing the individual drugs controlled. The importantpoint now is that such a penalty is not a necessary feature of adiscouragement policy for marihuana, regardless of its, proprietyfor other drugs. The Partial Prohibition Approach Is Not Logically Inconsistent It will. be, argued that a law which permits a person toacquire and use marihuana but does not permit anyone to sell itto him for profit is logically unsound. We do not agree. If wehad recommended a social policy of approval or neutrality towarduse, partial prohibition would indeed have been illogical.However, under a discouragement policy, such a, scheme isperfectly consistent. Under partial prohibition, use is discouraged in three mainways. First, law enforcement authorities will make a concertedeffort to reduce the supply of the drug. If a person wishes touse marihuana, he will have to seek out a person to sell it tohim; and if his seller is in the business of distributingmarihuana for profit, the seller is violating the law. Second, the user will have to confine his disapproved behaviorto the home. If lie uses the drug in public, he has committed anoffense; if lie possesses it in public, it may be summarilyseized as contraband. Third, continuing efforts will be made by educators, publichealth officials, and official government spokesmen to discourageuse. Realizing that educational efforts are not alwayssuccessful, we would hope for a sound program. In any event, thelaw should be an ancillary rather than a focal consideration. There is nothing theoretically Inconsistent about a schemewhich merely withdraws the criminal sanction from a behaviorwhich is not immoral but which is disapproved. The individual isbeing allowed to make his own choice. Hopefully, he will choosenot to use marihuana. If he chooses to do so, however, he willhave to do so discreetly and in private. Apart from its ultimatepossession by the user, however, all marihuana-related activityis prohibited. The drug is contraband from its initial growth,through its harvest and distribution. It ceases to be contrabandonly when possessed and used in the home. 3. Prohibition of All Possession Is Not Essential toProhibition of Sale The other side of the "inconsistency" objection isthe argument by law enforcement officials that they cannotadequately enforce proscriptions against sale without apossession penalty. We disagree. We have already explained thatenforcement of a possession offense to some extent impedes theeffort to reduce supply. Possession cases are generally regardedin the law enforcement community and by judges and prosecutors as"cheap" cases. Few seriously contend that prosecutionof possessors reduces supply. Some persons argue in response that the law should remain onthe books as a tool not against the possessor but against theseller. They say that a possession offense is helpful in threeways. First, a prosecution can be used as a bargaining tool toencourage the possessor to reveal his source; this is called"turning an informant." Second, the police may knowthat a person is a seller, but may not be able to prove eithersale or intent to sell, so they can at least charge suchsuspected sellers with simple possession. Third, a corollary of the second argument is that thepossession offense provides a useful tool in the "pleabargaining" process. That is, a seller may plead guilty tothe lesser offense of possession, now generally a misdemeanor,instead of running the risk of trial and conviction of the moreserious offense of sale, generally a felony. The prosecution mayaccept such a "bargain' if it is uncertain of the strengthof the case, to avoid delay in sentencing, to reduce judicialbacklog or in return for information from the defendant. From an institutional standpoint, we do not find thesearguments persuasive. First, if a possession offense is on thebooks, possession is a criminal activity. We oppose criminalizingconduct when its purpose and intent is directed not toward thatconduct but toward another behavior. In answer to the informant argument, the marihuana user (andthis may not be true of other drugs) is simply too low in thedistributional chain to help very much. As indicated earlier, theNational Survey shows most users receive their marihuana fromtheir friends or acquaintances either as a gift or at cost.Rarely is the time spent on him or on his "source" afruitful allocation of the law enforcement official's time. Also,it is institutionally improper to hold the criminal sanction overa person to force him to talk, when we otherwise would beunwilling to use that sanction. As to the "lack of proof" and "pleabargaining" arguments, we believe they challenge afundamental tenet of our criminal justice system. That is, underour law, a person is not guilty just because the police think heis guilty; his offense must be proven beyond a reasonable doubtto a judge or jury. If a possession offense were not on thebooks, the police would have to gather enough evidence to convictthe seller of sale or of possession with intent to sell, and theprosecution would have to convince the judge beyond a reasonabledoubt. The defendant, suspected seller or not, is entitled to dueprocess of law. The "lack of proof" argument is nothing more than aplea for an "easy out" when the police do not haveenough evidence. This simply represents an admission that lawenforcement officials want a possession offense which they canapply selectively, to people whom they think, but cannot prove,are sellers. Such a notion is inconsistent with the basic premiseof our system of equal treatment under the law. If"simple" possession is not an offense for some, it isnot an offense for all. A "known seller" is entitled tothe same rights as anyone else: criminal conduct must be provedbeyond a reasonable doubt. We do not favor coddling criminals. Wedo insist, as did the framers of the Constitution, that suspectedcriminal behavior be proved. 4. That Partial Prohibition Did Not "Work" ForAlcohol Doesn't Mean It Won't For Marihuana Prohibition failed to achieve its avowed purpose ofeliminating the use of intoxicating liquors from American life.Risking an oversimplification, we think two reasons wereessentially responsible for this failure: the unwillingness of asubstantial minority, and probably a majority, of the Americanpublic to discard a habit deeply ingrained in their lives; andthe inability of the law enforcement community to eliminate thebootlegging traffic which catered to this continuing demand. As we have repeatedly noted, one of the reasons for adoptionof a partial prohibition approach is uncertainty about the extentto which marihuana use is ingrained in American culture. Indeed,adoption of partial prohibition is the best way to find out forsure. If the social interest turns out to be only transient, thispolicy will prove particularly appropriate. Similarly, an increase in marihuana use may be prevented by aconcerted effort to eliminate major trafficking, the scope ofwhich is presently only a small fraction of Prohibitionbootlegging. We do not pretend that supply of a plant so easilygrown can be eliminated. However, an intensive effort toeliminate commercial criminal enterprise should have some impacton the extent of use. 5. The Possession Offense Is Not Required as a DetectionDevice In addition to their deterrent and symbolic functions, thedrug possession laws serve a third function not shared by mostother criminal laws. Like laws against public drunkenness, theyfacilitate societal detection of drug-dependent persons. Ideally,such persons, although apprehended by law enforcementauthorities, may be detained for purposes of treatment andrehabilitation. Whatever the merits of such an argument for the opiates andalcohol, such an argument does not apply to marihuana. Only avery small percentage of marihuana users are drug-dependent orare in need of treatment. Their dependence is generally uponmultiple drug use, not on marihuana. In any event, the existenceof such a small population does not justify retention of thepossession offense as a detection device. 6. International Obligations Do Not Require Maintenance ofa Possession Penalty Some have raised the possibility that removal of simplepossession criminal penalties would contravene this country'sobligations under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961),to which it became a signatory in March, 1967. We do not believethe provisions of that Convention compel the criminalization ofpossession for personal use. Nowhere in the Convention are its Parties expressly requiredto impose criminal sanctions on possession for personal use.Article 4 requires Parties to "take such legislative andadministrative measures as may be necessary . . . . to limitexclusively to medical and scientific purposes the production,manufacture, export, import, distribution of, trade in, use andpossession of drugs." Penal sanctions are not necessarilyincluded in this formulation. Article 36, which deals specifically with penal provisions,requires each party to adopt "such measures as willensure" that the listed activities, including possession,"shall be punishable offenses." Some have argued thatthis provision requires prohibition of personal use. However, from a comprehensive study of the history of theConvention, the Commission has concluded that the word"possession" in Article 36 refers not to possession forpersonal use, but to possession as a link in illicit trafficking.This interpretation is bolstered also by the failure to include"use" in Article 36 even though it has been included inArticle 4. Finally, we must consider Article 33, which provides that"the Parties shall not permit the possession of drugs exceptunder legal authority." This Article also does not requirethe imposition of any sanctions on possession for personal use.Experts consulted by the Commission have indicated that thisArticle may, nevertheless, require that the Parties to limitpossession and use to medical and scientific purposes. Toaffirmatively allow drugs to remain in the possession of personsfor non-medical use would in this view contravene Articles 4 and33 to read together. From this perspective our internationalobligations may require the classification of marihuana, ascontraband. For this reason, together with a desire to symbolizeour discouragement policy in a clear way, we have included thecontraband feature in our legal implementation scheme. In conclusion, our reading of the Convention is that a Partymay legitimately decide to deal with non-medical use andpossession of marihuana through an educational program andsimilar approaches designed to discourage use. 7. No Potency Distinction is Necessary at the Present Time Following the approach taken in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970, we have drawn a line betweenthe natural cannabis plant and the synthetictetrahydrocannabinols. "Marihuana" is defined as anyand all parts of the natural plant. That we choose this approachfor purposes of statutory implementation does not mean that weare unaware of the difference between the less potent and morepotent preparations of the natural plant. As noted in Chapters 11 and III, the highest risk of cannabisuse to the individual and society arises from the very long-term,very heavy use of potent preparations commonly called hashish. Nosuch pattern of use is known to exist in the United States today. The predominant pattern of use in the United States isexperimental or intermittent use of less potent preparations ofthe drug. Even when hashish is used, the predominant patternremains the same. In addition, whatever the potency of the drugused, individuals tend to smoke only the amount necessary toachieve the desired drug effect. Given the prevailing patterns of use, the Commission does notbelieve it is essential to distinguish by statute between lesspotent and more potent forms of the natural plant. Reinforcingthis judgment are the procedural and practical problems attendingan effort to do so. If the criminal liability of ail individual user is dependenton the THC content of the substance, neither lie nor thearresting officer will know whether he has committed a crimeuntil an accurate scientific determination is made. Even if suchaccurate determinations were feasible on a large scale, which isnot now the case, such after-the-fact liability is foreign to ourcriminal laws. Under present circumstances, then, a statutory line based onpotency is neither necessary nor feasible. We emphasize also thatany legal distinction is an artificial reflection of theCommission's major concern: the heavy use of the drug over a longterm. The most emphatic element of official policy should be todiscourage such use, especially of the more potent preparations.Unfortunately precise legislative formulations regarding theamount of the drug presumed to be for personal use do not assistthis effort at all. Whether it is lawful to possess one ounce ofhashish or a proportionate amount based on potency (for example,one-fourth ounce), an individual prone to use the drug heavilywill do so. Society's resources should be committed to the taskof reducing supply of the drug and persuading our citizens not touse it. Expenditure of police time and financial resources in anattempt to ascertain the THC content of every seized substancewould make little, if any, contribution to this effort. A Final Comment In this Chapter, we have carefully considered the spectrum ofsocial and legal policy alternatives. On the basis of ourfindings, discussed in previous Chapters, we have concluded thatsociety should seek to discourage use, while concentrating itsattention on the prevention and treatment of heavy and very heavyuse. The Commission feels that the criminalization of possessionof marihuana for personal is socially self-defeating as a meansof achieving this objective. We have attempted to balanceindividual freedom on one hand and the obligation of the state toconsider the wider social good on the other. We believe ourrecommended scheme will permit society to exercise its controland influence in ways most useful and efficient, meanwhilereserving to the individual American his sense of privacy, hissense of individuality, and, within the context of ailinteracting and interdependent society, his options to select hisown life style, values, goals and opportunities. The Commission sincerely hopes that the tone of cautiousrestraint sounded in this Report will be perpetuated in thedebate which will follow it. For those who feel we have notproceeded far enough, we are reminded of Thomas Jefferson'sadvice to George Washington that "Delay is preferable toerror." For those who argue we have gone too far, we noteRoscoe Pound's statement, "The law must be stable, but itmust not stand still." We have carefully analyzed the interrelationship betweenmarihuana the drug, marihuana use as a behavior, and marihuana asa social problem. Recognizing the extensive degree ofmisinformation about marihuana as a drug, we have tried todemythologize it. Viewing the use of marihuana in its widersocial context, we have tried to desymbolize it. Considering the range of social concerns in contemporaryAmerica, marihuana does not, in our considered judgment, rankvery high. We would deemphasize marihuana as a problem. The existing social and legal policy is out of proportion tothe individual and social harm engendered by the use of the drug.To replace it, we have attempted to design a suitable socialpolicy, which we believe is fair, cautious and attuned to thesocial realities of our time. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-32IA086-000614-B046-325http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncrec1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022307 text/html 5993HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:23:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:26 GMTContent-length: 5776 Drugs And Social Responsibility Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY "The difficulty in life is the choice." George Moore (1900) A constant tension exists in our society between individualliberties and the need for reasonable societal restraints. It iseasy to go too far in either direction, and this tendency isparticularly evident where drugs are concerned. We have guided our decision-making by the belief that thestate is obliged to justify restraints on individual behavior.Too often individual freedoms are submerged in the passions ofthe moment, and when that happens, the public policy may bedetermined more by rhetoric than by reason. Our effort has beento minimize the emotional and emphasize the rational in thisReport. Drugs In a Free Society A free society seeks to provide conditions in which each ofits members may develop his or her potentialities to the fullestextent. A premium is placed on individual choice in seekingself-fulfillment. This priority depends upon the capacity of freecitizens not to abuse their freedom, and upon their willingnessto act responsibly toward others and toward the society as awhole. Responsible behavior, through individual choice, is boththe guarantor and the objective of a free society. DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The use of drugs is not in itself an irresponsible act.Medical and scientific uses serve important individual and socialneeds and are often essential to our physical and mentalwell-being. Further, the use of drugs for pleasure or othernon-medical purposes is not inherently irresponsible; alcohol iswidely used as an acceptable part of social activities. We do think the use of drugs is clearly irresponsible when itimpedes the individual's integration into the economic and socialsystem. A preference for individual productivity and contributionto social progress in a general sense still undergirds theAmerican value structure, and we emphasize the policy-maker'sduty to support this preference in a public policy judgment. At the same time, in light of the emerging leisure ethic andthe search for individual meaning and fulfillment noted inChapter 1, we cannot divorce social policy from the questionsraised by the recreational use of drugs. Productivity andrecreation both have a place in the American ethical system. Theyare not inconsistent unless the individual's use of leisure timeinhibits his productive role in society. Drugs should be servants, not masters. They become masterswhen they dominate an individual's existence or impair hisfaculties. To the extent that any drug, including alcohol,carries with it risks to the well-being of the user and seriouslyundermines his effectiveness in the society, that drug becomes amatter of concern for public policy. An essential step in the process of policy-formation is adetermination of the circumstances under which use of any givendrug' poses such risks. For some drugs, the risks may be so greatthat all permissible measures should be taken to eliminate use.For other drugs, such risks may be present only under certainspecific circumstances, in which case society may defer toresponsible individual choice on the matter of recreational usebut take appropriate steps to minimize the incidence andconsequences of dysfunctional use. In our Report next year, forwhich studies are already underway, we will consider from thisperspective the whole range of drugs now used for non-medicalpurposes. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-33IA086-000614-B046-359http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncrec2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022409 text/html 18684HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:23:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:53 GMTContent-length: 18466 A Social Control Policy for Marihuana Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse Chapter V marihuana and social policy A Social Control Policy for Marihuana A Social Control Policy for Marihuana In formulating a Marihuana policy, our strongest concern iswith irresponsible use, whether it be too often, too much,indiscriminate, or under improper circumstances. The excessive orindiscriminate use of any drug is a serious social concern; andthis is particularly true of marihuana since we still know verylittle about the effects of long term, heavy use. We have littledoubt that the substantial majority of users, under any socialcontrol policy, including the existing system, do not and wouldnot engage in irresponsible behavior. In identifying the -appropriate social control policy formarihuana, we have found it helpful to consider the followingpolicy options: I Approval of Use. II Elimination of Use. III Discouragement of Use. IV Neutrality Toward Use. APPROVAL OF USE Society should not approve or encourage the recreational useof any drug, in public or private. Any semblance of encouragementenhances the possibility of abuse and removes, from apsychological standpoint, an effective support of individualrestraint. For example, so long as this society (not only thegovernment, but other institutions and mass advertising as well)in effect approved of the use of tobacco, the growing medicalconsensus about the dangers of excessive use did not make asignificant impression on individual judgment. With the SurgeonGeneral's Report on Tobacco in 1964, Smoking and Health, a veryreal change has occurred in the way society now thinks aboutcigarettes. The institutions of society definitely add their influencesto the variety of social pressures which persuade individuals touse any kind of drugs. Rational social policy should seek tominimize such social pressures, whether they come from peers,from the media, from social custom, or from the user's sense ofinadequacy. Official approval would inevitably encourage somepeople to use the drug who would not otherwise do so, and wouldalso increase the incidence of heavy or otherwise irresponsibleuse and its complications. On this basis we reject policy optionnumber one, approval of use. ELIMINATION OF USE For a half-century, official social policy has been not onlyto discourage use but to eliminate it (option number two). Withthe principal responsibility for this policy assigned to lawenforcement, its implementation reached its zenith in the late1950's and early 1960's when marihuana-related offenses werepunishable by long periods of incarceration. This policy grew outof a distorted and greatly exaggerated concept of the drug'sordinary effects upon the individual and the society. On thebasis of information then available, marihuana was not adequatelydistinguished from other problem drugs and was assumed to be asharmful as the others. The increased incidence of use, intensive scientificreevaluation, and the spread of use to the middle and uppersocioeconomic groups have brought about the informal adoption ofa modified social policy. On the basis of our opinion surveys andour empirical studies of law enforcement behavior, we areconvinced that officialdom and the public are no longer aspunitive toward marihuana use as they once were. Now there exists a more realistic estimate of the actualsocial impact of marihuana use. School and universityadministrators are seldom able to prevent the use of marihuana bytheir students and personnel and are increasingly reluctant totake disciplinary action against users. Within the criminaljustice system, there has been a marked decline in the severityof the response to offenders charged with possession ofmarihuana. In our survey of state enforcement activities, only 11% ofall marihuana arrests resulted from active investigativeactivity, and most of those were in sale situations. For the mostpart, marihuana enforcement is a haphazard process; arrests occuron the street, in a park, in a car, or as a result of a phonecall. Among those arrested, approximately 50% of the adults and70% of the juveniles are not processed through the system; theircases are dismissed by the police, by the prosecutors or by thecourts. Ultimately less than 6% of all those apprehended areincarcerated, and very few of these sentences are for possessionof small amounts for personal use. In the law enforcement community, the major concern is nolonger marihuana but the tendency of some users to engage inother irresponsible activity, particularly the use of moredangerous drugs. Official sentiment now seems to be a desire tocontain use of the drug as well as the drug subculture, and tominimize its spread to the rest of the youth population. Lawenforcement policy, both at the Federal and State levels,implicitly recognizes that elimination is impossible at thistime. The active attempt to suppress all marihuana use has beenreplaced by an effort to keep it within reasonable bounds. Yetbecause this policy still reflects a view that marihuana smokingis itself destructive enough to justify punitive action againstthe user, we believe it is an inappropriate social response. Marihuana's relative potential for harm to the vast majorityof individual users and its actual impact on society does notjustify a social policy designed to seek out and firmly punishthose who use it. This judgment is based on prevalent, usepatterns, on behavior exhibited by the vast majority of users andon our interpretations of existing medical and scientific data.This position also is consistent with the estimate by lawenforcement personnel that the elimination of use isunattainable. In the case of experimental or intermittent use of marihuana,there is room for individual judgment. Some members of oursociety believe the decision to use marihuana is an immoraldecision. However, even during Prohibition, when many people wereconcerned about the evils associated with excessive use ofalcohol, possession for personal use was never outlawed federallyand was made illegal in only five States. Indeed, we suspect that the moral contempt in which some ofour citizens hold the marihuana user is related to other behavioror other attitudes assumed to be associated with use of the drug.All of our data suggest that the moral views of the overwhelmingmajority of marihuana users are in general accord with those ofthe larger society. Having previously rejected the approval policy (option numberone), we now reject the eliminationist policy (option numbertwo). This policy, if taken seriously, would require a greatincrease in manpower and resources in order to eliminate the useof a drug which simply does not warrant that kind of attention. DISCOURAGEMENT OR NEUTRALITY The unresolved question is whether society should try todissuade its members from using marihuana or should deferentirely to individual judgment in the matter, remaining benignlyneutral. We must choose between policies of discouragement(number three) and neutrality (number four). This choice is adifficult one and forces us to consider the limitations of ourknowledge and the dynamics of social change. A number ofconsiderations, none of which is conclusive by itself, point atthe present time toward a discouragement policy. We will discusseach one of them separately. 1. User Preference Is Still Ambiguous Alcohol and tobacco have long been desired by large numberswithin our society and their use is deeply ingrained in theAmerican culture. Marihuana, on the other hand, has only recentlyachieved a significant foothold in the American experience, andit is still essentially used more by young people. Again, theunknown factor here is whether the sudden attraction to marihuanaderives from its psychoactive virtues or from its symbolicstatus. Throughout this Commission's deliberations there was arecurring awareness of the possibility that marihuana use may bea fad which, if not institutionalized, will recede substantiallyin time. Present data suggest that this is the case, and we donot hesitate to say that we would prefer that outcome. To theextent that conditions permit, society is well advised tominimize the number of drugs which may cause significantproblems. By focusing our attention on fewer rather than moredrugs, we may be better able to foster responsible use anddiminish the consequences of irresponsible use. The more prudent course seems to be to retain a social policyopposed to use, attempting to discourage use while at the sametime seeking to deemphasize the issue. Such a policy leaves uswith more options available when more definitive knowledge of theconsequences of heavy and prolonged marihuana use becomesavailable. 2. Continuing Scientific Uncertainty Precludes Finality In 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, society was cognizantof the effects of alcohol as a drug and the adverse consequencesof abuse. But, because so many people wished to use the drug,policy-makers chose, to run the risk of individual indiscretionand decided to abandon the abstentionist policy. There are manytoday who feel that if the social, impact of alcohol use had thenbeen more fully understood, a policy of discouragement ratherthan neutrality would have been adopted to minimize the negativeaspects of alcohol use. Misunderstanding also played an important part when thenational government adopted an eliminationist, marihuana policyin 1937. The policy-makers knew very little about the effects orsocial impact of the drug; many of their hypotheses werespeculative and, in large measure, incorrect. Nevertheless, the argument that misinformation in 1937automatically compels complete reversal of the action taken atthat time is neither reasonable nor logical. While continuingconcern about the effects of heavy, chronic use is not sufficientreason to maintain an overly harsh public policy, it is still asignificant argument for choosing official discouragement inpreference to official neutrality. 3. Society's Value System Is In a State of Transition As discussed in Chapter 1, two central influences incontemporary American life are the individual search for meaningwithin the context of an increasingly depersonalized society, andthe collective search for enduring American values. In ChapterIV, we noted that society's present ambivalent response tomarihuana use reflects these uncertainties. For the reasons discussed in the previous Chapters, a suddenabandonment of an official policy of elimination in favor of oneof neutrality toward marihuana would have a profoundreverberating impact on social attitudes far beyond the one issueof marihuana use. We believe that society must have time toconsider its image of the future. We believe that adoption of adiscouragement policy toward marihuana at this time wouldfacilitate such a reappraisal while official neutrality, underpresent circumstances, would impede it. 4. Public Opinion Presently Opposes Marihuana Use For whatever reasons, a substantial majority of the Americanpublic opposes the use of marihuana, and would prefer that theirfellow citizens abstain from using it. In the National Survey,64% of the adult public agreed with the statement that"using marihuana is morally offensive` (40% felt the sameway about alcohol). Although this majority opinion is not by any meansconclusive, it cannot be ignored. We are well aware of theskeptics in with which marihuana user, and those sympathetic totheir wishes, view the policy making process; and we areparticularly concerned about the indifference to or disrespectfor law manifested by many citizens and particularly the youth. However, we are also apprehensive about the impact of a majorchange in social policy on that larger segment of our populationwhich supports the implications of the existing social policy.They, too, might lose respect for a policy-making establishmentwhich appeared to bend so easily to the wishes of a"lawless" and highly vocal minority. This concern for minimizing cultural dislocation must, ofcourse, be weighed against the relative importance of contraryarguments. For example, in the case of desegregation in theSouth, and now in the North, cult-Lire shock had to be acceptedin the light of the fundamental precept at issue. In the, case.of marihuana, there is no fundamental principle supporting theuse of the drug, and society is not compelled to approve or beneutral toward it. The opinion of the majority is entitled togreater weight. Looking again to the, experience with Prohibition, when anabstentionist policy for alcohol was adopted on the nationallevel in 1918, its proponents were not blind to the vociferousopposition of a substantial minority of the people. By the late1920's and early 1930's, the ambivalence of public opinion towardalcohol use and the unwillingness of large numbers of people tocomply with the new social policy compelled reversal of thatpolicy. Even many of its former supporters acknowledged itsfutility. With marihuana, however, the prevailing policy of eliminatinguse had never been opposed to any significant degree until themid-1960's. Unlike the prohibition of alcohol, which had been thesubject of public debate off and on for 60 years before it wasadopted, present marihuana policy has not until now engaged thepublic opinion process, some 50 years after it first began to beused. Majority sentiment does not appear to be as flexible as itwas with alcohol. 5. Neutrality Is Not Philosophically Compelled Much of what was stated above bespeaks an acute awareness bythe Commission of the subtleties of the collective consciousnessof the American people, as shown in the National Survey. There isa legitimate concern about what the majority of the non-usingpopulation thinks about marihuana use and what the drugrepresents in the public mind. The question is appropriatelyasked if we are suggesting that the majority in a free societymay impose its will on an unwilling minority even though, as itis claimed, uncertainty, speculation, and a large degree ofmisinformation form the basis of the predominant opinion. If wehave nothing more substantial than this, the argument goes,society should remain neutral. To deal with this contention, one must distinguish betweenends and means. Policy-makers must choose their objectives with asensitivity toward the entire social fabric and a vision of thegood society. In such a decision, the general public attitude isa significant consideration. The preferred outcome in ademocratic society cannot be that of the policy-makers alone; itmust be that of an informed public. Accordingly, the policy-makermust consider the dynamic relationship between perception andreality in the public mind. Is the public consensus based on areal awareness of the facts? Does the public really understandwhat is at stake? Given the best evidence available, would thepublic consensus remain the same? Assuming that dominant opinion opposes marihuana use, thephilosophical issue is raised not by the goal but by how it isimplemented. At this point, the interests of the unwilling becomeimportant. For example, the family unit and the institution ofmarriage are preferred means of group-living and child-rearing inour society. As a society, we are not neutral. We officiallyencourage matrimony by giving married couples favorable taxtreatment; but we do not compel people to get married. If itshould become public policy to try to reduce the birth rate, itis unlikely that there will be laws to punish those who exceedthe preferred family size, although we may again utilizedisincentives through the tax system. Similarly, this Commissionbelieves society should continue actively to discourage peoplefrom using marihuana, and any philosophical limitation isrelevant to the means employed, not to the goal itself. FOR THESE REASONS, WE RECOMMEND TO THE PUBLIC AND ITSPOLICY-MAKERS A SOCIAL CONTROL POLICY SEEKING TO DISCOURAGEMARIHUANA USE, WHILE CONCENTRATING PRIMARILY ON THE PREVENTION OFHEAVY AND VERY HEAVY USE. We emphasize that this is a policy for today and theimmediate future; we do not presume to suggest that this policyembodies eternal truth. Accordingly, we strongly recommend thatour successor policy planners, at an appropriate time in thefuture,, review the following factors to determine whether analtered social policy is in order: the state of public opinion,the extent to which members of the society continue to use thedrug, the developing scientific knowledge about the effects andsocial impact of use of the drug, and the evolving socialattitude toward the place of recreation and leisure in awork-oriented society. In our second Report next year, we willcarefully review our findings to see if our perceptions havechanged or if society has changed at that time. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-34IA086-000614-B047-22http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncaddend.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022454 text/html 21264HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:24:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:47 GMTContent-length: 21046 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding - Addendum Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 addendum The previous Chapter recommended a social policy orientedtoward the discouragement of marihuana use and presented a set ofproposals for the legal implementation of that policy. Inaddition to these legal recommendations for federal, and stateaction, the Commission believes certain other recommendationsshould be presented for action. Ancillary Recommendations These recommendations are presented in three categories: (1)legal and law enforcement, (2) medical, and (3) other. Some ofthese recommendations apply to other drugs as well and will bediscussed further in our second Report. However, we consider ituseful to make recommendations now so that policy planners can beinformed of the implications of what has been studied to date. Foremost among the Commission's conclusions is a need forconsistency between federal and state laws affecting marihuanadistribution and use, and uniformity of marihuana laws among thestates. The administration of all marihuana laws must be mutallyreenforcing so that total governmental response to marihuana isboth equitable and understandable. Legal and Law Enforcement Recommendations 1. Federal RECOMMENDATION: FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES, ESPECIALLYTHE BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS AND THE BUREAU OFCUSTOMS, SHOULD IMPROVE THEIR STATISTICAL REPORTING SYSTEMS SOTHAT POLICIES MAY BE PLANNED AND RESOURCES ALLOCATED ON THE BASISOF ACCURATE AND COMPREHENSIVE INFORMATION. In an effort to obtain information relating to enforcement ofthe marihuana laws including arrest, prosecution, sentencing andconviction data, the Commission found that sufficient informationwas available about prosecution and court action, but not aboutthe activities of the law enforcement agencies. We wereconfronted by and large with inadequate statistical informationand little or no in-depth evaluation. The statistical reporting procedures of the Bureau ofNarcotics and Dangerous Drugs and the Bureau of Customs are notuniform, making it extremely difficult to assess theeffectiveness of the two principal drug enforcement agencies ofthe Federal Government. The Bureau of Narcotics and DangerousDrugs keeps centralized files but the Bureau of Customs maintainsits files on a regional basis. In both Bureaus, statisticalinformation is kept only in its raw form; that is, number ofarrests, number of seizures and so on. Very little analysisexists of the procedures leading to arrest, of thecharacteristics of persons arrested, and of the law enforcementstrategies involved in the arrest. For law enforcement personnelto understand more fully how they are carrying out theirfunctions so that internal assessments of particular policies canbe made, sophisticated statistics must be maintained. Both the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs and theBureau of Customs are aware of these problems. Both wereextremely helpful to the Commission and its research staff inseeking useful information from the mass of raw statistics.However, the information from the available statistics isincomplete and of limited utility for policy planning purposes. In support of this priority recommendation, Congress is urgedto provide additional and adequate funding for this area, at thesame time requiring both agencies to utilize a common reportingsystem so that information can be more easily shared betweenthem. In addition, it is recommended that the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, in its Uniform Crime Reports, requests the stateagencies to identify marihuana cases separately from narcoticcases and report them as a separate component. RECOMMENDATION: THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUSDRUGS SH0ULD INCREASE ITS TRAINING PROGRAMS OF STATE AND LOCALPOLICE WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON THE TRAINING IN THE DETECTION OFTRAFFICKING CASES. The Commission's interviews with state and local police,officials revealed a consistent desire to upgrade the quality oftheir investigations. Since the Federal Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs, through its National Training Institute, hasbeen performing this task well, it is recommended that the fundsbe granted by the Congress to extend the range of the educationalprogram offered and increase the number of persons trained. RECOMMENDATION: INCREASED BORDER SURVEILLANCE, A TIGHTENING OFBORDER PROCEDURES, AND A REALISTIC ERADICAT10N PROGRAM TODIMINISH THE SUPPLY OF DRUGS COMING INTO THE COUNTRY, COUPLEDWITH A MORE EFFECTIVE PROGRAM FOR DIMINISHING THE DOMESTICPRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MARIHUANA, ARE REQUIRED. The Commission, as part of its mandate, studied drugtrafficking patterns along the borders of the United States. Ananalysis of border marihuana seizures was also made. The resultsof both studies indicated that proportionately larger seizureswere made along the borders at locations where, there were nomanned checkpoints. The Commission therefore recommends that morevigorous effort be made by federal agencies to interdictsmugglers along the entire border while continuing their effortsat the formal checkpoints. In discussions with representatives of other countries, acommon observation made by foreign officials has been thiscountry's somewhat indifferent attitude about the eradication ofour home-grown marihuana, an attitude that is not appreciated byother countries wider pressure from the United States to destroytheir crops. Since this Administration has wisely made illicittrafficking in all drugs a foreign policy priority, we recommendthat priority be supported by an equally assiduous effort toeradicate marihuana within our borders. We recommend further that preclearance procedures beeliminated so that Customs personnel may more effectively controlsmuggling of marihuana and other drugs. Preclearance is aprocedure whereby passengers and their baggage destined for theUnited States are inspected by U.S. Customs, Immigration andAgriculture officials prior to departure from a foreign location.This practice is in effect in Bermuda, Montreal, Nassau, Toronto,Vancouver, Winnipeg and the Virgin Islands. Other locations arepetitioning for the same privilege. An inherent weakness in the preclearance procedure is thatCustoms personnel stationed outside the United States have noauthority for search, seizure and arrest. This fact is well-knownto the professional smuggler who uses it to his advantage. Sincewe have been informed that preclearance creates a gap in Customs'interdiction process, reason dictates that the procedure beeliminated in the interest of tighter control. H. State RECOMMENDATION: ALL STATES SHOULD ADOPT THE UNIFORM CONTROLLEDSUBSTANCES ACT TO ACHIEVE UNIFORMITY WITH REGARD TO MARIHUANA ANDOTHER DRUG LAWS, WITH THE EXCEPTION THAT THE LEGAL RESPONSE TOPOSSESSION FOR ONE'S OWN USE BE UNIFORMLY ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCEWITH OUR RECOMMENDATION IN CHAPTER V OF THIS REPORT. As noted earlier, one of the greatest needs in the entire drugarea is uniformity of state laws with regard to structure andpenalties. While this recommendation applies to all drugs and notjust marihuana, we feel it essential to make this recommendationnow to help deemphasize the marihuana problem. Significantdifferences in penalties among the states constitute a validsource of irritation and conflict among various segments of ourpopulation. In an age of high mobility, it is unconscionable thatpenalties should vary so greatly in response, to the samebehavior. RECOMMENDATION: EACH STATE SHOULD ESTABLISH A CENTRALIZEDCOMPULSORY REPORTING AND RECORD-KEEPTNG AUTHORITY SO THATADEQUATE AND ACCURATE STATISTICS OF ARRESTS, SENTENCES ANDCONVICTIONS ON A STATEWIDE BASIS ARE AVAILABLE. Several states have systems for maintaining records of drugarrests on a statewide basis. Accurate reporting and compilationof these cases permit the state to assess accurately the impactof law enforcement on drug offenders. The Law EnforcementAssistance Administration of the Department of Justice shouldassist the states to establish compulsory statistical reportingcenters so that individual state needs are met and a clearerpicture of the national trends can be, ascertained. Efficientstate record-keeping will have an additional benefit ofincreasing the reliability of the Uniform Crime Reports compiledby the Federal Bureau of Investigation. RECOMMENDATION: THOSE STATES REQUIRING PHYSICIANS TO REPORTDRUG USERS SEEKING MEDICAL ASSISTANCE SHOULD CHANGE SUCHREQUIREMENTS TO INSURE THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE DRUG USER'SIDENTITY, SO THAT PERSONS NEEDING MEDICAL HELP WILL FEEL FREE TOSEEK IT. Seventeen states* currently require physicians to report to agovernment agency information on those persons treated by themwho are dependent on, or are habitual users of drugs. No commonpattern emerges among these states. *California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Massachusetts,Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New Mexico. New York,North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Virginia, Washington. After reviewing these statutes, the Commission believes thatthe disadvantages of maintaining such reporting systems outweighthe benefits to society or the individual. Fear of disclosure tothe police discourages many persons front seeking needed medicalhelp. Furthermore, the requirement makes the physician aninformant and an agent of law enforcement. While a need exists for reliable statistics regarding thenumber and nature of those persons being treated, the Commissiondoes not feel that identification of the individual user isnecessary. We again emphasize that society should encouragepersons in need of medical attention to seek out authorizedpractitioners without having to fear legal repercussions for suchaction. III. International RECOMMENDATION: IF THE UNITED STATES SHOULD BECOME A SIGNATORYOF THE PROPOSED PSYCHOTROPIC CONVENTION, WE RECOMMEND THATCANNABIS BE REMOVED FROM THE EXISTING SINGLE CONVENTION ANDCONSIDERATION BE GIVEN TO LISTING IT IN THE PSYCHOTROPICCONVENTION AMONG DRUGS WHICH HAVE SIMILAR EFFECTS. Under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, of whichthe United States became a signatory in 1967, cannabis, with theexception of its leaves and stems, is included with narcoticdrugs and cocaine. While that categorization had somejustification in 1961 when knowledge about marihuana was more,limited, this justification no longer exists. More importantly,tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive ingredient incannabis, is not included in the Single Convention and isproposed for inclusion in the Psychotropic Convention. The Commission sees little sense in having the potentpsychoactive ingredient in cannabis covered in one Convention andthe natural supplying data from its major foreign studies ofchronic cannabis users in Jamaica and Greece. For medicalresearch purposes, an analysis of data derived from populationsin other countries with 10, 20 or 30 years of experience withheavy marihuana use will provide useful information aboutprobable consequences if the, incidence of marihuana use in theUnited States were to continue and increase, and if more peopleengaged in heavy, long term use. IV. Therapeutic Uses RECOMMENDATION: INCREASED SUPPORT OF STUDIES WHICH EVALUATETHE EFFICACY OF MARIHIUANA TN THE TREATMENT OF PHYSICALIMPAIRMENTS AND DISEASE IS RECOMMENDED. Historical references have been noted throughout theliterature referring to the use of cannabis products astherapeutically useful agents. Of particular significance forcurrent research with controlled quality, quantity andtherapeutic settings, would be investigations into the treatmentof glaucoma, migraine, alcoholism and terminal cancer. TheNIMII-FDA Psychotomimetic Advisory Committee's authorization ofstudies designed to explore the therapeutic uses of marihuana iscommended. V. Community-Based Treatment RECOMMENDATION: COMMUNITY-BASED TREATMENT FACILITIES SHOULD BEPROMOTED IN CARlNG FOR PROBLEM DRUG USERS UTILIZING EXISTINGHEALTH CENTERS WHEN POSSIBLE AND APPROPRIATE. In studying marihuana, the Commission has obtained informationabout a number of treatment centers and services. The wide rangeof agencies and the variety of goals and techniques present aconfusing array of services available to drug users, varyingwidely in their effectiveness. Uniform criteria for evaluatingthe "success" of these programs is urgently needed. The medical members of the Commission believe that some of thetechniques being used may pose as much potential harm as good.Many young people who are experiencing profound difficultiesresulting from the use of drugs may suppose they are beingtreated and helped, when in reality they are not. In some cases,the short-term benefit may be disruptive to the long-term welfareof the individual. In the rush to provide treatment facilities,many programs have been given impressive credentials withoutmeeting minimal medical standards. It is essential that treatmentfacilities have, as their primary orientation, the well-being ofthe individual under treatment. VI. Training Programs RECOMMENDATION: PUBLIC HEALTH COURSES ON THE SOCIAL ASPECTS OFDRUG USE SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THE CURRICULA OF THE SCHOOLS OFTHE HEALTH PROFESSIONS. The Commission recommends that schools of the healthprofessions include in their curricula courses on the social,public health and therapeutic aspects of drug use as appropriateto the educational purpose of the individual school. The NationalSurvey indicated that the public views the family physician as animportant source of information about drugs. Next to schoolpersonnel, physicians were mentioned most often in thisconnection. Persons involved in the health professions must beprovided with information about nonmedical as well as the medicalaspects of drug use. Other Recommendations 1. Reclassification of Cannabis RECOMMENDATION: THE COMMISSION RECOGNIZES THAT SEVERAL STATELEGISLATURES HAVE IMPROPERLY CLASSIFIED MARIHUANA AS A NARCOTIC,AND RECOMMENDS THAT THEY NOW REDEFINE MARIHUANA ACCORDING TO THESTANDARDS OF THE RECENTLY ADOPTED UNIFORM CONTROLLED SUBSTANCESLAW. Scientific evidence has clearly demonstrated that marihuana isnot a narcotic drug, and the law should properly reflect thisfact. Congress so recognized in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970, as did The Conference ofCommissioners on Uniform State Laws in the Uniform ControlledSubstances Law. In those states where the Uniform Controlled Substances Lawhas not yet been adopted, twelve of which continue to classifymarihuana as a "narcotic", the Commission recommendsthat the legislatures distinguish marihuana from the opiates andlist it in a separate category. The consequence of inappropriatedefinition is that the public continues to associate marihuanawith the narcotics, such as heroin. The confusion resulting fromthis improper classification helps to perpetuate prejudices andmisinformation about marihuana. II. Information RECOMMENDATION: A SINGLE FEDERAL AGENCY SOURCE SHOULDDISSEMINATE INFORMATION AND MATERIALS RELATING TO MARIHUANA ANDOTHER DRUGS. THE NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE FOR DRUG ABUSEINFORMATION SHOULD BE CHARGED WITH THIS RESPONSIBILITY. A great proliferation of drug information materials hasoccurred in recent years. These, materials are currentlydistributed by a number of federal agencies. Some of thesematerials conflict with each other. The result is a confusion anduncertainty on the part of the, public about the accuracy of allthese statements. The public should have one federal source fromwhich to obtain drug information. The National Clearinghouse forDrug Abuse Information appears best suited to perform this task. III. Education RECOMMENDATION: THE SPECIAL ACTION OFFICE FOR DRUG ABUSEPREVENTION IN THE WHITE HOUSE SHOULD BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THECOORDINATION, DEVELOPMENT AND CONTENT REVIEW OF ALLFEDERALLY-SUPPORTED DRUG EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS ANT) SHOULD ISSUEA REPORT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE, EVALUATING EXISTING DRUG EDUCATIONMATERIALS. The Commission has studied many programs of drug educationthroughout the country. Some are irrelevant, others are poorlydesigned, still others are misleading, and a good many of themare, of questionable value. A few are excellent. The FederalGovernment must provide assistance to the states and schooldistricts in this matter, and should provide the leadership indeveloping sample programs in cooperation with educationalsystems. An evaluation of existing programs by The Special ActionOffice for Drug Abuse Prevention of the White House could be veryhelpful in improving the standards of drug education. IV. Voluntary Sector Participation RECOMMENDATION: THE COMMISSION NOTES THE SIGNIFICANT ROLEPLAYED BY THE VOLUNTARY SEC TOR OF THE AMERICAN COMMUNITY ININFLUENCING THE SOCIAL, RELIGIOUS AND MORAL ATTITUDES OF OURNATION'S CITIZENS AND RECOMMENDS THAT THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR BEENCOURAGED TO TAKE AN ACTIVE ROLE IN SUPPORT OF OUR RECOMMENDEDPOLICY OF DISCOURAGING THE USE OF MARIHUANA. Already very active in drug education and preventionactivities, the social agencies, service clubs, church groups,and other non-governmental bodies have, been extremely helpful inattending to the difficult problems of drug abuse. The local andpersonal nature of such organizations gives them an advantageover state and federal governments in the development ofattitudes by our citizens. The policy which we here recommend, indeed any policy whichmight be recommended, will inevitably encounter widespread andearnest objections. The fullest efforts of all citizens of goodwill be required to attend to the, massive problem of drug abusein a calm, just, responsible and effective manner. The help ofthe voluntary agencies in working toward this end is earnestlyinvited and urgently needed. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-35IA086-000614-B047-38http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1let.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022505 text/html 3760HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:25:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:33 GMTContent-length: 3543 National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse - Letter Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse 801 19th Street N.W. Washington, D.C. 20006 March 22, 1972 To The President and Congress of the United States: As Chairman of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse, I am pleased to submit to you our first year Report inconformance with the mandate contained in Section 601 of PublicLaw 91-513, The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and ControlAct of 1970. This Report "Marihuana, A Signal ofMisunderstanding" is an all-inclusive effort to present thefacts as they are known today, to demythologize the controversysurrounding marihuana, and to place in proper perspective one ofthe most emotional and explosive issues of our time. We on theCommission sincerely hope it will play a significant role inbringing uniformity and rationality to our marihuana laws, bothFederal and State, and that it will create a healthy climate forfurther discussion, for further research and for a continuingadvance in the development of a public social policy beneficialto all our citizens. Whatever the facts are we have reported them. Wherever thefacts have logically led us, we have followed and used them inreaching our recommendations. We hope this Report will be afoundation upon which credibility in this area can be restoredand upon which a rational policy can be predicated. By Direction of the Commission Raymond P. Shafer The President The President of the Senate The Speaker of the House Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-36IA086-000614-B047-59http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncstaff.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022517 text/html 5120HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:25:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:06 GMTContent-length: 4903 National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse -- Staff Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Members and Staff COMMISSION MEMBERS The Honorable Raymond Philip Shafer, Chairman Dana L. Farnsworth , M.D., Vice Chairman Henry Brill, M.D. The Honorable Tim Lee Carter, U.S. Representative, Kentucky Mrs. Joan Ganz Cooney Charles 0. Galvin, S.J.D. John A. Howard , Ph. D. The Honorable Harold E. Hughes, U.S. Senator, Iowa The Honorable Jacob K. Javits, U.S. Senator, New York The Honorable Paul G. Rogers, U.S. Representative, Florida Maurice H. Seevers, M.D., Ph. D. J. Thomas Ungerleider, M.D. Mitchell Ware, J.D. COMMISSION STAFF Executive Director Michael R. Sonnenreich Deputy Director Louis P. Bozzetti, M.D. Suzanne Baumgartner Glenn Gilman John Helm Paulette Hodges Roberta Hollander Anthony J. Roccograndi Ralph M. Susman Michel D. Silva Richard J. Bonnie Emery F. Bacon Lenore R. Kupperstein Jack D. Blaine, M.D. Delores E. Mack, Ph. D. Maryann L. Urban Sol J. Silverman Andrea Maharam Corcoran Peter J. Jessen Evelyn Miller Cynthia Rose Carol Simons Sally M. Boyd Mary K. Ryan Ethel McIntosh Basil M. Johnson Support Staff Cynthia Freeman Judith Herbert Christine Jones Maryann M. Kowalczyk Theresa Lewis Youth Consultants Kathryn E. Aasen John D. Arterberry Bren L. Buckley Robert Donfeld Ann Frame Eric A. Goldstein Terry J. Houle Milton J. Nichols Student Researchers Samuel H. Bayless Theodore M. Becker Karen Bonnie Richard D'Amico Linda Dubuclet John T. Golden James Kimble William King Sharon Payne Mary Povich Cornelia Reister Carlton Thompson Deloris West Michael S. Pauley Andrew D. Pike Ellen B. Rouse Terri J. Siegel Richard L. Taylor Sarah C. Tefft Patricia A. Wallace Dianne L. Williams Daniel Lipman Gerald F. Murray Joel S. Ostrow Stephen H. Pugh Michael W. Russell William Sharek Kenneth S. Starkey Michael Stein Michael J. Valentine Notice: Former staff members: Maureen E. Biner, Valerie Boyle,Hugh E. Flaherty, Roy E. Kinsey, Sherrill gasser and John Williams. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-37IA086-000614-B047-84http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1p.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022530 text/html 6556HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:25:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:30 GMTContent-length: 6339 Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding -- Preface Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding The Technical Papers of the First Report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse March, 1972 Preface Congress created the Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse toseparate fact from fiction, reality from myth, and to achieve abalanced judgment on the marihuana issue. The first report of theCommission is an attempt to clarify the essential issues andconcerns of our society regarding marihuana and to extrapolateour findings and conclusions into a reasonable societal response. In an effort to present these complex issues with a maximum ofclarity, comprehension, and readability, the Commission Reportdoes not include references. This Appendix, however, fullydocuments the methodological and substantive, issues presented inthe Report. In addition to the technical data, the Appendix alsocontains the historical and philosophical matrix of the Report. The papers of the Appendix are divided into six major parts.Part One deals with the biosocial aspects which relate tomarihuana's effect on individuals as well as to the largersociety. It includes an historical survey of two types of marihuanause, medicinal and intoxicant, which constitutes a review ofmarihuana use in many parts of the world. An analysis of theaccepted sociocultural parameters helps to put the Americanmarihuana, user into perspective. Part One also presents detailed and current reviews of thebotanical, psychopharmacologic, physiologic, and behavioraleffects of marihuana on man. Part Two, the social aspects of marihuana use, discussespatterns of the individual user as well as the relationship ofmarihuana use to violent and non-violent crime. One of the most controversial issues in the study of marihuanais its relationship to other drugs. The second chapter of PartTwo deals specifically with this issue and explores, in depth andwith careful consideration, the hypothesis that marihuana useleads to other drugs, especially heroin. Part Three is concerned with the legal aspects of themarihuana controversy. In order to place marihuana, apsychoactive drug, in proper perspective, a history of thecontrol of marihuana, alcohol and tobacco is presented. This section of the Appendix also reviews the currentmarihuana laws at the international, federal and state levelsincluding statutes that require physicians to report drugaddiction. The section concludes with a description oftrafficking and distribution patterns of the drug. Part Four, the response of the criminal justice system,analyzes law enforcement behavior with respect to marihuana use.The relationship between the opinions held by officials in thecriminal justice system and their behavior toward marihuanaoffenders is also discussed. Part Five presents the findings of the Commission-sponsoredNational Survey of public attitudes and behavior towardmarihuana, other drug use and related social issues. Part Six discusses the marihuana issue with respect tosociolegal policy practices and decisions. Included in thesection is a discussion of the constitutional dimensions whichform the basis for alternative models for the control ofmarihuana. A nationwide study of marihuana education presentspolicies and programs on a state-by-state basis and includesdescriptions of ongoing marihuana education programs. The Appendix concludes with a presentation of future researchrecommendations as suggested guidelines for various agencies,institutions and individuals engaged in research on marihuana. Each of the papers contained herein represents the compositeeffort of the Commission members and staff, consultants,contractors and youth consultants. Of necessity, space limitations precluded the publication infull of many excellent papers; many works are presented either inabridged form or integrated into the Commission's ownpresentation. A list of all papers submitted to the Commission is presentedat the conclusion of the Appendix. Should any reader wish toobtain a copy of a particular work, the request should be sentdirectly to the author and not to the Commission. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-38IA087-000627-B021-174http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053546 text/html 41557HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:35:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:52 GMTContent-length: 41339 History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant From: Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding, theReport of the US National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,1972 The term "marihuana" is a word with indistinctorigins. Some believe it is derived from the Mexican words for"Mary Jane"; others hold that "marihuana"comes from. the Portuguese word marigu-ano which means"intoxicant" (Geller and Boas, 1969: 14). This chapteroutlines the many and varied uses of marihuana through history,and deals with its use in medicine and its use as an intoxicant. The experience of the 1960's might lead one to surmise thatmarihuana use spreads explosively. The chronicle of its 3,000year history, however, shows that this "explosion" hasbeen characteristic only of the contemporary scene. The plant hasbeen grown for fiber and as a source of medicine for severalthousand years, but until 500 A.D. its use as a mind-alteringdrug was almost solely confined in India. The drug and its usesreached the Middle and Near East during the next severalcenturies, and then moved across North Africa, appeared in LatinAmerica and the Caribbean, and finally entered the United Statesin the early decades of this century (Snyder, 1970: 129). Meanwhile it had been introduced into European medicineshortly after the invasion of Egypt by Napoleon and had a minorvogue as an intoxicant for a time in France. Regardless of which parts of the world are discussed, many of thesame problems and concerns about cannabis are common to all,including the United States. Understanding its various usesduring many centuries in diverse countries and continents canperhaps lead to a better understanding of marihuana in general. History of the Medical Use The history of cannabis products and their use has been long,colorful and varied. "To the agriculturist, cannabis is afiber crop; to the physician, it is an enigma; to the user, aeuphoriant; to the police, a menace; to the trafficker, a sourceof profitable danger; to the convict or parolee and his family, asource of sorrow" (Mikuriya, 1969: 34). The fact is thatcannabis has been held simultaneously in high and low esteem atvarious times throughout recorded history, particularly in ourown times. The volume of information available on the medical applicationof cannabis is considerable. Occasionally certain references havebeen condensed or deleted, but this should not detract from thecompleteness of the report. This historical survey of the medical uses of marihuana isintroduced by abroad overview of its use, including brief noteson current and projected research, and then considers specifichistorical settings and circumstances in ancient China, moving onto Egypt, India, Greece, Africa, and the Western World. Cannabis sativa has been used therapeutically from theearliest records, nearly 5,000 years ago, to the present day(Mikuriya, 1969: 34) and its products have been widely noted fortheir effects, both physiological and psychological, throughoutthe world. Although the Chinese and Indian cultures knew aboutthe properties of this drug from very early times, thisinformation did not become general in the Near and Middle Eastuntil after the fifth century A.D., when travelers, traders andadventurers began to carry knowledge of the drug westward toPersia and Arabia. Historians claim that cannabis was first employed in thesecountries as an antiseptic and analgesic. Other medical uses werelater developed and spread throughout the Middle East, Africa,and Eastern Europe. Several years after the return of Napoleon's army from Egypt,cannabis became widely accepted by Western medical practitioners.Previously, it had had limited use for such purposes as thetreatment of burns. The scientific members of Napoleon's forceswere interested in the drug's pain relieving and sedativeeffects. It was used during, and to a greater extent, followinghis rule in France, especially after 1840 when the work of suchphysicians as O'Shaughnessy, Aubert-Roche, and Moreau de Toursdrew wide attention to this drug. With the rise of the literary movement of the 1840-1860 periodin France (Gautier, Baudelaire, Dumas, etc.), cannabis becamesomewhat popular as an intoxicant of the intellectual classes. In the United States, medical interest in cannabis use wasevidenced in 1860 by the convening of a Committee on CannabisIndica of the Ohio State Medical Society, which reported on itstherapeutic applications (McMeens, 1860: 1). Between the period1840-1890, Walton states that more than 100 articles werepublished recommending cannabis for one disorder or another. Concern about cannabis as an intoxicant led the government ofIndia to establish the India Hemp Commission of 1893-94 toexamine the entire question of cannabis use in India. Paralleling the question over cannabis use in the latter halfof the 19th century was the growing medical use of othermedications superior to cannabis in their effects and more easilycontrolled as to dose. Consequently, medical use of cannabisdeclined and cannabis began to lose support of the medicalprofession. During the years between 1856-1937, cannabis lost its image asa medicine and was left with a disreputable image as anintoxicant. Strong public reaction coupled with a campaign in thepublic press led to a federal anti-marihuana law in 1937. (Thedrug was illegal in many states before 1937.) The issue ofmedical use remained active, however, and Dr. William C.Woodward, Legislative Counsel to the AMA, an opponent of cannabisuse and the only physician to be a witness at the Taxation ofMarihuana hearings, stated: There are exceptions in treatment in which cannabis cannotapparently be successfully subsituted for. The work of Pascalseems to show that Indian Hemp has remarkable properties inrevealing the subconscious; hence, it can be used forpsychological, psychoanalytic and psychotherapeutic research(Hearings, House of Representatives, 1937: 91). Although cannabis drugs are generally regarded as obsolete andrarely used in "western" medicine today, cannabis is"still used extensively in the Ayruvedic, Unani and Tibbisystems of medicine of the Indian-Pakastani subcontinent"("The Cannabis Problem, 1962: 27). The Pharmacopoeias ofIndia mention cannabis use in the recent past. Two preparationsof cannabis, a liquid extract and a tincture, are listed in the1954 and 1966 Pharmacopoeias of India which contain descriptionsof cannabis and its extract and how it is made (Chopra &Chopra, 1957: 9). A more recent source makes reference to the fact that "incontemporary India and Pakistan, there continues to be widespreadindigenous medical, 'quasi-medical,' and illicit use of bothopium and cannabis" (Chopra & Chopra, 1957: 12-13).Bouquet notes that hemp resin is occasionally used in the nativemedicines of the countries where it is collected. He pointsespecially to India where, "the medical systems . . . makemuch use of cannabis as a sedative, hypnotic, analgesic,anti-spasmodic and anti-hemorrhoidal" (Bulletin onNarcotics, 1962:27). According to the Canadian Commission of Inquiry into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs: There is no currently accepted medical use of cannabis inNorth America outside of an experimental context. Althoughcannabis has been reported to produce an array of possibly usefulmedical effects, these have either not been adequatelyinvestigated, or can be replaced by using other more readilyavailable and convenient drugs. The natural product's variabilityin potency and instability over time are among the factors whichhave led to its disfavor in Western 20th century medicine....cannabis has often been employed in the past, and is currentlyused illicitly in North America, to reduce the secondary symptomsand suffering caused by the flue and the common cold. These . . .alleged therapeutic properties of cannabis have not beenadequately studied in a scientific context, and their generalmedical potential remains a matter of conjecture (1970: 74). Similar statements regarding cannabis are to be found inMarijuana, edited by Erich Goode, and in the textbookPharmacological Basis of Therapeutics by Goodman and Gilman(1970: 300). Concerning therapeutic uses, the latter states: Although cannabis was once used for a wide variety of clinicaldisorders and has even been demonstrated to have antibacterialactivity, there are at present no well substantiated indicationsfor its use. It is no longer an official drug. Preparations arerarely available (cannabis preparation and synthetic THC areobtainable only for research purposes), and prescriptions areregulated by special tax laws. Hollister (1971: 27) lists a few difficulties of thetherapeutic use of cannabis: The onset of the action of oral doses of THC is often rather slow, contrary to that of conventional sedative-hypnotics. Doses high enough to produce a marked hypnotic effect are almost always accompanied by some degree of psychotomimetic-like perceptual disorders, which many patients might find disagreeable. The fine titration of dose required to provide sedative effects is likely to be difficult. The drug does not have novel effects compared with other sedative-hypnotics. The Department of Health, Education, and We] fare report toCongress in 1971, Marihuana and Health, repeats the statement ofthe Canadian Interim Report of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Useof Drugs, and states: "There is no currently acceptedmedical use of cannabis in the United States outside of anexperimental context" (DHEW: 1971: 27). Allen Geller andMaxwell Boas (1969: 4) think that cannabis' "unsavoryreputation has largely stymied further research." Despite the many statements discounting cannabis' therapeuticusefulness, some authorities maintain that its medical valuemight be reborn through further research and/or use. DavidSolomon, in his foreword to The Marihuana Papers (1968: xxi)argues that: Marihuana should be accorded the medical status it once had in this country as a legitimate prescription item. After 1937, with the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act and subsequent federal and state legislation, it became virtually impossible for physicians to obtain or prescribe marihuana preparations for their patients. Thus, the medical profession was denied access to a versatile pharmaceutical tool with a history of therapeutic utility going back thousands of years. In a 1970 article, "Pot Facing Stringent ScientificExamination ," reference is made to Dr. Par who states thatthere are three areas in which "chemical and animalexperiments are under way:" (1) Analgesia-mood elevation plus analgesic power may makeuseful drug. (2) Blood pressure reduction-hypertension may be helped by newdrugs which lower the blood pressure by what seems to be actionon the central nervous system. (3) Psychotherapeutic-new compounds are antidepressants andantianxiety drugs (Culliton: 1970). Mikuriya cites it studies concerning cannabis funded by theNational Institute of Mental Health in 1961. The studies were"either specialized animal experiments, part of anobservational sociologic study of a number of drugs, orexplorations of chemical detection methods" (Mikuriya, 1969:38). Feinglass has pointed to four general categories into whichthe clinical studies of marihuana could be divided (1968:206-208). They are: Anticonvulsant effects-treatment of tetanus, convulsions of rabies, epilepsy, and infant convulsions. Psychotherapeutic actions - appetite-stimulation, treatment of depression, and as a sedative and hypnotic in reducing anxiety; treatment of addiction. Antibiotic properties. Pain-affecting power. Grinspoon suggests: Very little research attention has been given to the possibility that marihuana might protect some people from psychosis. Among users of the drug, the proportion of people with neuroses or personality disorders is usually higher than in the general population; one might therefore expect the incidence of psychoses also to be higher in this group. The fact that it is not suggests that for some mentally disturbed people, the escape provided by the drug may serve to prevent a psychotic breakdown (1969: 24). Mikuriya lists many possible therapeutic uses of THC andsimilar products in his paper "Marihuana in Medicine: Past,Present and Future." He includes: Analgesic-hypnotic, appetite stimulant, antiepileptic,antispasmodic, prophylactic and treatment of the neuralgias,including migraine and tic douloureaux,antidepressant-tranquillizer, anti-asthmatic, oxytocic,anti-tussive, topical anesthetic, withdrawal agent for opiate andalcohol addiction, child birth analgesic, and antibiotic (1968:39). China The oldest known therapeutic description Of cannabis was bythe Emperor Shen-Nung in the 28th century B.C. in China, wherethe plant had long been grown for fiber. He prescribed cannabisfor beri-beri, constipation, "female weakness," gout,malaria, rheumatism and absentmindedness (Bloomquist, 1968: 19). Egypt In Egypt, in the 20th century B.C., cannabis was used to treatsore eyes. Additional medical usage was not reported until muchlater. India Prior to the 10th century B.C., bhang, a cannabis preparation,was used as an anesthetic and antiphlegmatic in India. In thesecond century A.D., a Chinese physician, Hoa-Tho, prescribed itas an analgesic in surgical procedures (Mikuriya, 1969: 34). From the 10th century B.C. up to 1945 (and even to the presenttime), cannabis has been used in India to treat a wide variety ofhuman maladies. The drug is highly regarded by some medicalpractitioners in that country. The religious use of cannabis in India is thought to havepreceded its medical use (Blum and Associates, II, 1969: 73;Snyder, 1970: 125). The religious use of cannabis is to help"the user to free his mind from worldly distractions and toconcentrate on the Supreme Being" (Barber, 1970: 80). Cannabis is used in Hindu and Sikh temples and at Mohammedanshrines. Besides using the drug as an aid to meditation, it isalso used to overcome hunger and thirst by the religiousmendicants. In Nepal, it is distributed on certain feast days atthe temples of all Shiva followers (Blum & Associates, 1969,11: 63). The Hindus spoke of the drug as the "heavenlyguide," "the soother of grief." Considered holy,it was described as a sacred grass during the Vedic period (Fort,1969: 15). A reference to cannabis in Hindu scriptures is thefollowing: To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in bhang... Bhang is the joy giver, the sky filer, the heavenly guide,the poor man's heaven, the soother of grief ... No god or man isas good as the religious drinker of Mang. The students of thescriptures of Benares are given bhang before they sit to study.At Benares, Ujjain and other holy places, yogis take deepdraughts of Mang that they may center their thoughts on theEternal . . . By the help of Mang ascetics pass days without foodor drink. The supporting power of Mang has brought many a Hindufamily safe through the miseries of famine (Snyder, 1970: 125). Greece In ancient Greece, cannabis was used as a remedy for earache,edema, and inflammation (Robinson, 1946: 382-383). Africa Cannabis was used in Africa to restore appetite and to relievepain of hemorrhoids, its antiseptic uses were also known tocertain African native tribes (O'Shaughnessy, 1842: 431). Variousother uses, in a number of countries, included the treatment oftetanus, hydrophobia, delirium tremens, infantile convulsions,neuralgia and other nervous disorders, cholera, menorrhagia,rheumatism, hay fever, asthma, skin diseases, and protractedlabor during childbirth. The 19th Century Documents of the 19th century report on the use of cannabis tocontrol diarrhea in cholera and to stimulate appetite. In hisreports of the late 1830's and early 1840's, O'Shaughnessy (1842:431) stated that tetanus could be arrested and cured when treatedwith extra large doses of cannabis. John Bell, M.D., Boston, reported enthusiastically in 1857,about the effects of cannabis in the control of mental andemotional disorders as opposed to the use of "moraldiscipline" to restrain the mentally ill. Similarly, in1858, Moureau. de Tours reported several case histories of manicand depressive disorders treated with hashish (Walton, 1938: 3). The Ohio State Medical Society's Committee on Cannabis Indica,convened in 1860, reported that their respondents claimedcannabis successfully treated neuralgic pain, dysmenorhea,uterine hemorrhage, hysteria, delirium tremens, mania, palsy,whooping cough, infantile convulsions, asthma, gonorrhea, nervousrheumatism, chronic bronchitis, muscular spasms, tetanus,epilepsy and appetite stimulation (McMeens, 1860: 1). The India Hemp Commission (1894: 174) likewise was informed ofsimilar medicinal uses for cannabis. Specific reports includedthe use of cannabis as an analgesic, a restorer of energy, ahemostat, an ecbolic, and an antidiaretic. Cannabis was alsomentioned as an aid in treating hay fever, cholera, dysentery,gonorrhea, diabetes, impotence, urinary incontinence, swelling ofthe testicles, granulation of open sores, and chronic ulcers.Other beneficial effects attributed to cannabis were preventionof insomnia, relief of anxiety, protection against cholera,alleviation of hunger and as an aid to concentration ofattention. MEDICAL USES IN THE 20TH CENTURY Despite the fact that marihuana was made illegal in the UnitedStates in 1937, research has continued on the medical uses ofmarihuana. The findings include various possible medicalapplications of cannabis and its chemical derivatives. One of the most recent and interesting findings (Frank, 1972)concerns the effect of cannabis in reducing intraocular pressure.It was found that as the dose of marihuana increased, thepressure within the eye decreased by up to 30%. This occurred innormal persons as well as in those with glaucoma, a disease ofthe eye in which increased intraocular pressure may causeblindness. Much more research is necessary in connection withthis experimental clinical finding before final judgment can bepassed on such a possible therapeutic value. During the past 20 years in western medicine, marihuana hasbeen assigned antibiotic activity; as a result, several studiesrelating to this possibility have been undertaken. H. B. M.Murphy (1963: 20) reported investigations in Eastern Europe. Hestated that "it is alleged to be active against grampositive organisms at 1/100,000 dilution, but to be largelyinactivated by plasma, so that prospects for its use appear tobe, confined to E. N. T. (ear, nose and throat) and skininfections." Dr. J. Kabelikovi (1952: 500-503) and his coworkers carriedout tests on rats, which were similar to tests carried out withpenicillin in vitro. The alcohol extract of cannabis wasbacterially effective against many gram-positive and onegram-negative microorganisms. It was also found that a paste formof external application was successful. According to Kabelikovi,"from a study of 2,000 herbs by Czechoslovakian scientistsit was found that cannabis indica (the Indian Hemp) was the mostpromising in the realm of antibiotics." In a 1959 publication of Pharmacie, Krejci stated: "Fromthe flowering tips and leaves of hemp, cannabis sativa var indicabred in Middle Europe, were extracted a phenol and an acidfraction. From the acid fraction, two acids were obtained, ofwhich one preserved its antibiotic properties" (p. 349). Inanother Czechoslovakian publication, Krejci (1961: 1351-1353)referred to two additional samples with antibiotic activity. Sample I in Fig. 1 has been sufficiently identified ascannabidiolic acid and sample 9 as cannabidiol. Both fractionsshow antibiotic activity. The results of tests lead us toconclude that the antibacterial action of cannabis sativa is notidentical to the hashish effect found, for example, intetrahydrocannabinol. However, it was established that cannabissativa is effective as an antibiotic for local infections. Kabelik, Krejci, and Santavy (1960: 13) include in"Cannabis as a Medicant" the various microorganismsagainst which cannabis is effective. Proof could be furnished that the cannabis extracts produce avery satisfactory antibacterial effect upon the followingmicrobes: staphylococcus pyogenes aureus, steptococcus alphahaemolyticus, streptococcus beta haemolyticus, enterococcus,diplococcus pneumonia, B. anthracis, and corynebacteriumdiptheriae i.e., all of them gram-positive microorganisms.Noteworthy is the effect upon staphylococcus aureaus strains,which are resistant to penicillin and to other antibiotics. These authors also mentioned that E. coli (gramnegativebacteria) were tested and found to be resistant to the cannabisextract. One of the conclusions was "the possibility ofutilizing the antibiotics locally without any danger of producingresistant strains to other antibiotics administered at the sametime throughout treatment" (Kabelik, et al., 1960: 13). Veliky and Genest in "Suspension Culture of CannabisSativa," (1970) reported that "the ethanol extract ofcultured cells exhibited antibiotic activity against Bacillusmegatherium, staphlococcus aureaus and escherichia coli" (p.493). Other reports said that "a pronounced antibiotic effecthas been observed in South America, where fresh leaves, afterbeing ground, are used as a poultice for furuncles, and in folkmedicine in Europe for treatment of erysipelas" (Kabelik, etal., 1960: 8). This section on the -antibiotic uses of cannabis concludeswith a summary of several reports from various countries. InPharmacopee Arabe: "The ground-up seeds are mixed with breadfor people with tuberculosis" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967:145). In Czechoslovakia: "A preparation from seed pulp was .. . introduced by Sirek to act as a roborant diet in treatment oftuberculosis" (Kabelik, 1960: 8). "In Southern Rhodesiathe plant is used as an African remedy for malaria, anthrax,sepsis, black water fever, dysentery, blood-poisoning, tropicalquinine-malarial haemoglobinuria, and a wart medicine"(Watt, 1961: 13). In Argentina: Cannabis is considered a real panacea for tetanus, colic,gastralgia, swelling of the liver, gonorrhoea, sterility,impotency, abortion, tuberculosis of the lungs and asthma ...even the root-bark has been collected in spring, and employed asa febrifuge, tonic, for treatment of dysentery and gastralgia,either pulverized or in form of decoctions. The root when groundand applied to burns is said to relieve pain. Oil from the seedshas been frequently used even in treatment of cancer . . .(Kabelik, 1960: 8). In 1949, Davis and Ramsey reported a study of the effect ofTHC on epileptic children. "The demonstration ofanticonvulsant activity of the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)congeners by laboratory tests (Loewe and Goodman, FederationProc., 6: 3521 1947) prompted clinical trial in fiveinstitutionalized epileptic children" (David and Ramsey,1949: 284-285). Of these five children, all had severesymptomatic grand mal epilepsy with mental retardation; threealso had cerebral palsy; and three had focal seizure activity.The EEG tracings were reported to be grossly abnormal in all fivechildren. The results after treatment with homologues of THC,were reported as follows: Three children-responded at least as well as to previoustherapy. Fourth child-almost completely seizure free. Fifthchild-entirely seizure free. As a result of their study, David and Ramsey (1949: 284-285)felt that "the cannabinols herein reported deserve furthertrial in non-institutionalized epileptics." Dr. Vansim of Edgewood Arsenal has written in a recentlypublished book "Psychotomimetic Drugs," that thesynthetic preparations of cannabis are of interest. There arethree areas where they may be of definite use in medicine (Efron,1969: 333-334). One concerns the use of a cannabis analogue whichDr. Walter S. Loewe reported very effective in preventing grandmal seizures if given in small doses. The second use refers to cannabis as an antidepressant. Straub(Walton, 1938: 3), Adams (1942: 726-727), and Stockings (1947,920-922) point to the possible use of cannabis and cannabisanalogues in relieving dysphoria in depressed patients. Otherauthors (Parker and Wrigley, 1950: 278-279) had lesser successbut recommended further research in this field. A report from London in 1968 suggests that cannabis treats thesymptoms and not the cause by focusing the user's attention onhis anxieties and pains without helping him to resolve them(Report by the Advisory Committee, 1968: 11). The third use is described by Douthwaite, who used hashish in1947 "for reducing of anxiety and tension in patients withduodenal ulcer" (Pond, 1948: 279). A report in a 1965 issue of Medical News ("CardiacGlycocides," p. 6) suggests cannabis as treatment for aspecific form of malignancy. Cannabis is recognized as an appetite stimulant, whichsuggests that the drug might be useful in the treatment ofpathological loss of appetite known as anorexia nervosa(Grinspoon, 1969: 21). Similar symptoms exist in terminal cancerpatients who, when treated with cannabis over a short period oftime, demonstrated stimulation of appetite, euphoria, increasedsense of well-being, mild analgesia and an indifference to painwhich reduced the need for opiates (DHEW, 1971: 11). Cannabis has been recently proposed as an adjunct in thetreatment of alcoholics and drug addicts. Roger Adams (1942:726-727) and Todd Mikuriya (1970a: 187-191) noted that thesubstitution of smoked cannabis for alcohol may haverehabilitative value for certain alcoholics. Regarding the use of cannabis analogue in the treatment ofdrug, alcohol and depressive state withdrawal, Thompson andProctor (1953: 520523) report the following: Depressive States: 20 cases of neurotic depression-4 improved (20%) 6 cases of psychotic depression-none improved (00%) Post-Alcoholic Cases: 70 cases--59 reported clinical alleviation of symptoms (84%) Drug Cases: 6 cases of barbiturate addiction-4 reported amelioration ofsymptoms (66%) 4 cases of dilaudid addiction-3 reported alleviation (75%) 2 cases of pantopan and one paregoric addiction-all reportedsmooth withdrawal (100%) 12 cases of Demerol addiction-10 withdrawals in one week (83%) 6 cases of morphine addiction-2 withdrawals without unpleasantsymptoms (33%) The doctors concluded that "Pyrahexyl (a syntheticcannabis-like drug) and related compounds are beneficial in thetreatment of withdrawal symptoms from the use of alcohol to amarked degree, and in the treatment of withdrawal symptoms fromthe use of opiates to a less marked, but still significantdegree" (Thompson & Proctor, 1953:520-523). Drs. Allentuck and Bowman (1942) undertook a study of the useof marihuana in the morphine abstinence syndrome. They stated: A series of cases were selected from among drug addictsundergoing treatment. . . . Comparative results were charteredfor the gradual withdrawal, total withdrawal, and marihuanaderivative substitution, as methods of treatment. . . . 49subjects were studied. The results in general, although stillinconclusive, suggest that the marihuana substitution methodameliorated or eliminated (the symptoms) sooner, the patient wasin a better frame of mind, his spirits elevated, his physicalcondition was more rapidly rehabilitated, and he expressed a wishto resume his occupation sooner (p. 250). In his study of the medical application of cannabis for MayorLaGuardia's committee, Dr. Samuel Allentuck reported"favorable results in treating withdrawal of opiate addictswith tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful purified product ofthe hemp plants" (Mikuriya, 1969: 38). Roger Adams' detailed studies, as reported by Dr. C. K.Himmelsbach in his 1944 article "Treatment of the MorphineAbstinence Syndrome with a Synthetic Cannabis-Like Compound"(1944:26), indicated that "withdrawal manifestations wereconsidered to be mild. The reported therapeutic value ofmarihuana was attributed to improved appetite, greater sleep,euphoria, and a reduction of the intensity or elimination ofabstinence phenomena." Himmelsbach, however, had lessersuccess when he studied the effect of a "pyrahexyl"compound on the morphine abstinence syndrome, as noted by hisconclusions that: (1) Pyrahexyl compound appears to possess considerablecannabis-like effect when administered orally, but little or nonewhen given intramuscularly. (2) When given by mouth In definitely effective amountspyrahexyl compound had no appreciable ameliorative effect on theopiate abstinence syndrome (P. 29). The New York City Mayor LaGuardia's Committee on Marihuana(1944: 147-148) reported two possible therapeutic applications ofmarihuana: The first is the typical euphoria-producing action which mightbe applicable in the treatment of various types of mentaldepression; the second is the rather unique property whichresults in the stimulation of appetite. In the light of thisevidence and in view of the fact that there is a lack of anysubstantial Indication of dependence on the drug, It was reasonedthat marihuana might be useful in alleviating the withdrawalsymptoms in drug addicts. However, the studies here describedwere not sufficiently complete to establish the value of suchtreatment . . . . A study was then undertaken at Riker's Island (N.Y.)Penitentiary involving 56 morphine or heroin addicted inmates.Two groups were equally matched according to age, physicalcondition, length and intensity of habit, etc. One group receivedno treatment or Magendie's solution, and the other received 15mg. of THC and/or placebo. "The impression was gained that those who receivedtetrahydrocannabinol had less severe withdrawal symptoms thanthose who received no treatment or who were treated withMagendie's solution" the report stated. However, the reportfurther said that this alleged therapeutic use of marihuanashould be "investigated under completely controlledconditions" before meaningful conclusions can be developed(New York City Mayor, AU: 147-148). Some reports indicate that cannabis helps relieve labor pains.Such uses are reported among native tribes in South Africa andSouthern Rhodesia: "The Suto tribe fumigates the parturientwoman to relieve pain;"the Sotho women of Basutoland"are reported as smoking cannabis to stupefy themselvesduring childbirth," and have also been known to"administer the ground-up achene with bread or mealiepap toa child during weaning" (Watt, 1962:13). The use of cannabis in the treatment of leprosy has beendescribed in a 1939 dictionary of Malayan medicine: "Seedsof Hydnocarpus anthelmintim ... form the basis of the Tai FoonChee treatment of leprosy. After crushing and sieving, they aremixed with cannabis indica in the proportion of two parts of theseeds to one of Indian hemp" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967:146). Likewise, Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk quote Pappe that"the early colonist employed a decoction in the treatment ofchronic cutaneous eruptions, possibly in leprosy (Andrews andVinkenoog, 1967: 146). Kabelik, Krejci, and Santavy have reported favorable results"in stornatitis aphtosa, gingivitis, and in paradentoseswith a mouthwash of the following composition: Tinct. Cannabis20.0, Tinct. Chamomillae, Tinct. jernmarum populi (or another tanfor example, Tinct. Gallarum) aa 10.0 to be applied in the formof sprays or linaments to the inside of the mouth" (Kabeliket al., 1960: 13). In reference to the use of cannabis, Chopra and Chopra (1957:12-13) listed some preparations used in the practice ofindigenous medicine in India in 1957. They summarize theirarticle "The Use of the Cannabis Drugs in India" (1957:12-13) by saying: . . . with regard to the use of cannabis in Indian indigenousmedicine at the present time, it may be said that It was andstill is fairly extensively used in both the Ayurvedle (Hindu)and Tibbi (Mohammedan) systems of medicine as an anodyne,hypnotic, analgesic and antispasmodic, and as a remedy forexternal application to piles. It is also used in the treatmentof dysmennorhoea, rheumatism, chronic diarrhoea of the spruetype, gonorrhoea, malaria and mental diseases on the advice ofitinerant practitioners of Indigenous medicine as well as quackswho roam about the country. For medicinal purposes the drug isadministered by mouth and hardly ever by smoking. The use of cannabis drugs in indigenous medicine has greatlydeclined during recent years for two reasons-firstly, because ofthe rapid deterioration of the potency of cannabis drugs instorage, the specimens available on the market being often Inertand quite useless; secondly, because a number of potent andeffective drugs of the type used In western medicine are nowavailable on the market and are used quite extensively by thepractitioners of indigenous medicine in place of cannabis, forthe anodyne, sedative and hypnotic effects. In the rural areas ofIndia, however, the practitioners of indigenous medicine stilluse cannabis quite extensively In their practice. The same article lists a variety of uses in which cannabis isemployed therapeutically in veterinary medicine. Dr. R. N. Chopra (1940: 361) reports the following medicinalhousehold uses of Indian Hemp: The hemp drugs are popularly used as household remedies in theamelioration of many minor ailments. A mild beverage made frombhang leaves is believed to sharpen appetite and to helpdigestion. Indian hemp Is commonly used as a smoke and as a drinkfor its supposed prophylactic value against marihuana inmalarious tracts. Bhang beverages form one of the popularhousehold remedies for gonorrhoea and dysuria. On account oftheir mild diuretic and sedative properties these drinks probablygive a certain amount of symptomatic relief. Likewise, the use ofbhang for dysmenorrhea, asthma, and other spasmodic conditions isnot uncommon. A poultice made from fresh leaves is a commonhousehold remedy for painful affections of the eyes,conjunctivitis, swollen joints, orchitis, and other acuteinflammatory conditions. Tuberculosis, anthrax, tetanus, and menstrual cramps are amongthe miscellaneous medical uses of cannabis reported. Reports fromMexico indicate the use of marihuana smoking "to relax andto endure heat and fatigue" (Mikuriya, 1969: 37). Kabelik et al. (1960: 13) also discuss other varied uses ofcannabis. In human therapy the best results have been obtained with thefollowing medicaments combined with substances derived fromcannabis: dusting powder together with boric acid (otitis),ointment (staphylococcus infected wounds, staphylodermia and soon), ear drops (otitis chron.), alcohol solutions with glycerine(treatment of rhagades on the nipples of nursing women-preventionof staphylococcic mastitis,) aqueous emulsions (sinusitis),dentin powder with the IRC (Isolated Resin from Cannabis)(caries). The preparations mentioned above have been alreadytested clinically, and will eventually be made available forproduction. . . . the experiments made in clinical practice,particularly in stomatology, otorhinolaryngology, gynecology,dermatology, phisiology, with some pharmaceutical preparationscontaining antibacterial substances from cannabis have beenreported. Attention has been drawn to the advantageousutilization of the active substances from cannabis in veterinarymedicine, and particularly in preventive medicine foranthropozoonoses. Murphy (1963: 20) refers to an article by Lang,"Treatment of Acute Appendicitis with a Mixture of MaJen," which says "the drug has apparently been used inChina for the treatment of appendicitis." The Xosa tribe inSouth Africa "employs it for treatment of inflammation ofthe feet" (Kabelik et al., 1960: 7), while the Mfengu andHottentot use the plant as a snake-bite remedy (Watt, 1962: 13). Other therapeutic uses attributed to marihuana are for thetreatment of migraine headaches, as an analgesic, and as ahypnotic. Hollister (1971: 28) stated that "other uses whichhave been proposed for marihuana include the treatment ofepilepsy, as prophylaxis for attacks of migraine or facialneuralgia, or as a sexual stimulant." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-39IA086-000614-B047-103http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022540 text/html 25027HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:25:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:41 GMTContent-length: 24809 Marijuana -- History of the Intoxicant Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana And Drug Abuse Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding History of the Intoxicant Use The preceding history of the medical use of marihuana hasprovided an outline of how marihuana has been alleged to carediseases and relieve pain. This section discusses the non-medicaluse of cannabis. The survey includes a discussion of marihuanause in India, the rest of Asia, Africa, Europe, and the UnitedStates; and a concluding analysis of the intoxicant use incontemporary times. Assessing marihuana's use as an intoxicant is difficultbecause for many people around the world, its importance as anintoxicant has been secondary to its use as a folk medicine or aceremonial adjunct (Grinspoon, 1971: 173-174). Caffeine andnicotine apart, cannabis is second in worldwide popularity onlyto alcohol. India Marihuana was probably first used as an intoxicant in Indiaaround 1000 B.C., and soon became an integral part of Hinduculture (Snyder, 1970: 125). In China, where the marihuana planthad been used to make cloth and certain medicines for centuries,it was not recorded as an intoxicant. Explanations are unclear asto why marihuana was used as an intoxicant in India but not inChina. Marihuana was also used as an intoxicant in other parts of theworld prior to 500 A.D. but was not as well documented as the useof opium. The drug "nepenthe" in Homer's Odyssey isbelieved by a number of scholars to have been a brew in which themost active ingredient was hemp (Brotteaux, 1967: 10). Galenwrote in the second century that it was customary to promotehilarity and happiness at banquets by giving the guests hemp(Reininger, 1967: 14-15). Cannabis is used in three different preparations in India(Snyder, 1970: 27). The first is called bhang, comparable inpotency to marihuana in the United States. It is made from theleaves and stems of uncultivated plants and blended into apleasant tasting liquid concoction. The second is ganja, morepotent than bhang, made from the tops of cultivated plants. Thethird and most potent preparation, charas, is similar to hashishor "hash" and is obtained by scraping the resin fromthe leaves of the cultivated plants. Hard blocks are pressed fromthis material which are converted for smoking. High-caste Hindus are not permitted to use alcohol. But theyare allowed bhang at religious ceremonials, and also employ it asan intoxicant at marriage ceremonies and family festivals. Bhangis used by laborers in India in much the same way as beer is usedin the United States (Barber, 1970: 80). The lower classes of India use either a few pulls at a ganjapipe or sip a glass of bhang at the end of the day to relievefatigue (Grinspoon, 1971: 173), to obtain a sense of well-being,to stimulate appetite, and to enable them to bear more cheerfullythe "strain and monotony of . . . daily routines"(Geller and Boas, 1969: 5). These types of users and objectivesare frequently the reverse of those in the United States wheremarihuana users consider themselves an exclusive and advanced"in-group" (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967: iii). A majorintoxicant use in India is for religious purposes. Asia and the Middle East Cannabis spread from India to other parts of Asia, to theMiddle East and then to Africa and South America, although somebelieve it may have originated independently in the latter twocontinents (Fort, 1969: 15). Cultural values may have played apart in determining its use. Opium and cannabis were equallyavailable in pre-Communist China; but cannabis had no vogue as anintoxicant (Barber, 1970: 80). The Chinese spoke of the plant asthe "Liberator of Sin." In India, it was called. the"Giver of Life" (Fort, 1970: 15). One author proposedthat temperament may have also played a role in thisdetermination, suggesting that perhaps the placid, practicalChinese did not appreciate the euphoria produced by cannabis(Snyder, 1070: 125). Additional evidence of mid-Asian use comes from cuneiformtablet interpretations that ascribe use in Persia circa 700-600B.C. and of the time of Ashurbanipal's Assyrian reign, 669-626B.C. (Blum. and Associates, 1969, 1: 62). The drug's popularity as an intoxicant spread to the MiddleEast and thoroughly permeated Islamic culture within a fewcenturies (Geller and Boas, 1969: 5). Because alcohol wasprohibited to the followers of Mohammed, cannabis was accepted asa substitute. The Myth of the Assassins Two Muslim myths, one from the 10th century A.D. and the otherfrom the 13th century A.D., have been the sources of some of thecontemporary attitudes about the drug. The first myth deals withhashish as a magical eastern drug brought by the Arabs into Spainin the 10th century. These invaders confined its use primarily tothemselves, taking it back to Africa when they left Spain.Although it did not become a European habit, some beliefs aboutthe drug were left behind. The existence of this "magical eastern drug" wasprobably known to Marco Polo, the Venetian traveler of the 13thcentury A.D. before he left on his journey to the East. MarcoPolo returned to Europe with his own tale of cannabis which, inthe potent form of hashish, was said to be used as an intoxicantby Hasan-I-Sabbah to send his ruthless followers on missions ofmurder. The word "assassin" was said to be derived fromthe word "hashish," or from Hasan (Geller and Boas,1969: 6). Marco Polo had written about how this "Old Man ofthe Mountain" sent his men out on their missions with allthe color and pageantry that Europeans associated with the East.As Marco Polo described: In the territory of the Assassins there were deliciouswalled gardens in which one can find everything that can satisfythe needs of the body and the caprices of the most exactingsensuality. Great banks of gorgeous flowers and bushes coveredwith fruit stand amongst crystal rivers of living water....Trellises of roses and fragrant vines cover with their foliagepavilions of jade and porcelain furnished with Persian carpetsand Grecian embroideries. Delicious drinks in vessels of gold or crystal are servedby young boys or girls, whose dark unfathomable eyes cause themto resemble the Houris, divinities of that Paradise which theProphet promised to believers. The sound of harps mingles withthe cooing of doves, the murmur of soft voices blends with thesighing of the reeds. All is joy, pleasure, voluptuousness andenchantment. The Grand Master of the Assassins, whenever he discovers ayoung man resolute enough to belong to his murderous legions . .. invites the youth to his table and intoxicates him with theplant "hashish." Having been secretly transported tothe pleasure gardens the young man imagines that he has enteredthe Paradise of Mahomet. The girls, lovely as Houris, contributeto the illusion. After he has enjoyed to satiety all the joyspromised by the-Prophet to his elect, he falls back to thepresence of the Grand Master. Here he is informed that he canenjoy perpetually the delights he has just tasted If he will takepart in the war of the Infidel as commanded by the Prophet (Gellerand Boas, 1969: 6). Another translation (Kitti, 1967: 24) begins the tale thisway: Now no man was allowed to enter the Garden save those whom heintended to be his ASHISHIN. In reality, this was a religious situation and scholars havelong since exposed Marco Polo's tale as being a myth, at best animaginative embellishment of tales he had heard. Africa Use of cannabis in most parts of Africa developed slowly, mostof it during the past 100 years (Blum and Associates, 1969, I:73). A report from Africa in 1891 (Reininger, 1966: 141-142),dealt with a tribe that used hemp as an intoxicant in their newlyformed religion and in preparation for battle. A similar use isdescribed in the Congo, when Simba warriors in 1964 were said touse a cannabis-alcohol mixture in preparation for battle, torouse themselves for the battle and to magically guaranteeimmunity from harm. In Morocco, marihuana, called kif, has been used as anintoxicant by adult males for centuries; that custom continuestoday even though the drug is illegal (Mikuriya, 1970: 122-123). Although moderate use appears to be tolerated in the areas ofIndia, North Africa and the Middle East, excessive use isgenerally viewed as indicative of serious personality problems(Geller and Boas, 1969: 7). Europe One of the more suggestive parallels between 19th centuryFrance and the United States today is the fact that the Frenchinterest in cannabis at that time was aroused by the returningFrench soldiers and scientists of Napoleon's army in Egypt, asource of the drug. A similar interest occurred in the UnitedStates after the Korean conflict, and has intensified sinceVietnam (Geller and Boas, 1969: 7). During the 19th century, European interest in the drug wasaided by two scientific reports, the first by W. B. O'Shaughnessyin 1839, and the second report by Queen Victoria's physician,Russell Reynolds. Both men recommended its medical use for avariety of ailments and as a mild euphoriant (Grinspoon, 1971:56). Cannabis received highly laudatory testimonials from themedical profession of that day and was readily available withoutprescription (Snyder, 1970: 121). Interest in cannabis was further kindled by popular writerswho used and spoke of hashish enthusiastically, including CharlesBaudelaire, Arthur Rimbaud, and Pierre Gautier. Gautier andBaudelaire, in fact, were members of the Club des Hachischins, inwhich a number of writers and intellectuals gathered andexperimented with hashish (Geller and Boas, 1969: 13). Although the public delighted to read of the French writers'drug experiences, the public did not care to engage in the samekind of activity; to them the experiences were frightening andrepugnant. "As a result, the smoking of hashish remained thesub-rosa province of a few European artists until the recenttrans-Atlantic phenomenon of the American drug culture"(Geller and Boas, 1969: 8). United States The, events surrounding the introduction of cannabis use tothe New World are entirely unclear. Some historians say theSpaniards brought the plant with them in the 16th century, othersay marihuana smoking came in with the slave trade or with theAsian Indian migration of the late 18th century. The hemp plant was cultivated in the United States forcenturies, apparently without general knowledge of itsintoxicating properties (Grinspoon, 1971: 10). Cannabis was anoften used medicine in the United States in the 19th century. Itwas easily available without a prescription and was also widelyprescribed by physicians (Snyder, 1970: 26). Hemp was used by thepioneers to cover their wagons. The plant was a major crop inKentucky, Virginia, Wisconsin and Indiana, and was one of themore important southern agricultural products, after cotton.. Itis still used to make rope, twine and textiles, while the seed isused as bird food (Geller and Boas, 1969: 16). Marihuana use as an intoxicant in the United States beganslowly in the early part of this century. Puerto Rican soldiers,and then Americans who were stationed in the Panama Canal Zone,are reported to have been using it by 1916. American soldiersfighting Pancho Villa circa 1916 also learned to use it. Thisfollows the first reported use in Mexico in the 1880's (Blum andAssociates, 1969, 1: 69-70). Intoxicant use in the United Statesis also traced to the large influx of Mexican laborers in the1910's and 1920's (Geller and Boas, 1969: 14). The 1933 Report of the "Military Surgeon" stated,regarding marihuana use among the soldiers in the Canal Zone,that: Marihuana as grown and used on the Isthmus of Panama is amild stimulant and intoxicant. It is not a "habitforming" drug in the sense that the derivatives of opium,cocaine, and such drugs, are as there are no symptoms ofdeprivation following its withdrawal. Delinquencies due to marihuana smoking which result intrial by military court are negligible in number when comparedwith delinquencies resulting from the use of alcohol drinks,which is also classed as a stimulant and intoxicant (Gellerand Boas, 1969: 147). The report went on to say that marihuana presented no threatto military discipline, and "that no recommendations toprevent the sale or use of marihuana are deemed advisable." Cannabis has been rejected in various societies on asceticgrounds. In such puritanical societies such as the Wahabil ofArabis and the Senussis of Libya, no smoking of any kind wastolerated, nor was coffee. In North Africa, social rank dictateduse: the aristocratic Moors scorned both hemp and tobaccosmoking, preferring instead, as compatible with high status,opium eating (Blum and Associates, 1969, 1: 73). One statement highlighting this kind of value conflict comesfrom a Nigerian journalist (Davies, 1966: 299-300) attempting toexplain the 15-year prison sentences of foreign tourists forgrowing and smoking marihuana: There is a growing trend in the more economically advancedcountries to indulge at leisure in the exploration of thepersonality. At a certain stage of development, there is lessneed to produce and more time to spend consuming. This ishealthy. If used properly, marihuana could be helpful at thisstage of development. However, countries which are only beginningto develop a more complex economic structure must channel alltheir energies into creating a new system. This means that theymust sacrifice more of their pleasure. People who smoke hemp seemon the whole to be less aggressive than people who drink alcohol.Hemp smoking may have a positive value for certain socialfunctions.... One of the first acts of the Military Government was toissue a decree making it punishable by death to grow marihuana,and by up to twenty years of prison for merely being inpossession of it . . . meantime, we Nigerian have to stop gettinghigh for a while and develop our country. In the United States, the decade of the 1960's has seen aspectacular and unprecedented spread of the use of marihuana,chiefly among the youth. An estimated 24 million persons haveused marihuana and approximately 3.4 million are current users.The numbers involved and the fact that use spans all age groupsand social classes in American life has produced marked publicreaction and a need for more information on the drug. References Adams, P.: "Marihuana," Bulletin of the New YorkAcademy of Medicine (1942). Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M.: "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99(2) (September 1942). Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog, S. (eds.) : The Book of Grass: AnAnthology on Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Barber, T. X.: LSD, Marihuana, Yoga, and Hypnosis, Chicago:Aldine Publishing Company (1970). Bloomquist, E. R.: Marijuana, Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press(1968). Blum, R. H. and Associates: Drugs I: Society and Drugs: Socialand Cultural Observations, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc.(1969). Blum, R. H. and Associates: Drugs II: Students and Drugs:College and High School Observations, San Francisco: Jossey-BassInc. (1969). "The Cannabis Problem: A Note On The Problem and TheHistory of International Action," Bulletin onNarcotics,14(4) (1962). "Cardiac Glycocides Found Cytotoxic," Medical News(London) March 26 (1965). Chopra, 1. C. and Chopra, R. N.: "The Use of the CannabisDrugs in India," Bulletin on Narcotics, 9(l) (1957). Chopra, R. N.: "Use of Hemp Drugs in India," TheIndian Medical Gazette, (June 1940). Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs:Interim Report, Ottawa (1970). David, J. P. and Ramsey, H. H.: "Antiepileptic Action ofMarihuana-active Substances," Federation Procedures, 8(1949). Davies, A.: "Nigeria Whispers," Andrews, G. andVinkenoog, S. (ed&) : The Book of Grass: An Anthology onIndian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Department of Health, Education and Welfare: Marihuana andHealth, A Report to the Congress from the Secretary, Departmentof Health, Education and Welfare (March 1971). Efron, D. H. (ed.) : Psychotomimetic Drugs, New York: RavenPress (1969). Feinglass, S. J.: "Marijuana: Standardization,Characterization and Potential Therapeutic Uses," Journal ofSecondary Education, 43 (May 1968). Fort, J.: The Pleasure Seekers: The Drug Crisis, Youth andSociety, New York: Grove Press, Inc. (1969). Frank, Ira, University of California, Los Angeles, School ofMedicine, Personal Communication, September 1971. Geller, A. and Boas, M.: The Drug Beat, New York: Cowles BookCompany, Inc. (1969). Goode, E.: Marijuana, Chicago: Atherton Press (1969).Grinspoon, L.: "Marihuana," Scientific American, 221(6)(December 1969). Grinspoon, L.: Marihuana Reconsidered, Cambridge: HarvardUniversity Press (1971). Hearings before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House ofRepresentatives, Taxation of Marihuana, 75th Congress, 1stSession on H.R. 6385 (1937). Himmelsbach, C. J.: "Treatment of the Morphine AbstinenceSyndrome with a Synthetic Cannabis-Like Compound," SouthernMedical Journal, 37 (January 1944). Hollister, L. E.:"Marihuana in Man: Three Years Later." Science, 172(April 2, 1971). Indian Hemp Drugs Commission: Marijuana, Report of the IndianHemp Drugs Commission, Government Central Printing Office, Simla(1894). Kabelik, J.: "Hemp (Cannabis sativa)-AntibioticDrug," Pharmazie, 121 (1957). Kabelik, J., Krejci, Z., and Santavy, F.: "Cannabis as aMedicant," Bulletin on Narcotics, 12(3) (July-September1960). Kabelikovi, J.: "Antibacterial Action of CannabisIndica," Lekarske Listy, 15 (7) (1952). Kitti, Phillip K.: "The Assassins," Andrews, G. andVinkenoog, S. (eds.) : The Book of Grass: An Anthology of IndianHemp, New York: Grove Press, Inc. (1967). Krejci, Z.: "Onthe Problem of Substances with Antibacterial and Hashish Actionin Hemp (Cannabis Sativa L.)," Casopis8 Lekaru Ceskych(1961). Krejci, Z., Horak, M., and Santavy, F.: "Hemp (Cannabissativa)-Antibiotic Drug, 3rd Report," Pharmazie, 14 (1959). Loewe, S. and Goodman, L. S.: "Anticonvulsant Action ofMarihuana-Active Substances," Federation Procedures, 6(1947). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Cannabis Substitution. An AdjunctiveTherapeutic Toot in the Treatment of Alcoholism," MedicalTimes, 98 (4) (April 1970). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Marihuana in Morocco," Aaronson,B. & Osmond, H. (eds.) : Psychedelics, The Uses andImplications of Hallucinogenic Drugs, Garden City: Doubleday& Company, Inc. (1970). Mikuriya, T. H.: "Marihuana In Medicine: Past, Presentand Future," California Medicine, 110 (January 1969).Murphy, H. B. M.: "The Cannabis Habit: A Review of RecentPsychiatric Literature," Bulletin on Narcotics, 15(l)(1.963). McMeens, R. R.: "Report of the Committee on CannabisIndica," Transactions of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of theOhio State Medical Society, Columbus, Ohio: Follett, Foster andCo. (1860). New York City Mayor LaGuardia's Committee on Marihuana, TheMarihuana Problem in the City of New York: Sociological, Medical,Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, Lancaster,Pennsylvania: The Jaques Cattell Press (1944). O'Shaughnessy, W. B.: "On the Preparations of the IndianHemp, or Gunjah," Trans. Med. and Psy. SOC., Bengal (1838-40and 1842). Parker, C. S. and Wrigley, F. "Synthetic CannabisPreparations in Psychiatry: (I) Synhexyl," Journal of MentalSciences, 96 (1950). Reininger, W.: "Historical Notes," Solomon, D. (ed.)The Marihuana Papers, New York: The New American Library, SignetBooks (1966). Reininger, W.: "Remnants From Historic Times,"Andrews G. and Vinkenoog, S., (eds.) The Book of Grass: AnAnthology on Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). Robinson, V.: "Concerning Cannabis Indica "I CibaSymposia, 8 (Augus-September, 1946). Snyder, S.: Uses of Marijuana, New York: Oxford UniversityPress (1970). Snyder, S.: "What We Have Forgotten About Pot-APharmacologist's History," New York Times Magazine, (NewYork, New York) (December 13, 1970). Solomon, D. (ed.) : The Marihuana Papers, New York: NewAmerican Library (1968). Stockings, G. T.: "A New Euphoriant for Depressive MentalStates," British Medical Journal, 1 (10,47). Thompson, L. J. and Proctor, R. C.: "The Use of Pyrahexylin the Treatment of Alcoholic and Drug WithdrawalConditions," North Carolina Medical Journal, 14 (October,1953). Veliky, I. A. and Genest, K.: "Suspension Culture ofCannabis Sativa," Lloydia, 33(4) (December, 1970). Walton, R. P.: Marihuana: America's New Drug Problem,Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott (1938). Watt, J. M.: "Dagga in South Africa," Bulletin onNarcotics, 13(3) (1961). Watt, J. M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M. G.: The Medicinal andPoisonous Plants of Southern and Eastern Africa, 2nd edition,Edinburgh and London: E. and S. Livingstone, Ltd. (1962). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-40IA086-000614-B047-131http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022554 text/html 15678HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:25:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:22 GMTContent-length: 15460 II. Biological Effects of Marihuana II. Biological Effects of Marihuana Botanical and Chemical Considerations Cannabis sativa is one of man's oldest and most widely useddrugs. The substance has been used in various ways as long asmedical history has been recorded and is currently used as amultipurpose drug throughout the world (Adams, 1942; Adams,1941-1942; Grinspoon, 1969; Indian Hemp, 1969; Walton, 1938). During the past few years, a resurgence of the use ofmarihuana by western society, its increased importance as asocial issue and the development of more precise compounds andanalytic techniques have sparked dormant scientific interest inthe substance. However, this effort has added little to what wasalready known about the clinical syndrome produced by cannabis(Hollister, 1971) and described by investigators during the last100 years (Hollister, 1971; Beaudelaire, 1861; Moreau, 1845;Lewin, 1964; Indian Hemp, 1969; Mayor's Committee, 1944). Strongly held, diametrically opposed opinions exist aboutwhether the ultimate effects of cannabis use are harmful,harmless, or beneficial to human functioning (Pillard, 1970). Despite these conflicting opinions, from a scientificperspective, the literature on marihuana is as clear, if notclearer, than for many other botanical substances consumed byman. Most of the older reports suffer from multiple scientificdefects such as biased sampling, lack of adequate controls,unsophisticated techniques, and use of unstandardized marihuanaof unknown potency. Nevertheless, much is known about the use ofcannabis by man. Marihuana has a unique position in the multitudeof pharmaceuticals in that human experimentation has been greaterthan laboratory animal experimentation. The crucial experiments about social effects from chronic usewill be settled by close observation of those who use the drug.The issues of potential therapeutic utility; mechanisms of mentalfunction alteration; and the relationship to mental illness willrequire more extensive laboratory experimentation (Hollister,1971). Botanical and Chemical Considerations In the past several years considerable progress has been madein adding to the understanding of marihuana as a complex drugcontaining botanical substance. Much important information hasbeen obtained from intensive investigation of marihuana ofworldwide origin cultivated under Government contract by theUniversity of Mississippi (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Marihuana is a preparation derived from the hemp plant,Cannabis sativa. This plant is an annual which either iscultivated or grows freely as a weed around the world, includingmost of the United States. When cultivated in temperate climates,plantings are made in May to June. The seeds germinate in lessthan a week. in moist soil. After thinning, the plants grow asrapidly as two feet a week during the peak growing season. Theycan reach a height of up to 18 feet at maturity, approximatelythree to five months after planting. Growth is greatly inhibitedby inadequate light, water or soil nutrients. Marihuana is produced by cutting the stem beneath the lowestbranches, air drying, and stripping seeds, bracts, flowers,leaves and small stems from these plants. Stems and seeds arevariably removed using a mesh screen producing manicuredmarihuana. Hashish is produced by scraping the thick resinousmaterial secreted by the flowers (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Many morphological variations in branching and leaf structureare observed among plants produced by different seed types. Thecharacteristic leaf is palmately-compound and contains an oddnumber of coarsely serrated leaflets. Plants of a given seed typegenerally grow at similar rates and resemble each other. Thus,botanists believe, Cannabis sativa represents a single specieswhich has not stabilized and has many variations (Doorenbos etal., 1971). Cannabis Sativa is a dioecious species with separate male andfemale plants, both producing flowers. Some monoecious variantsare reported. Pollination appears to be accomplished by aircurrents. Bees are attracted by male flowers but not by femaleflowers. Sex cannot be established until flowering begins and thestructure of the male and female flower is distinct. Male plantsbegin shedding leaves shortly after flowering, shied their pollenand die. Female plants lose their older leaves as the seedmatures. After shedding their seed, they die. Contrary to popularbelief, there is no significant difference in drug contentbetween male and female plants at equivalent states of maturity(Fetterman et al., 1970; Ohlsson et al., 1971). Male plantsmature earlier than the females, shed their pollen and die whilethe female plant is continuing to mature. The drug content of the plant parts is variable. Generally,the, drug content decreases in the following order: bracts,flowers, leaves. Practically no cannabinoids are found in thestems, roots and seeds. Obviously, fluctuations in pharmacologicactivity of a sample of Marihuana, depend on the mixture of theseplant parts which is determined by the manicuring process(Fetterman et al., 1970). Different variants of the plant contain different amounts ofpsychoactive drug. Variants of cannabis Sativa cover a spectrumof drug contents. Generally, they can be classified as eitherdrug or fiber genotype. Drug type is high in THC and low incannabidiol and the fiber type is the converse. This type isdetermined genetically and transmitted by the seed. Thus, seeds from different geographical areas produce plantswith a wide range of drug content. For example, when grown undersimilar conditions, plants grown from seeds from Mexico maycontain 15 times more psychoactive drug than those grown fromseeds from Iowa. Of course, individual plants of the same variantoften contain greatly different drug content (Fetterman, et al.,1970). Environmental factors are not as important as heredity indetermining type, but they influence to some degree the drugcontent. However, environmental factors, including type of soil,water, growing space, temperature and light do play an importantrole in determining the size and vitality of the plant (Doorenboset al., 1971; Ohlsson et al., 1971; Phillips et al., 1970). This notorious variability of cannabis preparations causesmany disadvantages for detailed and reproducible biological work.Consequently, much effort has been expended to provide a firmchemical basis in order to provide pure and well-definedsubstances for research. The major naturally occurring active component of cannabis,1-delta 9-trans tetrahydrocannabinol, was not isolated in a pureform and its structure illucidated until 1964 (Gaoni andMechoulam, 1964; Mechoulam and Gaoni, 1967; Mechoulam et al.,1970). In addition, the A' isomer, which is usually present insmall quantities in the natural product representing less than10% of the combined THC content, has a similar spectrum ofactivity (Hively et al., 1966). These two chemicals, available byindustrial synthesis (Fahrenholtz et al., 1967; Petrzilka andSikemeier, 1967) or by extraction from the natural plant, canapparently reproduce fully the effects of the crude drug inanimals and man. More than 20 natural cannabinoids have beenidentified in the plant (Figure 1) (Mechoulam, 1970; Shani andMechoulam, 1970; Doorenbos et al., 1971). All but Delta 11 and Delta 9 THC are inactivepsychopharmacologically and do not seem to exert potentiating orother effects. However, new compounds, cannabinoids andnon-cannabinoids, are being isolated from the plant and requirefurther investigation. Several studies may indicate that somematerial present in natural marihuana may act synergisticallywith THC and potentiate its psychological effect Leniber (1972)Paton and Pertwee (1971) suggest cannabidiol may play this role. The chemical nomenclature of tetra-hydrocannabinols is in astate of confusion due to the existence of two numbering systems.The dibenzopyran or formal system treats the compound assubstituted dibenzopyrans ( Delta 9 THC) while the monoterpenoidsystem considers them as substituted terpenes (Al THC). Theformal system will be used hereafter (Figure 2). Many of the natural cannabinoids are present in the plant asacids. These acids are believed to be psychopharmacologicallyinactive. However, they are converted rapidly when heated, andslowly when stored into their respective active neutralcomponents (Figure 3) (Waller, 1971). This conversion(decarboxylation) does not apparently occur when the acids areabsorbed after oral consumption (Mechoulam, 1970). The proposed biogenesis (Figure 4) of All THC appears toproceed through cannabidiol (CBD). Cannabis variates of the fibertype apparently do not perform this conversion. Thus, cannabidiolis the cannabinoid present in the largest percentage in thenon-drug variety (Phillips et al., 1970). Marihuana appears tolose its potency over time due to conversion of THC to cannabinol(CBN) (Mechoulam, 1970) and this also apparently occurs morequickly for hashish implying the presence of a stabilizingsubstance in the whole plant (Figure 5). Recently, the n-propyl homologue, of Delta 9 THC has beenisolated from crude marihuana. It has about 20% of the activityof Delta THC in mice, and probably makes only a smallcontribution to the total marihuana effect (Gill, 1971). Merkus(1971) and Vree et al. (1971) have recently identified propyl andmethyl cannabinol homologues in hashish in extremely smallquantities. In addition, numerous other non-cannabinoids have beenidentified in the natural material. Most of these have little orno psychoactivity (Gill et al., 1970; Bercht et al., 1971).Recently, waxes. starches, oils, terpenes and simple nitrogenouscompounds including muscarine, choline and trigonelline as wellas volatile low-molecular weight piperdines have been isolated. Additionally, four more complex nitrogenous containingcompounds of the generally-accepted alkaloid type have beenreported in marihuana leaves in minute concentrations (average0.002%). These produced decreased activity but no acute toxicityin mice (Klein et al., 1971). Another laboratory has isolated two steroids and triterpenesfrom. marihuana as well as tyramine amide derivatives from theroots (Doorenbos et al., 1971). Analysis of the smoke obtained from marihuana has beeninvestigated. As in the case of any combustible plant, a gas andparticulate phase is produced. Both these phases are delivered tothe lung. Both the gas and particulate phase consist of compoundspresent in approximately the same percentages as other burnedcellulose containing materials except for the cannabinoidfraction. This includes carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, andhydrogen cyanide gases. (Truitt et al. , 1970) The remainder, the smoke condensate, consists of a complexmixture of relatively non-volatile compounds. Included in thismixture are the cannabinoids (16%), carbohydrates and alcohols(8%), fatty and aromatic acids (11%), polybasic acids (7%),aliphatic amines (1%), aromatic phenols (27%), aliphatic phenols(6%), tannin (6%), unidentified compounds (18%) (Truitt et al.,1970). Another group of investigators (Magus and Harris, 1971)compared the tar collected from combustion of marihuanacigarettes with the tar yielded from tobacco cigarettes. Theyreported that the total tar yield from marihuana was slightlyless than half that produced by an equal weight of tobacco. Thetar contained similar constituents based on typical changesproduced on skin of mice. In addition, there a multitude of synthetic compounds relatedto the naturally occurring Delta 9 THC derivatives and much morepotent (Figure 6). A large number of bomologues have beenprepared all with similar activity but differing widely in theirpotency. In general, the activity of these compounds increasesdramatically over that of A' THC by lengthening the 3 alkyl sidechain to 6 and 7 carbons, with additional branching in the alphaand beta positions. The dimethylheptyl analogue (EA1476 or DMHP)is the most active having 50 times the activity of A' THC. The1-methyloctyl substitution (MOP, EA1465) is the next most potent,compound. The 1,2-dimethylortyl substitution resulted in a 251fold decreased activity from DMHP. (Domino et al., 1972; Sim andTucker, 1963) Numerous variations of the basic structures in thecyclohexene moeity of the molecule, as well as the replacement of-both methyl groups-by-hydrogen resulted in partial and evencomplete, loss of activity (Domino et al., 1972; Sim and Tucker,1963). Mechoulam. (1971) has summarized the investigations relatedto the structure activity relationships of the cannabinoids asfollows: (1) The pyran ring with a hydroxyl group at 1 position and analkyl group at the 3 position is an essential requirement forpsychotomimetic activity, eg., cannabidiol is inactive. (2) The aromatic hydroxyl group has to be f reo or esterifiedfor activity. (3) The presence of a carboxyl, acetyl or carbomethoxyl groupin position 2 or 4 renders the compound inactive. Substitutionwith an alkyl ,group at position 2 retains activity. (4) Dextrorotary (+) delta-9-THC is inactive whereas itsoptical isomer levorotary (-) delta9-THC is active. (5) Maximal activity is seen if the double bond is in thedelta-9 or delta-8 position. The delta,-6a, 10a-THC is relativelyinactive. 9 (6) The activity of the delta-6a, 10a-THC can beincreased by replacement of the pentyl side chain with a hexylside chain to form synhexyl which is an active compound.Branching of the side chain may lead to considerable increase inpotency. The substitution of a dimethyllheptyl side chain for thepentyl side chain in the delta-6a, 10a analogue of THC to formDMHP or EA1476 results in a marked increase in pharmacologicactivity. (7) Substituents at the 9 and 10 position have to be in theplane of the ring (that is equatorial) in order that highactivity be retained. More detailed information on materials, chemistry, bioassays,analytical methods, and methodology for detecting THC or itsmetabolites in biological fluids may be obtained from TheMetabolism of the Tetrahydrocannabinols (Lemberger, 1972) and TheSecretary of Health, Education and Welfare, 1972 Report onMarihuana and Health. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-41IA086-000614-B047-146http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022611 text/html 53265HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:26:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:16 GMTContent-length: 53047 Marijuana -- Factors Influencing PsychopharmacologicalEffect Factors Influencing Psychopharmacological Effect A renewed interest in marihuana studies has been prompted bythe recent clarification of the complexities of its chemistry,new techniques to quantity the amounts of active drug in naturalmaterials, and the availability of purifiedtetrahydrocannabinols. These advances allow more precisescientific research on psychiopharmacological effect. DOSE-RESPONSE RELATIONSHIP A major advance has been a quantification of dose of THC inrelation to clinically observable phenomena. This has beenextensively studied over a wide dose range for marihuana (Rodinand Domino, 1970; Melges et al., 1970; Tinklenberg et al., 197O;Weil et al., 1968; Meyer et al., 1971; Clark and Nakashima, 1968;Clark et al., 1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Mayor's Committee,1944; Manno et al., 1970) and Delta 9 tetrahydrocannabinol(Isbell et al., 1967; Waskow et al., 1970; Hollister et al.,1968; Perez-Reyes and Lipton, 1971; Lemberger et -al., 1971;Dornbush and Freedman, 1971). Investigations by Isbell et al. (1967), Kiplinger et al.(1971) and Renault et al. (1971) have clearly demonstrated thatwhen reliable quantities of smoked marihuana or THC are deliveredto the subject, a reproducible linear dose-dependent effectoccurs on indices of physiologic, psychomotor, and mentalperformance as well as on mood and subjective experiences over adose range of 12.50 to 200 micrograms of Delta 9 THC per kilogramof body weight. In a 154 pound man this is comparable to consuming 0.88 to17.5 milligrams of Delta 9 THC or 88 to 150 milligrams ofmarihuana containing one percent Delta 9 THC. It is generallyassumed that good quality marihuana available in the UnitedStates contains 1% Delta 9 THC and an average marihuana cigaretteconsists of 500 milligrams of marihuana; thus, 5 milligrams ofDelta 9 THC (Hollister, 1971). As with most drugs, the larger the dose taken, the greaterthe psychopharmacologic effect. Isbell et al. (1967) noted thatclinical syndromes vary from a mild euphoric feeling ofrelaxation at low doses (25 micrograms per kilogram) to anintensive hallucinogenic-like experience at high doses (250micrograms per kilogram). DOSE-TIME RELATIONSHIP Similar time-action curves have been demonstrated for smokedDelta 9 THC and equivalent quantities of smoked marihuana(Hollister et al.,1968; Isbell et al., 1967 Renault et ai., 1971Kiplinger et al., 1971). Symptoms began almost immediately aftersmoking (2-3 minutes). At lower doses, the peak effect is seen at10 to 20 minutes and the duration of effect is 90 minutes to twohours. At higher doses, symptoms persist for three to four hours. Therefore, as with most drugs, the larger the dose taken, thelonger the action. The subjective symptoms experienced by thesubject appear to parallel in time the subjective effects andsome physiological indices such as pulse rate (Isbell et al.,1967; Hollister, 1968 - Renault and Schuster, 1971; Kiplinger etal., 1971; Galanter et al., 1972; Lemberger et al., 1971). Otherssuch as reddening of the eyes have a delayed peak response andlonger duration (Kiplinger et al., 1971). ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION A second factor which influences the effect experienced bythe user is the manner in which the substance is consumed. Thatis, whether it is smoked, swallowed or injected. Isbell et al. (1967) demonstrated that smoked material is twoand a half to three times as effective as orally consumedmarihuana in the form of a 95% ethanolic solution in producingequivalent physiologic and subjective effects. In addition, the oral time-action curve is extended withonset of symptoms one-half to one hour after administration. Apeak effect is reached in two to three hours and the effectpersists for three to five hours at low doses and six to eighthours at larger doses (Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell, et -al.,1967; Lemberger et al., 1971; Perez-Reyes, and Lipton, 1971). In general, the effects produced by ingested THC or ingestedmarihuana extract are comparable to those produced by nearlyone-third the amount of smoked and inhaled THC or marihuana(Hollister, 1971). Recent work has been reported which clarifies these findings.Lemberger et a]. (1971) studied absorption into the bloodutilizing radioactive labeled THC by three routes ofadministration: smoked, ingested in 95% ethanolic solution incherry syrup, and intravenously injected. The first appearance ofthe drug into the, blood was immediate intravenously; almostimmediate, by inhalation; and delayed for 15 to 30 minutes wheningested. Perez-Reyes and Lipton (1971) using labeled AO THCdemonstrated that rate of absorption by the gastrointestinaltract, and the duration of action is greatly influenced by thevehicle used to ingest the drug. Speed and completeness ofabsorption varied when the THC was dissolved in 100% ethanol orsesame oil or emulsified with a bile salt (sodium glycocholate),and administered to a subject who had fasted 12 hours. With thebile salt vehicle, the physiologic and subjective effects werenoted between 15 to 30 minutes after ingestion and lasted two tothree hours. In contrast, the effects, with ethanol or sesameoil, appeared after one ,hour and lasted four to six hours. Hollister and Gillespie (1970) hypothesized that this delayedgastrointestinal absorption of THC might be accounted for by thenonpolar vehicle required to dissolve TUC or marihuana extracts. Furthermore, Perez-Reyes and Lipton (1971) found that thepeak levels and duration of radioactivity in the plasmaparalleled the physiologic and subjective effects, although theplasma levels remained high for a longer period of time than theeffect. Subjects receiving the drug emulsified in sodiumglycocholate or dissolved in sesame oil had three times higherplasma levels of radioactivity with much less excreted in thefeces than those receiving the drug dissolved in ethanol. These results indicate that the THC was poorly absorbed fromthe gastrointestinal tract when given in all alcoholic solution.The sesame oil solution and the glycocholic acid preparationallowed more complete absorption and the latter preparation wasmuch faster. It is of interest that the degree of subjective highafter ingestion of 37 milligrams Delta 9 THC also parallels theplasma radioactivity. Thus, the subjects reported their experience, as intense andunpleasant both with the bile salt and the sesame oil, and asmoderate and entirely pleasant with ethanol. (Perez-Reyes andLipton, 1971) This correlates well with earlier findings ofHollister et a]. (1968). QUANTIFICATION OF DOSE DELIVERED The problem in quantifying the THC dose delivered bydifferent routes of administration has been clarified by severalstudies using radioactive compounds. However, until a method fordetermining the THC blood concentration is developed, onlyestimates oil amount delivered are possible. Radioautographic studies clearly demonstrate that intravenousinjection gives the, most complete and consistent delivery(Lemberger et a]., 1971; Me Isaac et M., 1971; Ho et a]., 1971;Kennedy and Waddell, 1971; Idanpaan-Heikkila, 1971). Theseinvestigators have demonstrated that THC is poorly absorbed fromthe injection site after intraperitoneal or subcutaneousinjection. As discussed earlier, the completeness of absorption ocurringafter oral administration of THC appears to depend upon thevehicle. Judged by radioactivity levels, almost completeabsorption of the THC occurs with an oil or bile acid vehicle,but absorption is incomplete with an alcohol vehicle.(Perez-Reyes et al., 1971) Recent animal studies performed for NIMH indicated that theoral dose necessary to produce comparable gross behavioralchanges in lab animals is about three times higher than theintravenous dose (Marihuana and Health. 1971: 171). Ferraro(1971) demonstrated the comparability of effective oral doses ofTHC in chimpanzees and humans. Furthermore, preliminary workperformed in the laboratories of M. Isaac (1971) and Harris(1971) and Mechoulam (1971) appear to indicate that theintravenously administered dose of Delta 9 THC necessary toproduce detectable behavioral changes in monkeys (20 to 50microgram/ kg) on conditioned learning tasks is comparable tothat in man. (Kiplinger et a]., 1971; Lemberger et al., 1971). The dose of THC absorbed from natural marihuana extractsingested orally is uncertain. THC is present as an acid invariable quantities in natural marihuana. THC acid has notpresently been proven to be active. Claussen and Korte (1968)reported that the THC carboxylic acid is converted to free THCduring the smoking process. Whether these, acids are activethemselves; are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract orconverted there into THC; or are decarboxylated in the, body isunknown presently. Because inhalation is the most widely used route ofadministration of marihuana, several laboratories haveinvestigated the effect of combustion and smoking oil marihuana.Because techniques and conditions varied between laboratories,precise quantification of the delivery to the smoker's lungs isuncertain. Manno, et al. (1970) calculated that about 50% of the THCcontained in a marihuana cigarette would be delivered to thesmoker's lungs for absorption if the entire cigarette were smokedin 10 minutes and each inhalation was retained for 30 secondswith no sidestream loss. Truitt (1971) and co-workers (Foltz etal., 1971) found that 50%c of THC was pyrolyzed and 6% was lostin the side stream while noting that almost 21% of the THCremained in the butt when three-fourths of the cigarette isconsumed. Agurell and Leander (1971) studied the transfer of THC usingactual smoking subjects where only the main stream smoke wascollected. They found that 14-29%% of the THC was transferred inthe mainstream smoke for a cigarette and 45% for a pipe. However,they stated that this amount transferred would be comparable ifno butt was left. Agurell and Leander found that the amount transferred was noteffected by depth of inhalation but that smokers using deepinhalation retained 80% of the transferred THC while those usingsuperficial inhalation tended to exhale more than 20% of thetransferred THC. Mikes and Waser (1971) also found about 22% inthe mainstream smoke. These divergent data appear to be comparable when correctedfor loss to sidestream and retention in the unsmoked portion.Thus, the efficiency of delivery of THC by smoking and inhalationusing good techniques, and smoking the entire cigaretteapproximates 40-50% of the original THC contained. A smallfraction is lost in the uninhaled sidestream smoke, about 50% isdestroyed during pyrolysis and a variable amount is exhaled fromthe respiratory dead space. In apparent confirmation, Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972),using radiolabeled THC added to a marihuana cigarette, found thatthe initial plasma level of radioactivity after smoking was aboutonehalf the level after intravenous injection. Oraladministration of the same dose of THC in an alcohol vehicleproduced about one-half the peak level as smoking. However,Galanter et al. (1972) noted marked variability in the amount ofTHC absorbed using a standardized routine of inhaling,breath-holding and finishing the cigarette within a set timeperiod. EFFECT OF PYROLYSIS ON THE CANNABINOIDS Several investigators have studied the effect of pyrolysis onthe cannabinoids. Most have concluded that only negligiblechanges occur in the original cannabinoid fraction of marihuanaexcept for decarboxylation of the acids to the cannabinoids. Noevidence was found for isomerization of Delta 9 THC or Delta 8THC nor the formation of any new pyrolysis products (Manno etal., 1970; Coutselinis & Miras, 1970; Claussen and Korte,1968; Foltz et al., 1971; Agurell and Leander, 1971). Mikes andWaser (1971) suggested that a small percentage of cannabidiol wasconverted to Delta 9 THC, but this observation was not confirmedby the other groups. Coutselinis and Miras (1970) noted that less THC wasdestroyed during smoking when Delta 9 THC was the onlycannabinoid present rather than when a resin or a mixture ofcannabinoids were present. This was believed to be at leastpartially accounted for by the distribution of THC in thecigarette. More destruction occurred when the THC was evenlydistributed in the cigarette than when it was present in awell-defined lump. SET AND SETTING A most important variable encountered when evaluating theeffect of marihuana is the interaction of the drug with thenon-drug factors, set and setting. Set refers to the drug-taker'sbiological make-up including personality, past drug experiences,personal expectations of drug effect, and mood at the time of thedrug experience. Setting refers to the external surroundings andsocial context in which the individual takes the drug. Set andsetting exert their largest effect on psychoactive drugs, likemarihuana, with subtle subjective mental effect and minimalphysiological effect. Set and setting exert a variable but oftenmarked influence on the potential drug effects (Waskow et al.,1970; Wickler, 1970). The results of a series of experiments by Jones (1971)suggests the subjective state produced by "a sociallyrelevant dose of smoked marihuana.... 9mg THC" is determinedmore by set and setting than by the THC content of the marihuana. In one experiment, a greater variety and more intensepleasurable symptoms occurred in a fourman group allowingunstructured interpersonal interaction than in unstructuredsolitary test situations. Contrasting behavioral patterns wereobserved by the investigator and reported subjectively by theindividuals. Subjects tested individually demonstrated a relaxed,slightly drowsy, undramatic state as they read, listened to theradio, or sit doing nothing. In the group setting there waselation, euphoria, uncontrolled laughter, a marked lack ofsedation and much conversation. (Jones, 1971) This strongly emphasizes the importance of setting in themarihuana experience. The reason is apparent why marihuana isusually used with other people. However, most investigatorsstudying its effects evaluate their subjects alone, inwell-controlled, sterile, scientific laboratories. The importance of the placebo effect (the subject experiencesa drug effect from an inert material) to the "socialhigh" obtained from marihuana was studied in anotherexperiment (Jones and stone, 1970; Jones, 1971). Misjudgments ofthe pharmacologic potency of both the smoked placebo (marihuanawithout THC) and active marihuana were commonly made by thesubjects although physiologic and performance indices routinelymatched the distinction correctly. The smoking of a material thatsmells and tastes like marihuana by individuals with marihuanaexperience appeared to produce a mental state that is interpretedas being high if combined with the expectation of becoming high. The importance of learning to get high was demonstrated whenindividuals who smoked marihuana less than twice a month werecompared with those who used marihuana at least seven times aweek. Although both groups rated the active marihuana equallypotent, the frequent users rated the placebo equally to theactive drug, while the infrequent users experienced significantlyless high from the placebo. The infrequent users' experiences appears to reflect mainlypharmacologic factors with moderate set-setting influence.However, the frequent users' response to the placebo appears toreflect mainly learned set-setting influence and minimalpharmacologic factors. (Jones, 1971) Smith and Mehl (1970) call learning to get high "reverse tolerance." During the early exposures to marihuanathe individual learns to appreciate the subtle drug effect withrepeated experience with the drug. Consequently, less drug may berequired to experience the desired high in the early stages ofmarihuana use. Further evidence for this is seen when the familiar smokingroute and smell and taste cues are made ineffective by giving theactive and inactive material by the oral route (Jones and Stone,1970). Both groups of users can significantly distinguish theintoxication produced by 25mg of active material. But thefrequent user rates this high significantly poorer than hissmoking high while the infrequent user rates them correctly. TOLERANCE The development of tolerance is another important factor thatmay influence the psychophysiological effects of marihuana.Although tolerance occurs with many drugs and the process hasbeen studied for over a century, the mechanism of this complexphenomenon is not completely known. Kalant et a]., (1971) haveextensively discussed tolerance to the psychotropic drugs. Tolerance has two different connotations. The first, termed"initial tolerance," is an expression of the dose ofthe drug which the subject must receive at his first exposure toproduce a designated degree of effect. These authors state that avariety of congenital and environmental factors contribute to thewide range of differences in "initial tolerance"observed among different individuals, sexes, species, age groupsand so on. The second meaning of tolerance is that of an "acquiredchange in tolerance" within the same individual as a resultof repeated drug exposures so that an increased drug dose isrequired to produce the same specified degree of effect, or thesame dose produces less effect. In this chapter, tolerance willbe used synonymously with "acquired increase intolerance." -Tolerance can only be discussed for eachspecific drug action and not for all the actions of a given drugon the body. That is, tolerance occurs at different rates forsome of the various effects of the same drug on the body and maynot occur for other effects of the same drug. The relationshipbetween "initial tolerance" and "acquired changein tolerance" has not been clearly established. There are two classes of tolerance based on possiblemechanisms. The first, dispositional tolerance refers to changesin absorption, distribution, excretion and metabolism whichproduce a reduction in the intensity and duration of contactbetween the drug and the target tissue on which it acts. The second, functional tolerance includes changes in theproperties and functions of the target tissue making it lesssensitive to the same dose of the drug. Physiological toleranceimplies a, change in the target organ while psychological or"learned tolerance" implies the acquisition of newskills or functions to replace those changed in the target tissue(Kalant et al., 1971). Considerable evidence is accumulating which demonstrates thattolerance does develop in numerous animal species (pigeons, rats,dogs, monkeys, chimpanzees, mice) to the behavioral andphysiological effects of marihuana and THC in doses many timeslarger (from 1 mg. to 500 mg./ kg/day) than the minimal activedose (Carlini, 1968; Silva et al., 1968; McMillan et al., 1970,1971; Frankenheim et al., 1971; Carlini et al., 1970; Thompson etal., 1971; Pirch et al., 1972; Ferraro, 1971; Elsinore, 1970;Cole et al., 1971). Lipparini et al. (1969) were not able to demonstratetolerance in the rabbit. Tolerance, appears to develop rapidly to high doses even wheninjections are spaced up to about a week apart. Tolerance to highdoses appears to be long-lasting with little loss of toleranceeven after a month. But at low doses in the behavioral range,tolerance appears to completely dissipate in a few days after asingle dose. The magnitude of tolerance development can be large.After repeated exposure, a dose of over one hundred times theoriginal produces little effect (McMillan et al., 1971). The development of tolerance to THC in animals occurs forsome effects but not for others (McMillan et al., 1971; Pirch etal., 1972; Thompson et al., 1971 ). This differential developmentof tolerance may explain why tolerance to certain effects studiedhas not been demonstrated (Masur and Khazan, 1970; McMillan etal., 1971; Barry and Kubena, 1971; Kubena et al., 1971). Lomax (1971) and Thompson et al. (1971) have noted that thedevelopment of tolerance to one effect of the drug (hypothermiaor sedation) may allow the expression of the opposite effect(hyperthermia or stimulation) to which tolerance does notdevelop. Cross tolerance has been demonstrated between delta-9-THC,delta-8-THC and its synthetic analogues. Cross tolerance, has notbeen demonstrated between THC and lysergic acid diethylamide(LSD), mescaline or morphine (McMillan et al., 1970). Preliminary work performed by McIsaac (1971) and Harris etal., (1972) demonstrated a reduction in the duration and qualityof response on a conditioned learning task by monkeys on theseeond intravenously administered dose of THC. Tolerancedeveloped extremely rapidly so that no effect on behavior wasseen after five days. After a. two-week period without THC, theanimals were retested and the same degree of tolerance hadpersisted. The researchers believe these observations mightindicate a rapid behavioral adaption or "learned"functional tolerance. However, evidence indicates that dispositional toleranceand/or physiological type of functional tolerance also plays arole at least at higher doses. Tolerance develops to the centralnervous system depressant effects, hypotherma hypopnea (Thompsonet al., 1971) and the EEG effects (Pirch et al., 1971) of thedrug. McMillan et al., (1971) have demonstrated that tolerance tothe effects of THC on behavior can be blocked by the hepaticmicrosomal enzyme inhibitor, SKF-525-A which has been shown to bea potent inhibitor of THC metabolism (Dingell et al., 1971).Methodological techniques must be, developed which will allowmicrodistribution studies to be performed in tolerant animalswith low doses of THC before the mechanism of tolerancedevelopment can be clarified. Evidence for the development of marked tolerance by man hasbeen suggested by studies of heavy daily very long term users ofhashish, charas or ganja in foreign countries. Reports from the,Eastern literature (Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Dhunjibhoy, 1930;Ewans, 1904) and more recently from Greece (Miras, 1965; Fink etal., 1971) and Afghanistan (Weiss, 1971) relate daily consumptionof enormous quantities of potent cannabis preparation estimatedto contain up to about one gram of THC per day. Weiss (1971) has noted that daily charas smokers start withsmall doses and then in order to achieve the same effectgradually increase their daily dose about 5-6 times over a 20 to30 year period. Generally, most reach their maximum dose by age40 and then gradually decrease their daily dose by 50% usuallyceasing use by their 60's. Some smokers have been noted to raisetheir original daily dose up to a maximum of 10 times within thefirst two years. Others have noted that moderate use for many years does notnecessitate increased doses (Sigg, 1963). At least part of the increase in daily amount of drug used isaccounted for by the finding that the duration -of theintoxication becomes shorter over the years so that the veryheavy smoker must consume the drug more frequently to remainintoxicated. Additionally, smokers report that they have onoccasion discontinued use for days or months after which theyexperienced similar effects at smaller doses (Weiss, 1971). Fink et al. (1971) noted that as hashish users total dailydose was decreased by more than half over the years, thefrequency of use per day declined correspondingly. Rubin and Comitas (1972) noted that very long term Jamaicanganja smokers generally consumed an average of seven spliffsdaily (a ganja cigarette several times the size of an Americanmarihuana cigarette) with a maximum of 24. Further evidence for the development of tolerance, at leastto certain of the depressant effects, is that these very longterm smokers apparently tolerate the extremely high doses wellwithout dysphoria or decreased ability to perform their usualactivities (Weiss, 1971; Fink et al., 1971; Rubin and Comitas,1972). Smith and Mehl (1970) noted the, accumulating Americananecdotal evidence of mild tolerance development after heavydaily use for a number of years. Jones (1971) and Meyer et a].(1971) have suggested diminished effect on physiologic andpsyochomotor performance, that is, little or no impairment offunction in daily users compared with infrequent, intermittentusers of marihuana. Additionally, several investigators havenoted that frequent users had little or no impairment onpsychomotor performance tasks while marihuananaive individualsgiven the same dose had impaired function. (Clark et al., 1968,1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Weil etal., 1968). Subsequently (Mendelson et al., 1972) repetitive daily (freeaccess) use over a 21-day period by groups of long-termintermittent (average 7.7 sessions per month) and moderate,marihuana users (daily average, 33 smoking sessions per month)was studied. The development, of tolerance was strongly suggestedto the physiological pulse rate and general depressant effect onactivity as well as psychological effects which impair recentmemory, time estimation and psychomotor coordination. No tolerance development occurred to the subjective effectsof marihuana for experienced users over the 21-day period (global"highness", somatic, perceptual, awareness, feeling,control, friendliness, ambivalence and altered thinking).Furthermore, with the exception of a higher ambivalence ratingfor the daily riser group, there were no differences in thesubjective reports of the daily users or intermittent users.(Mendelson et al., 1972). The ambivalence score is believed (Katzet al., 1968) to be the best measure of "psychedelic effects" of hallucinogenic drugs. In a prior study (Meyer et al., 1971) found that while theheavy smokers experienced more profound subjective effects soonafter smoking, they were less intoxicated than the intermittentusers one hour later. These findings suggest to the investigators that the qualityof the "high" may be different for heavy andintermittent users and may change with heavy use. Tolerance, tothe subjective effects of marihuana may occur predominantly tothe depressant effects so that the stimulatory effects (orhallucinatory-like) would be predominant in the heavy users. Theintermittent users who smoked marihuana several times daily inthe, current study showed no increase in the ambivalence, rating. The increased daily frequency of marihuana use by both groupsover time by shortening the interval between smoking sessionsappears consistent with earlier observations (Meyer et al., 1971)that the duration of the desired "high" is shorter inheavy users than in intermittent users. Fink et al. (1971) confirmed several of these findings in astudy in which intermittent users smoked a fixed dose (14 mg. ofTHC) of marihuana. They noted a suggestion of development oftolerance to pulse rate, short-term memory, digit symbolsubstitution but not to the subjective high or EEG changes.However, the subjects did feel that the duration of theintoxication shortened progressively during the second half ofthe experiment. Schuster and Renault (1971) administered twice daily fixeddoses of marihuana (smoke from 430 mg. of marihuana with 1.5% THCcontent) to intermittent users over a 10-day period. A peaktachycardia, of 20 to 30 beats per minute and a usual social highwere produced. Preliminary observations revealed the developmentof tolerance to time estimation in a few days, but no evidencefor tolerance to the tachycardia, orthostatic blood pressure, orrating of the high. Hollister (1971), in preliminary studies found no significantevidence of tolerance after five daily oral doses of 20 mg. ofTHC. Clinical responses measured were subjective judgment of thehigh, mood, pulse rate, reading comprehension or excretion ofurinary metabolites. REVERSE TOLERANCE Smith and Mehl's (1970) clinical observations of manymarihuana smokers suggest a J-shaped time curve of tolerance tomarihuana. A novice marihuana smoker often reports feeling nohigh or requiring considerably more drug to get high on his firstfew trials with the drug than after he obtains more experiencewith the drug. This phenomenon has been called "reversetolerance." These clinicians believed this represented"learning to get high" or acquiring the ability toappreciate or become sensitive to the subtle aspects of theintoxication. Goode (1971) found that more frequent and term marihuanasmokers tend to require fewer "joints" to get high butdifferences were not statistically significant. Weil et al. (1968) reported that experienced users ofmarihuana achieved a "high" after being given the samedose as naive (non-users) persons who did not experience a highbut did demonstrate objective physiologic and psychomotor drugeffects. Meyer et al. (1971) found that heavy marihuana, users (dailyfor three years) were most sensitive to the "high" andrequired less marihuana to achieve a social high than infrequentintermittent users (use one to four times per month for less thantwo years). Phillips et al. (1971) reported an increase in severity ofsymptoms after repeated administration of THC to rats. This"sensitization" may be a correlate of reversetolerance. Lemberger et al. (1971) supplied additional evidence forreverse tolerance based on the intravenous administration of 0.5mg of THC to experimental subjects. Naive subjects experienced noeffect from this small dose. However, daily marihuana users, whowere told they were receiving a non-pharmacologically active doseof THC, reported a "marihuana high," which lasted up to90 minutes. Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972) and Mechoulam (1970) suggestedthe possibility that enzymes necessary to convert THC to a moreactive compound require prior use of marihuana. Reverse tolerance appears to be a complex phenomenon. Jones(1971) presented evidence which stressed the importance ofexpectation, setting and prior drug experience on learning to get"high." As the user gains more experience withmarihuana, the more the individual's mind is able to respond tothe expectation of the "high" by actually becoming highwhen given an inert material which smells and looks likemarihuana. Weil (1971) believes that the capacity to get"high" is an inherent characteristic of eachindividual's mind. He, believes that marihuana facilitates theuser's abilitv to achieve this altered state of consciousness,that is, learn how to get high. Mendelson et al. (1972) did not find evidence for reversetolerance. In fact, the daily users were more likely than theintermittent users to smoke two cigarettes per occasion. Bothgroups had had an average of five years of marihuana use. Severalother investigators did not obtain any evidence of reversetolerance after repetitive daily use in experienced subjects(Hollister, 1971; Schuster and Renault, 1971; Fink et al., 1971). METABOLISM Metabolism of the drug by the body exerts an importantinfluence on the psychopharmacologic effect of marihuana. Manylaboratories in many countries have been examining themetabolism, of the cannabinoids using in vitro liver microsomalenzyme preparations. With the recent availability of radiolabeled Delta 9 andDelta l THC, cannabinol and cannabidiol much activity hasoccurred in vivo in animals. A comprehensive review of theseareas including studies of absorption, disposition, excretion,metabolism and stimulation-inhibition of metabolism is beyond thescope of this report. Readers interested in further details inthis area are referred to an excellent comprehensive review byLemberger (1972). From animal and in vitro studies it appears that the liverrapidly changes Delta 9 and Delta 11 THC in a similar manner byhydroxylation to 11-OH THC. This compound appears to be as potentor possibly more potent pharmacologically than the parentcompounds This metabolite appears to be, rapidly hydroxylated to8-11 dihydroxy Delta 9 THC (7-11 dihydroxy All THC) which isinactive. The 8-OH Delta THC appears to be a minor activemetabolite (Christensen et al., 1971; Burstein et 1970; Ben-Zviet al., 1970; Foltz et al., 1970; Wall et al., 1970,71; Nilssonet al., 1970). These metabolites are excreted primarily into the bile andthen to the feces. Some evidence exists for an enterohepaticcirculation returning the drug to the blood. (Miras andCoutselinis, 1970; Klausner and Dingell, 1971) Another metabolic pathway appears to be present resulting ina series of acidic metabolites excreted primarily in the urine(Agurell et al, I., 1970). Recently, Burstein and Rosenfeld(1971) isolated and identified a majo r rabbit urinarymetabolite, 11-carboxy-2'-hydroxy-Delta 9 THC. They postulatethat other acidic metabolites might be esters or amides of thiscompound (Figure 7). Recently, Nakazawa and Costa (1971) demonstrated that A' THCwas metabolized by lung microsomes forming two unidentifiedproducts not found in liver homogenates. Lemberger et al. (1970, 1971, 1972) and Galanter et al.(1972) have performed metabolic studies in mail usingintravenous, oral and smoked Delta 9 THC. These studies indicatethat the THC disappears from the plasma in two phases. The initial rapid phase has two components and representsmetabolism by the liver and redistribution from the blood to thetissues. The slower second phase represents tissue retention andslow release and subsequent metabolism. The plasma 1/2 life of THC was significantly shorter in dailyusers than nonusers at both the first component of phase one (10minutes versus 13 minutes) and phase two (27 hours versus 56hours). Tissue distribution was similar in daily and nonuser (1/2life 2 hours). Therefore, immediate metabolism of THC and subsequentmetabolism is more rapid for daily user than the non-userimplying specific enzyme induction. THC persists in the plasmafor a considerable period of time, at least three days, with ahalf life of 57 hours for nonusers and 28 hours for daily users. The presence of 11-hydroxy THC and more polar metabolites inthe plasma of both users and nonusers within 10 minutes indicatesthat the metabolite probably accounts for the pharmacologicalactivity of marihuana, not THC. Further metabolism of the 11-hydroxy THC to more polarinactive 8-11 dihydroxy A' THC metabolite occurs more rapidly inusers than nonusers. During the first few hours after injection,unchanged THC, its polar metabolites and nonpolar metabolites inthe plasma, decline rapidly and then level off as they aredistributed to the tissues. THC persists in the plasma, for atleast three days, and both users and non-users excretemetabolites in the urine and feces for more than a week. Delta-9-THC is extensively metabolized to more polar compoundswhich were excreted in the urine and feces. Urinary excretion andbiliary excretion (reflected a day later in the feces) wasgreatest during the initial 24 hours, then gradually tapered off.All THC is metabolized since no unchanged THC was excreted in thefeces or urine. No difference in total cumulative excretion wasobserved but a significantly larger percentage of the metaboliteswere excreted in the urine of users than nonusers. About 40-45%of the metabolites were collected in the feces in both groups inone week. Urinary excretion in this period accounted for 30% indaily users and 22% in nonusers. (Lemberger et al., 1970, 1971,1972) Perez-Reyes et al. (1971) found a similar pattern ofexcretion of metabolites after oral administration. Urine contained no Delta 9 THC, only a small quantity (3%) of11-hydroxy THC and 90% more polar acidic compounds as yetunidentified. (Lemberger, 1971). Preliminary studies by Bursteinand Rosenfeld ('1971) suggest that these human acidic urinarymetabolites are identical to the 11-carboxy-2' hydroxy THC foundin rabbits. In man, Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972) found that 11-OH THCand 8-11-OH THC were primarily excreted in the feces. Twenty-twopercent of the metabolites in the feces were unchanged 11-hydroxyTHC and slightly less were 8-11-dihyd-roxy THC. The remainderwere unidentified more polar compounds, perhaps conjugates ofthese metabolites. All user subjects (Lemberger et al., 1970, 1971, 1972) but nonon-user noted a high after intravenous injection of the 0.5 mgdose of Delta 9 THC. This would be a dose range of 5 to 7micrograms/kg. Highs have been noted by Kiplinger et al. (1971)with smoking THC to deliver a dose of 6.25 micrograms/kg. Thehigh for some lasted up to 90 minutes. Thus, the plasma levels ofDelta 9 THC and its metabolites seen after intravenous injectionsuggest that psychopharmacologic effects are seen in the firstcomponent of the rapid phase and terminated by redistribution andmetabolism after the initial phase. The 11-hydroxy Delta 9 THCwould be present at this early phase and is probably responsiblefor the activity of Delta 9 THC in marihuana. Further evidence that the 11-OH Delta 9 THC is responsiblefor marihuana's effect was seen in oral and inhalation studies.By the oral route, blood levels of unchanged THC were relativelylow compared to the radioactivity levels of the metabolicproducts at the time of peak subjective effect. While the bloodlevel of unchanged THC at the peak oral effect was identical tothat after intravenous injection of the 0.5 mg. dose, thepsychologic, effect was much more pronounced after oraladministration of the larger 20 mg. dose of THC. Again afterinhalation, the plasma levels of the metabolites correlatetemporally with the subjective effects but the plasma levels ofunchanged Delta 9 THC do not. (Lemberger, 1970, 1971, 1972;Galanter, 1972) PATTERN OF USE The drug effect of marihuana can only be realisticallydiscussed within the context of who the user is, how long he hasused, how much and how frequently he uses and what is the socialcontext of the use. In general, for virtually any drug theheavier the use pattern, that is the longer the duration, themore frequently the use and the larger the quantity used on eachoccasion, the greater the risk for either direct or indirectdamage. Tolerance development is only one of a variety of occurrenceswhich are related to the repetitive use of marihuana. Anydiscussion of drug effect must take into account the time periodover which the drug is used (duration of use). This is necessaryin order to detect cumulative effects or more subtlegradually-occurring changes. Of course, the issue of causality isquite complex because of the multitude of factors other thanmarihuana use that have a direct or indirect effect on theindividual over a period of years. For the purposes of this report, immediate or acute effectswill refer to those drug effects which occur during the drugintoxication or shortly following it. Short-term or sub-acutewill arbitrarily refer to periods of less than two years;long-term, from two to 10 years; and very long term (or chronic),greater than 10 years. Frequency of use, will arbitrarily be designated in thefollowing manner: experimental use refers to use of marihuana atleast one time but not more than once a month; intermittent userefers to use more than once a month but not more than 10 times amonth (several times a week) ; moderate use refers to use of thedrug more than 10 times a month but not more than once a day;heavy use designates use more than once, daily and very heart userefers to use many times a day, usually with potent preparations(high THC content), producing almost continual intoxication sothat the smoker's brain is rarely drug free. AMOUNT OF DRUG CONSUMED Relatively little actual data are available on the amount ofmarihuana, smoked per occasion or per day by current users in theUnited States. (McGlothlin, 1971, 1972). Estimates of thequantity of THC consumed are difficult because of the variabilityof potency as well as weight and size of the marihuana cigarette("joint") and the degree of cleaning of stems and seedsfrom the dried leaves manicuring"). The analytic data available indicates most of the marihuanaused in the United States is of Mexican origin and averages aboutI % THC per dry cleaned weight of marihuana (Lerner and Zeffert,1968; Jones, 1971). Subjective ratings by experienced marihuanausers appear to substantiate the data that marihuana containing1% THC is of average quality (Jones and Stone, 1970; Weil et al.,1968). Marihuana cigarettes are estimated (McGlothlin, 1971, 1972)to average about 0.5 g in weight and, therefore, contain about 5mg of THC. Cigarettes used in the eastern states are generallysmaller than those, rolled in the west (McGlothlin, 1971; NewYork Police Department, 1969, 1970) Most data indicates that for the large majority of usersone-half to one cigarette (2.5 to 5 mg THC) is sufficient to"get high" in intermittent moderate users, althoughoften two or more cigarettes were smoked to achieve additionaleffect (Nisbet and Vakil, 1972; Shean and Fechtmann, 1971;McGlothlin et al., 1970- McGlothlin, 1972; Jones, 1971; Goode,1970). Current American daily users appear to consume one to twocigarettes per occasion (Jones, 1971) although some usersestimate they smoke three to five cigarettes per occasion(McGlothlin et al., 1970). Goode (1971), however, foundpractically no relationship between amount required to get highand frequency of use (daily to less than monthly) or duration ofuse (less than two years to six or more years). In fact, theheavy and longer term users were less likely to require more"joints." Thus, the estimated 15 mg THC for current daily users isabout one-half that estimated for confirmed regular users 30years ago in the United States (Mayor's Committee, 1944; Charenand Perelman, 1946) and one-third to one-fourth the median dailyconsumption of daily users in North Africa and India. The maximum daily consumption of 10 cigarettes (50 mg THC)for current heavy U.S. marihuana smokers (Jones, 1971;McGlothlin, 1972) is about the same as the average amountconsumed by daily chronic users in other countries, and aboutone-fourth or less of the maximum in these countries (Soueif,1967; Sigg, 1963; Indian Hemp Drug Commission's Report,1893-1894; Chopra, 1940; Chopra and Chopra, 1939). Studies of American military in Vietnam (U.S. Congress, 1971;Colbach and Crowe, 1970; Forrest, 1970), and Germany (Tennant etal., 1971) described the daily use of quantities of hashish orpotent marihuana comparable to amounts consumed by regularchronic users in other countries. Experimental data appear to confirm these estimates ofquantity of THC consumed. Isbell et al. (1967) and Jones (1971)found that most subjects reported a normal "high" aftersmoking 5-10 mg of THC. Meyer et al. (1971) found that a"very high" state was attained by ad libitum smoking of3.12 mg THC by daily users and 3.78 mg THC by intermittent users. In experiments by Johnson and Domino (1971), subjects wereurged to smoke until they were as high as they had ever been onmarihuana and felt they could not smoke any more. These subjectssmoked from one to four cigarettes containing 8.7 mg of THC toreach this level of intoxication. The range was from 8.7 to 30 mgof THC with a mean of about 20 mg THC. Intermittent and daily users were allowed to smoke marihuanaon a free choice basis over a 21day period in studies byMendelson et al. (1972). Each cigarette contained one gram ofmarihuana of approximately 2% THC content, or about 20 mg of THC. Subjects were asked to rate their high on a 10 point scalewith 10 corresponding to highest ever; five as moderately highand zero, no effect. Ratings for the daily user group ranged fromzero to nine with an average of about six for all cigarettesrated. Individual means ranged f rom three to about seven. Onalmost all occasions, subjects in both groups smoked the entirecigarette. Kiplinger et al. (1971) and Lemberger, et al. (1971) notedthat daily long-term users were able to detect effects of the"high" at doses calculated to deliver as low as 5-7micrograms/kg THC (equivalent to smoking about 100 mgs. ofmarihuana containing 1 % THC). Perhaps this explains the findingthat many users are able to "get high" smoking USwild-growing marihuana containing front near zero to 0.5% THC(Lerner, 1969; Phillips et al., 1970; Fetterman et al., 1971). Several ad libitum experiments were performed with marihuanaof unknown composition (Williams et al., 1946; Siler et al.,1933) using "confirmed regular marihuana users"confined over a 39 and six-day period. The users, who generallyconsumed three cigarettes per day, under these rather artificialconditions of the, experiment consumed means of 17 (range nine to26) and five (range one to 20) cigarettes per day respectively. Miras and Coutsilinis (1970) reported recent experimentaldata on chronic Greek hashish users who routinely use, singlesmoked doses of hashish containing 100 mg of THC. Under adlibitum conditions, these users averaged 150-350 mg of THC perday over a 30-day period. The subjects studied during a 21-day period of free choiceMarihuana consumption by Mendelson et al. (1972) generallyconsumed all of one cigarette containing 20 mg of THC per smokingsession. 'The subjects who were previously daily users were morelikely during the experiment to consumer more, than one,cigarette per session than the, previously intermittent users. Individual consumption by the intermittent users ranged froman average of about one-half to six cigarettes per day (group mean three) while the daily usersconsumed an average of three-anda-half to nine cigarettes per day(group mean six-and-a-half). Reasons given by the subjects forthe dramatic shift in the frequency of marihuana use includedboredom, testing the limits of their endurance, demonstrating itsharmlessness to the research staff, and subtle social pressure. DURATION OF USE Very little American data exists on the duration of marihuanause. Practically no data exists which demonstrates the extentthat persons who initiated marihuana use some 20-40 years agohave continued its use. Robins and Murphy (1967) in a follow-upstudy of St. Louis black males noted that 20% of those who hadtried marihuana by age 24 were still using it to some degree 15years later. McGlothlin et a]. (1970, 1971) reported on a sampleof predominantly white adults who began using, marihuana inadolescence and had continued infrequent use for more than 20years. In the case of Western and particularly middle class Americanuse of marihuana, the rapid climb to prominence of the phenomenonsince the midsixties raises the question of whether the entiredrug movement is transient or permanent. Certainly, the majorityof the youthful users and many of the adults have used the drugless than 10 years and probably less than five years. One 1970 survey (Lipp, 1970) revealed that 77% of thosestudents who initiated marihuana use four to five years earlierwere still using it to some degree. A recent study (Walters eta]., 1972) indicates that students who first used marihuanabefore entering college in September 1965 and had continued useof marihuana in February 1969 ("old user") differedfrom the, vast majority of users who began their drug use incollege ("new user"). The old user is more likely to experiment with a wide varietyof drugs, to be extremely active in radical politicalorganizations, to be alienated from American society, to be lessdefinite about career plans, and to have more heterosexualactivities. The Commission-sponsored National Survey indicated thatmarihuana use by both youth (12-17 years of age) and adults (18and over) is experimental in approximately 75% of those who haveever used marihuana. These individuals have, either stopped usingit (66% of adults and 57% of youth) or are, using, it once, amonth or less. In contrast, 13% of the ever used subsample (12%adults, 16% youth) use marihuana once a week or more. In other non-Western countries, cannabis use frequentlypersists for long periods. Especially in the East, persons usingit for 20-40 years or more are not uncommon. In other cultures,initiation is most common in adolescence. Once the habit isestablished it is likely to continue on a daily basis for manyyears and frequently continues as a lifetime practice (Weiss,1971; Sigg, 1963; Soueif, 1967; Watt, 1936; Chopra and Chopra,1939; Bouquet, 1951; VN, 1957). Probably the duration of use will vary considerably dependingon cultural acceptance or rejection (McGlothlin, 1972). INTERACTION WITH OTHER DRUGS Little experimental work has been done on the interactionbetween marihuana and other drugs used socially or medicallyalthough this will become an important area as usage increases. Marihuana is often used with sweet wines to enhance itseffect. Some evidence for an additive effect of marihuana andalcohol on motor and mental performance and subjective effect hasbeen seen experimentally (Manno et al., 1971; Jones and Stone,1970). Some degree of additive effects would be expected withbarbiturates based on their similarity to alcohol. A morecomplex, mixed pattern of effect might be expected withamphetamines and hallucinogens. These latter combinations arerarely used socially (Hollister, 1971). CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-42IA086-000614-B047-170http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022623 text/html 47310HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:26:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:04 GMTContent-length: 47092 Acute Effects of Marijuana (Delta 9 THC) The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse Acute Effects of Marihuana (Delta 9 THC) SUBJECTIVE EFFECTS Descriptive accounts of marihuana intoxication have beenwritten by noted authors, Beaudelaire (1961), scientists, Moreau(1945), and common users Tart, 1970, 1971; Isbell et al., 1967;Report by Advisory Committee, 1968). Adequate description of thestate of mind produced by low doses is difficult because it isnot approximated in the usual states of consciousness or by othercommonly used drugs. The closest non-drug approximation may bethe altered state of consciousness experienced in the hypnotictrance or transcendental meditation or the, transition zonebetween waking and sleep (Weil, 1971). Due to the highlysubjective nature of the experience, there is much individualvariation in the effects described. Tart (1970, 1971) studied the range of potential commoneffects in an extensive survey of 150 users. Changes noted bythese studies at low doses (usually smoked dose about five mg.THC) include euphoria, with restlessness and mild mentalconfusion. Sensory perception of the external environment. isaltered. Users often perceive an overestimation or slowing ofelapsed time and expansion of space, enhanced sense of tactile,olfactory, gustatory perceptions and often a feeling of hunger.Visual alterations reported are more vivid imagery and seeingforms and patterns in objects that are usually amorphous.Increased awareness of subtle qualities of sound such as purity,distinctness or rhythm are characteristically perceived by users.A dreamy, relaxed state and disinhibition, with uncontrollablelaughter is reported and users often believe that interpersonalrelations are altered, and act to potentiate social interaction. At moderate doses intensifications of changes experienced arereported. Users' reports include disturbed associations, dullingof attention, vivid visual imagery, fixed ideas, rapidly changingpositive and negative emotions, fragmentation of thought, flightof ideas, impaired immediate memory, altered sense of identity,increased suggestibility and a feeling of enhanced insight. Athigher doses, interpersonal relations are dulled and the userfeels less social and more withdrawn. At larger doses psychotomimetic (hallucinogenic-like)phenomena are experienced in a wavelike fashion. These includedistortion of body image, depersonalization, visual illusions anddistortions, synesthesia, dream-like fantasies and vividhallucinations. Data from Isbell et a]. (1967) and Perez-Reyes et al. (1971)have indicated that the hallucinogenic oral dose is in the rangeof 0.4 to 0.5 mg./kg Delta 9 THC. Thus, the hallucinogenic doseis 80 times larger than the delivered dose of smoked marihuanaproducing minimal subjective effects (five micrograms/kg.) orabout 11 to 14 times larger than the usual smoked dose. LETHALITY There is no conclusive evidence that short-term marihuana usealone directly results in any physical damage to man. A fewscattered fatalities associated with marihuana use areoccasionally reported. Most are from 19th century Indianexperiences with large oral doses of charas (Deakin, 1880;Bouquet, 1951; Ewens, 1904, Walton, 1938; Indian Hemp Drugs,1893). Brill et al. (1970) and Smith (1968) have noted that therehave not been any reliable reports of human fatalitiesattributable purely to marihuana, although very high doses havebeen administered by users. A frequently cited recent report from Belgium by Heyndrickxet al. (1970) describes an essentially negative pathological andtoxicological study of a 23-year-old man found dead in thepresence of marihuana, and hashish. A cannabinoid was detected inhis urine. However, this finding in no way inculpates marihuanaas the responsible agent. There are many possible causes ofsudden death which are not toxins and do not produce observablepathology; e.g. anaphylactic reactions, insulin shock, cardiacarhythmias, etc. A case report (Nahas, 1971) of an attempted suicide bysmoking hashish, recently in France is even more anecdotal. Anindividual was reported to have smoked consecutively ten pipes ofhashish containing approximately 200 mg of Delta 9 THC eachbefore losing consciousness. But recovery occurred aftersupportive treatment. Another case report (Hughes et al., 1970) relates severediabetic coma with ketoacidosis after the ingestion of hugeamounts of marihuana by a mental patient. However, it appearsthat the pronounced vomiting secondary to the marihuana ingestioncaused a severe electrolyte imbalance and alkalosis. Possibly avulnerable glucose-regulating system responded to the severestress inappropriately. Retrospectively, there was no history ofdiabetes noted previously but this was not confirmed or ruled outby lab tests prior to the episode. Several case reports (Henderson and Pugsley, 1968 King andCowen, 1970; King et al., 1970; Lundberg et al., 1971; Gary andKeylon, 1970) noted acute severe, physiological disturbances andacute collapse (shock, chills and fever) subsequent tointravenous injection of suspensions of marihuana. These symptomsmay have been due to an allergic reaction to injected foreignplant material, to a bacteremia and/or to the injection ofinsoluble particles which are filtered by the organs. Thesymptoms may be considered a complication of the mode of use,rather than results of the drug. Although a median lethal dose has not been established in man(Brill et al., 1970), one has been found in laboratory animals.Earlier reports (Lowe, 1946; Joachimoglu, 1965) used materials ofuncertain potency and composition. Recent studies utilizedcarefully quantified materials. One group, Phillips et al.(1971), utilizing THC extracted from marihuana, demonstrated thefollowing LD50 (the dose that causes death in 50% of the animals)in units of mg/kg of Delta 9 THC from mice,/rats: oral 481.9/666,intraperitoneal 454-9/ 372.9, intravenous 28.6/42.47. Thompson et al. (1971) under contract to the NationalInstitute of Mental Health have recently carried out extensivestudies in rats, dogs and monkeys in order to define the range oftoxicity of the drug. The group used synthetic Delta 9 and A' THCand a crude marihuana extract (CME) of carefully definecomposition. Delta 9 THC was more potent than Al THC. CME wasless potent than a similar quantity of A' THC. Acute toxicity was studied using intravenous, intraperitonealand oral routes of administration in rats. An LD50 similar tothat reported by Phillips et al. (1971) was found by theintravenous route (20 mg/kg of THC) and intraperitoneal route(400 mg/kg) but higher values were noted with oral administration(1140 mg/kg). Interestingly, the LD50 for males was 1400 mg/kgwhile for females it was 700 mg/kg by the oral route. The minimallethal dose orally was between 225 and 450 mg/kg. An LD50 was not attainable in monkeys and dogs by the oralroute. Enormous dose levels (over 3000 mg/kg of Delta 9 THC) wereadministered without lethality to most animals. A dose of about1000 mg/kg THC was the lowest dose which caused death in anyanimals The completeness of intestinal absorption of THC at thesehigh doses is unknown. Behavioral changes in the survivorsincluded sedation, huddled posture, muscle tremors,hypersensitivity to sound and hypermobility. The cause of death in the rats and mice subsequent to oralTHC was profound central nervous system depression leading todyspnea, prostration, weight loss, loss of Fighting reflex,ataxia, and severe fall in body temperature which led tocessation of respiration from 10 to 46 hours after single doseoral administration. No consistent pathological changes wereobserved in any organs. The cause of death when it rarelyoccurred in the higher species did not appear to be related tothe same mechanism as in the rats. Using intravenous administration, the acute one dose LD50 forDelta 9 THC was 100 mg/kg in dogs and 15.6 to 62.5 mg/kg inmonkeys depending on concentration of the solution. The minimallethal intravenous dose for dogs, also depending uponconcentration, was 25 to 99 mg/kg and for monkeys 3.9 to 15.5mg/kg. In contrast to the delayed death observed in rats after oraladministration, lethality in rats, dogs and monkeys afterintravenous injection occurred within minutes after injection.When sublethal amounts were injected, central nervous systemdepression with concomitant behavioral changes similar to thoseobserved after oral doses were observed. However, their onset wasmore rapid and the intensity of effect more severe withanaesthesia, and convulsions noted after injection. The monkeysand dogs that survived the intravenous injection of THC recoveredcompletely within five to nine days. The only consistent pathological changes were noted in theanimals which succumbed. Pulmonary changes including hemorrhage,edema, emphysema and generalized congestion were found and deathresulted from respiratory arrest and subsequent cardiac failure.The investigators presumed one mechanism possibly accounting forthese findings was due to the concentration of the THC solutionand its insolubility in water. Presumably, when these highlyconcentrated solutions mixed with the blood, the THC precipitatedout of solution. The precipitated foreign material then formedaggregates (or emboli) that were filtered out in the lungcapillaries causing a physical blockage of pulmonary blood flow. Subsequently, intravenous studies were repeated using Delta 9THC emulsified in a sesame oil-Tween 80-saline vehicle at 15mg/ml or 40 mg/ml. The emulsions were administered at a uniformrate of 2 ml/15 sec. Doses administered were 1, 4, 16, 64,92,128, 192 and 256 mg/kg. All monkeys injected with 92 mg/kg orless survived and completely recovered from all effects with twoto four days. All monkeys injected with 128 mg/kg or moresuccumbed within 30 minutes for all but one (180 minutes). Histopathological changes found in the lungs of the deceasedmonkeys were like those described after the, previous intravenousexperiment. All the monkeys that died exhibited severerespiratory depression and bradycardia within five minutes afterthe injection. Respiratory arrest and subsequent cardiac failureoccurred within minutes. Behavioral changes preceding death weresalivation, prostration, coma and tremors. Behavioral and physiological changes described clinically inthe surviving monkeys followed a consistent developmentalsequence and were roughly dose related in severity and duration.Onset was 15 minutes following injection and duration was up to48 hours. Huddled posture and lethargy were the most persistentchanges. Constipation, anorexia and weight loss were noted.Hypothermia, bradycardia and decreased respiratory rate generallywere maximal two to six hours post injection. Tremors with motionbut not at rest were believed to be caused by peripheral muscleinadequacy. In summary, enormous doses of Delta 9 THC, All THC andconcentrated marihuana extract ingested by mouth were unable toproduce death or organ pathology in large mammals but did producefatalities in smaller rodents due to profound central nervoussystem depression. The non-fatal consumption of 3000 mg/kg A THC by the dog andmonkey would be comparable to a 154-pound human eatingapproximately 46 pounds (21 kilograms) of 1%-marihuana or 10pounds of 5% hashish at one time. In addition, 92 mg/kg THCintravenously produced no fatalities in monkeys. These doseswould be comparable to a 154-pound human smoking at one timealmost three pounds (1.28 kg) of 1%-marihuana or 250,000 timesthe usual smoked dose and over a million times the minimaleffective dose assuming 50% destruction of the THC by smoking. Thus, evidence from animal studies and human case reportsappears to indicate that the ratio of lethal dose to effectivedose is quite large. This ratio is much more favorable than thatof many other common psychoactive agents including alcohol andbarbiturates (Phillips et al. 1971, Brill et al. 1970). PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS Much research has been reported on the effect of single dosesof marihuana or THC on a wide variety of indices of physiologicfunction in animals. Most animalt studies involved large dosesa-rid produced profound changes similar in nature but less inmagnitude than those described in the previous paragraphs. Thesehave been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere (Secretary HEW 1972,Forney, 1971; Secretary HEW, 1971) and should be consulted ifmore detailed information is required. Similarly, much research has been done in man. As discussedin the previous section on factors influencing thepsychopharmacological effect in man, an acute dose-responserelationship has been clearly defined over a dose range relevantto human usage patterns for these effects. Thus, with increasingdose, the larger the effect on the index being observed and thelonger the effect persists. However, there is a wide variationbetween individuals' responses but each individual is quiteconsistent. The most consistent physiological sign is an increased pulserate (Mendelson et al., 1972; Johnson and Domino, 1971; Renaultet al., 1971; Galanter et al., 1972; Domino, 1970; Hollister etal., 1968 Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee 1944; Waskow etal., 1970; Isbell and Jasinski, 1969; Meyer et al., 1971; Weil etal., 1968; Jones and Stone, 1970; Clark and Nakashima, 1968).This does not appear to be a direct drug effect on the heart(Manno et al., 1970). Instead, the drug appears to cause complexchanges in the autonomic nerves regulating heart rate. Thus,Kiplinger et al. (1971) demonstrated that the increase producedby marihuana in heart rate is prevented by pretreatment with aBeta-sympathetic nervous system blocking agent, propranolol. Acomparable increase rate was produced by treatment withisoprotemol, a Beta-sympathetic like drug. One subject developedan abnormal bigeminal rhythm after both marihuana andisoproternol. Renault et al. (1971) noted a consistent effect of marihuanaon the cardiac rhythm which also produced an increased heartrate. The effect was the suppression of the normal sinusarrhythmia usually produced by respiration. Respiration usuallyproduces a slowing of heart rate mediated by the vagalparasympathetic nerve supply. This depression of normal vagaltone was further evidenced by the absence of heart rate slowingduring forced expiration against a closed glotis (valsalvamaneuver). This effect seemed to wax and wane over severalminutes producing alternate periods of rapid and slowed heartrate. Both autonomic nervous systems seem to be affected bymarihuana; the sympathetic is stimulated while theparasympathetic is inhibited. Kiplinger et al. (1971) clearly demonstrated that the amountof increase in _pulse rate was directly related to the dose ofTHC administered as did Renault et al. (1971) and Johnson andDomino (1971) over a wide range of doses. Both experienced andinexperienced marihuana smokers demonstrated increases regardlessof the subjective state described. Tachycardia is noted rapidlyand reaches a peak about 15 to 20 minutes after finishingsmoking. The pulse rate returns to normal within one toone-and-a-half hours. Other than the one report of bigeminy (Kiplinger et al.,1971), little or no alteration of normal heart rhythm were notedby electrocardiogram (Isbell et al., 1967; Mayor's Committee,1944) other than sinus tachycardia (Mendelson et al., 1972).Johnson and Domino (1971) noted premature ventricularcontractions in a few of their subjects, but they felt thiseffect was more likely produced by the smoking itself rather thanby the drug. Conjunctival injection, reddening of the eyes due toincreased prominence of the conjunctival blood vessel anddilation of the scleral vessels, (Hepler et al., 1971; Kiplinger,et al., 1971) is another highly consistent occurrence (Mendelsonet al., 1972, Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Ames, 1958; Hollister,et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967; Manno et al., 1970; Waskow etal., 1979; Weil et al., 1968) produced by orally ingested andsmoked al., 1968). This finding is produced by orally ingestedand smoked marihuana (or THC). And thus the effect must be adirect drug effect and not caused by irritation from smoke(Perez-Reyes and Lipton, 1971). Kiplinger et al. (1971) notedthat this finding was dose-related although it develops slowlyreaching a maximum about one hour after smoking. Reported effects on blood pressure are inconsistent. Someinvestigators find lowered pressure (Hollister et al., 1968;Isbell et al., 1967; Waskow, et al., 1970) while others report aslight increase (Johnson and Domino, 1971; Domino, 1970; Mayor'sCommittee, 1944) and still others report increases and decreases(Mendelson et al., 1972; Perez-Reyes et al., 1971). Preliminary results of a carefully performed study of thecardiovascular effects (Weiss, 1971) demonstrated orthostatic,hypotension in the erect position and hypertension when supine. Little or no effect has been demonstrated in humans on a widevariety of parameters investigated. Body temperature is unchanged(Mendelson et al., 1971; Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al.,1967; Brooks, 1896) as is respiratory rate (Domino, 1970; Isbellet al., 1967; Weil et al., 1968), lung vital capacity and acutebronchospasni (Mendelson et O., 1972) and basal metabolism(Mayor's Committee, 1944). Several studies (Mendelson et al., 1972; Mayor's Committee,1944; Personal Communication, 1970) have examined changes inblood cells and blood chemistry. No acute effects weredemonstrated on red blood cell number, or structure; differentialand total white blood cell count; platelet count; reticulocyte,count; serum electrolyte concentrations; calcium and phosphorousserum levels; liver function tests; uric acid concentration; typeor quantity of serum proteins. Although increased frequency ofurination is often reported, increased urine volume has not beendemonstrated (Ames, 1958; Mayor's Committee, 1944) and noalteration of kidney function identified (Personal Communication,1970; Hollister et al., 1968; Mayor's Committee, 194-4; Mendelsonet al. 1972). Reports of increased hunger, especially for sweets (Allentuckand Bowman, 1942; Ames, 1958; Manno et al., 1970; Mayor'sCommittee, 1944), have focused attention on blood sugar and foodintake. No consistent significant change in blood sugar has beendemonstrated (Dornbush and Freedman, 1971; Hollister, 1971;Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967; Manno et -al., 1970;Personal Communication, 1970; Weil et al., 1968) with someinvestigators finding decreases (Beringer et al., 1932;Lindemann, 1933-1934), others finding increases (Manno, 1970;Mayor"s Committee, 1944), still others finding bothincreases and decreases (Miras, 1965). Podolsky (1971) found that although fasting blood glucose wasunchanged by smoking marihuana, higher 30 and 60 minute glucoselevels were noted after a standard dose of glucose. Nocorresponding alteration in insulin or growth hormone levels wasdemonstrated. Hollister and Gillespie (1970) found an increased total foodintake when the drug was administered after breakfast but notafter an overnight fast. Half the subjects reported subjectiveincreased hunger. Subjects' free fatty acid levels and bloodglucose remained unchanged while the placebo controls' free fattyacid values decreased. Another study suggested increased appetiteand food intake but was without adequate controls (PersonalCommunication, 1970). An investigation of physiological parameters of stress aftermarihuana (Hollister, 1969; Hollister et al., 1970) revealed onlya minimal increase in white blood cells and a minimal decrease incosinophils but no changes in serotonin, cortisol level andurinary catecholamines. However, another investigator (Chopra,1969) demonstrated increased catecholamine excretion especiallythose from the adrenal medulla. Hepler and Frank (1971) and Frank et, al(1971) have carefullystudied ophthalmological changes produced by marihuana. Swellingof the eyelids (Ames, 1958), ptosis (Isbell et al., 1967),photophobia and nystagmus (Allentuck and Bowman, 1942) anddilated, sluggish reacting pupils (Mayer-Gross et al., 1960;Mayor's Committee, 1944) were all mentioned in earlierdiscussions but were not demonstrated (Hepler et al., 1971). Findings which were quantifiable (Hepler et al., 1971) were aslight pupillary constriction with normal responsiveness to lightand accommodation and an increase in glare recovery time. Nochange was evident on near and far visual acuity, fundiscopicexam, visual field acuity and depth and color perception.However, a decrease in tear secretion and an increase inconjunctival injection was demonstrated. Hepler and Frank (1971) reported an average of about 25%decrease in the intraocular pressure of most normal subjectsafter smoking marihuana. A preliminary trial in one patient withglaucoma demonstrated similar findings (Frank, 1971). No objective impairment of improvement invisual acuity orbrightness perception (Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al.,1969) nor effect on depth perception and duration of after image(Clark and Nakashima, 1968) was noted in other studies. Neurological examinations have consistently revealed no majorabnormalities during marihuana intoxication. (Mayor's Committee,1944; Rodin and Domino, 1970; Rodin et al., 1970; PersonalCommunication, 1970). Subjects often report muscle weakness.Minimal decreased leg, hand and finger maximum muscle strengthhave been demonstrated objectively (Fere, 1901; Hollister et al.,1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944). However, electromyography wasreported to be normal (Personal Communication, 1970 A slightly increased briskness in the knee jerk has beendetected (Domino, 1971 - Rodin and Domino, 1970) while no changein threshold or elicitation of deep tendon reflexes is usually,reported (Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967). Incoordination, fine tremor and ataxia are often experiencedby the user (Ames, 1958; Beringer et al., 1932; Clark et al.,1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944). The presence of a fine tremor anddecrements in hand steadiness and static body equilibrium leavebeen demonstrated with refined measuring devices when they arenot grossly observable (Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee,1944; Mendelson et al., 1972). Kiplinger et al. (1971) usingsensitive apparatus demonstrated these fine hand tremors andchanges in body equilibrium are also dose related. Cranial nerve function and somatic sensation have not beensignificantly impaired or improved. Subjective reports ofincreased auditory sensitivity contributing to greater estheticappreciation of music (Winick, 1960) have been generallyunconfirmed in objective tests of auditory acuity and pitch,frequency or intensity or threshold discrimination (Aldrich,1944; Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al., 1969; Clark andNakashima 1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Meyers and Caldwell,1969). Objective improvement in auditory acuity in severalsubjects was noted (Walton, 1938; Williams et al., 1946). Similarly, improvement in visual acuity and discriminationand altered depth perception reported by users has beenunconfirmed objectively (Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al.,1969; Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944;Hollister and Gillespie, 1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Frank etal., 1971). A slight improvement in vibratory sensation (Rodin andDomino, 1970), no change in touch or two-point discrimination(Rodin and Domino, 1970; Williams et al., 1946) nor olfactory andgustatory senses (Williams et al., 1946) have been demonstrated.Decreased sensitivity to pain has been objectively demonstrated(Personal Communication, 1970) which corroborates its pasttherapeutic use as an analgesic. One of the most frequently reported subjective effects ofmarihuana intoxication is a distortion of time sense (Tart,1971). Actual elapsed time is overestimated or perceived as beinglonger than actual clock time. Thus, present events are perceivedas prolonged when intoxicated and isolated from the past andfuture. They are in the "hereand-now" (Melges et al.,1971). Many have confirmed this experimentally (Ames, 19,58;Clark et al., 1970; Mendelson et al., 1972; Dornbush and Freeman,1971; Hollister and Gillespie, 1970; Weil et al., 1968; Williamset al., 1946). The over-estimate is much greater during periodslit which the subject is performing a task than for unfilledtime, and the error is (greater as the time period is longer(Clark et al., 1970). Melges et al. (1971) have demonstrated that marihuanaintoxication induces temporal distortions with a greaterconcentration on the present and a shortening of span ofawareness into the past and future. They believe that under thedrug's influence, as the, subject becomes less able to integratepast, present and future, his awareness becomes more concentratedon present events. These present events are experienced asprolonged or timeless because they no longer appear to theintoxicated individual as transitions from the past to thefuture. Melges and Bowlby (1969) have described habitual marihuanasmokers who specifically use the drug to achieve the"here-and-now" orientation. These smokers claim thisfocus on the present permits them to be more open to immediateexperience while being less troubled by past and future concerns.This focus may also explain the belief that perceptions duringintoxications are both unexpected and never experiencedpreviously. The effect of intoxication on the restingelectroencephalogram are still unclear but generally have beenminimal, inconsistent and within normal limits. In early studies(Wikler and Lloyd, 1945; Williams et al., 1946) a decrease inalpha activity was noted. More recently (Ames, 1958) noted adelayed alpha increase with concomitant increases in beta andtheta activity. Rodin and Domino (1971) reported a slight shifttoward slower alpha frequencies. Three other studies (Jones and Stone, 1970; Hollister et al.,1971; Rickles et al., 1970), failed to find consistent changesbut noted increased alpha frequency, increased synchronizationand occasional paroxysmal activity. These effects were ascribedto relaxation and drowsiness. Two investigators (Chopra, 1935; Miras, 1969) reporteddecreased fast activity and other variable effects. Mostrecently, Volavka et al. (1971) and Fink et al. (1971), reporteda significant rapid onset effect occurring during the five-minutesmoking period and of short duration (less than 30 minutes) incontinuously alert individuals. The principal changes detected bycomputer analysis were a dose related increase in percent alphatime and an associated reduction in theta and beta hands. Roth et al. (1972), demonstrated that auditory evokedresponses were decreased in amplitude by marihuana and THCparticularly during the first few minutes of stimulation. Theseresults may indicate that the intoxicated individual may receiveexternal auditory stimuli differently during the intoxicationperiod. The prominent and frequently reported sedative effects ofmarihuana and the dreamlike states occurring during intoxicationdirected several investigators to study the effects of marihuanaon sleep. Fragmentary data from one sleep laboratory (Pivik etal., 1969) indicated decreased rapideye-movement (REM) sleeptime. Another sleep lab (Rickles et al., 1970), in preliminarywork demonstrated an increase in REM sleep time. Fink et al.(1971) noted that EEG defined sleep (stages one and two) weredose dependent but THC did not act like a classical sedative. Theoccurrence of EEG sleep was much more frequent in the placebo andlow dose (10 mg THC) conditions than in the high dose condition(20 mg THC). Mendelson et al. (1972) noticed an increased amount of totalsleep as well as an increase in discrete episodes of sleeprelated to marihuana smoking. These findings correlate well withquestionnaire data (Tart, 1970) indicating that at moderatedoses, users found it easier to induce sleep and that sleep wasconsidered to be more refreshing, while at higher doses bothaspects were impaired. In summary, marihuana containing Delta-9-THC is apharmacologically active drug with minimal acute physiologicaleffects at the low to moderate doses used by man. Based on its few consistently observed physiological effects,marihuana is a rather unexciting compound of negligible acutephysiological toxicity at the usual doses consumed by man. Thesubjective state characteristically described by the intoxicateduser is far more interesting to both the user and the scientistthan the objective one observed by the investigator. EFFECTS ON MENTATION AND PSYCHOMOTOR PERFORMANCE Characteristically, intoxication with psychoactive materialseffect psychomotor and mental functions. It is apparent from thesubjective assertions of users and a wide range of experimentalstudies that marihuana is no exception (Clark and Nakashima ,1968; Clark et al., 1970; Dornbush and Freedman, 1971; Hollisterand Gillespie, 1970; Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944;McGlothlin et al., 1971; Melges et al., 1970; Meyer et al., 1971;Weil and Zinberg, 1969; Weil et al., 1968; Volavka et al., 1971;Galanter et al., 1972; Kiplinger et al., 1971; Mendelson et al.,1972; Dornbush et al., 1971). Psychomotor tasks which have been tested include tappingspeed, handwriting and free-hand writing and free handdrawing,simple and complex reaction time, pursuit rotor and trackingtasks and continuous performance tests. Cognitive tasksfrequently tested are simple arithmetic problems, serial additionor subtraction, fine judgment tasks, 'digit-symbol substitutiontest, digit-code memory, reading comprehension, speech or verbalout-put, forward and backward digit spans, goal directed complexserial subtractions and additions to reach a set end sum, andshort-term or immediate memory functions. In general, Kiplinger et al. (1971) have clearly demonstratedthat the degree of impairment is dose related and varies indegree during the period of intoxication exerting its maximaleffect at the peak intoxication. Naive subjects commonly demonstrate greater decrement inperformance than experienced users but report less subjectiveeffect (Weil et al., 1968). Experienced users appear to bettercompensate to the effect of the drug especially for ordinaryperformance at lower doses (Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Clark etal., 1970; Crancer et al., 1969; Jones and Stone, 1970; Meyer etal., 1971; Weil and Zinberg, 1969; Jones, 1971; Mendelson et al.,1972). Performance of simple or familiar tasks (i.e. simplereaction time) during intoxication is minimally effected.However, on unfamiliar or complex tasks (i.e., complex reactiontime), performance decrements occur (Weil and Zinberg, 1969;Dornbush et al., 1971; Moskowitz et al., 1970). Performance decrements are further enhanced when verbal tasksare performed during delayed auditory feedback (Kiplinger et al.,1971). Also marked individual differences in performance arenoted between similar subjects. (Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Clarket al., 1970; Manno et al., 1970; Kiplinger et al., 1971). Acyclical waxing and waning of the intensity of the intoxicationand concomitant performance occurs periodically (Clark et al.,1970; Melges et al., 1970). Finally, when subjects concentrate on the task beingperformed at "normal social high," objective evidenceof intoxication is not apparent and the individual may performbetter than when drug free (Rodin and Domino, 1970; Mendelson etal., 1972). Obviously, these observations raise practical doubtsregarding the intoxicated individuals' ability to function atjobs requiring memory, concentration, and organization ofthinking. THE INTOXICATED MENTAL STATE Several investigators have suggested that shortterm memory isthe mental function most significantly affected by marihuana andcontributes to the subtle alterations of mental functioningnoted. Generally an impairment of recent or short term memory isdemonstrated (Abel, 1970,1971; Dornbush et al., 1971; Menges,1970-71; Tinklenberg, 1970; Clark et al., 1970; Weil et al.,1968). Thus, mental tasks requiring immediate informationacquisition (Abel, 1971) and/or retrieval (Weil et al., 1968) areeffected. Abel (1971) recently showed that marihuana blocks theacquisition process involved in the storage of new interfereswith the retrieval of already stored information. Decrements areproduced in decisions requiring recent memory or sustainedalertness (Clark et al., 1970) ; conversation (Well et al., 1968); calculations, or reading which requires retention, coordinatingand indexing sequential information termed temporaldisintegration (Melges et al., 1970, 1971). Melges eta]. (1970, 1971) theorizes that episodic impairmentof immediate memory produces voids which are filled withperceptions and thoughts extraneous to the organized mentalprocesses. He suggests that this leads to temporal disintegrationproducing a fragmented and disorganized temporal experience inwhich past and future time frames are blurred and the present isexperienced as prolonged or boundless. Thus, depersonalizationoccurs as the individual experiences himself temporally in astrange and unreal manner during marihuana intoxication. UNPLEASANT REACTIONS: "TOO STONED" AND"NOVICE-ANXIETY" These substantial cognitive and psychomotor effects areprobably responsible for many of the acute adverse reactions tomarihuana. One, of the most common is the heavy, drugged feelingwhere the individual feels mentally and physically sluggish sothat every motion and thought seems to require extreme effort(Smith and Mehl, 1970). This probably reflects impaired cognitivefunction and psychomotor retardation from getting "toostoned." This most frequently occurs after oral ingestion ofa large dose of drugs or in inexperienced smokers who have, notlearned to selftitrate their dose to achieve the desired high. In these instances, depression, anxiety, fatigue, short-termmemory loss, dizziness, nausea, incoordination, palpitations areexperienced as generalized discomfort, and ill-being. "Novice anxiety reactions" or panic reactionsaccount for a majority of acute toxic reactions to marihuana(Baker and Lucas, 1969; Baker-Bates, 1935; Gaskill, 1945;Grossman, 1969; Persyko, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Sonnenreich andGoes, 1962; Sigg, 1963; Dally, 1967; Hamaker, 1891; Marten, 1969;Smith and Mehl, 1970; Walton, 1938). When dosage, set and setting are optimal the distortion ofself (depersonalization) and temporal disintegration(timelessness of the present moment) common to marihuanaintoxication is recognized by the individual as time-limited anddrug-induced. It is usually experienced as pleasurable. But, ifdose, set and setting are not optimal the experience may causethe intoxicated individual to fear that loss of his identify andself control may not end or that he is dying or losing, his mind.Acute, anxiety or panic results (Mel et al., 1970). Non-drug factors of set and setting play a most importantrole in these, reactions. Of course, the great variability ofindividuals makes the effect of marihuana on any specificindividual rather unpredictable. The large majority of these anxiety reactions occur innovices who have intense underlying anxiety surrounding marihuanause such as fears of arrest, of disruption of family andoccupational relations and of possible physical and mentaldangers. Also, individuals with relatively rigid personalitystructures, whose values are more in line with those of the"straight"society and have little desire for new anddifferent experiences, appear to experience these, anxietyreactions much more frequently than those, individuals who aremembers of the "counterculture" (Smith and Mehl, 1970). In addition, simple episodes of neurotic depression may beobserved in these, same types of individuals during periods ofunusual psychological stress (Well, 1970). Both of these types ofreactions are transient and abate as the drug effects wear offover a few hours. Treatment should consist of gentle butauthoritative. reassurance that nothing is seriously wrong andthat the drug effects will wear off and the individual will feelnormal" again (Smith and Mehl, 1970; Well, 1970). ACUTE PSYCHOSES Rare cases of full-blown acute psychotic episodesprecipitated by marihuana use are reported in individuals withhistories of mental disorder, with marginal psychologicaladjustments or with poorly developed personality structures andego defenses (Talbott, 1968; Heiman, 1968; Kaplan, 1971; Pernot,1969; Keeler, 1968; Defer and Diehl, 1968; Wurniser et al., 1969;Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Bromberg, 1939; Bromberg, 1934;Curtis and Wolfe, 1939; Hughes et al., 1970; Isbell et al., 1967;Keup , 1970; Keeler, 1967; Talbott and Teague, 1969 Mayor'sCommittee, 1944). Marihuana intoxication may hinder the ability of these,individuals to maintain structural defenses to existing stresses,or, alternatively produce a keener awareness of personalityproblems or existing stresses (Smith, 1968). Psychotherapy andantipsychotic medications are useful in controlling andpreventing this reaction (Weil, 1970). Exceptionally rare reports from North America of nonspecifictoxic psychosis or actite brain syndrome have occurred afterextremely high drug dose consumption, although such reports are,more common in the eastern countries. These conditions areself-limited and clear spontaneously as the drug effect abates(Weil et al., 1968; Bartolucei et al. 1969 Ames, 1958; Isbell etal., 1967; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Williams et al., 1946). Finally, marihuana intoxication may trigger delayed anxietyreactions or psychotic episodes in a small percentage of personswho have prior experience with hallucinogenic drugs (Ungerleideret al., 1968; Ungerleider, 1969; Weil et al., 1968; Favazza andDomino, 1969). In summary, the acute psychomotor-cognitive effects ofmarihuana intoxication are, interesting academically to gainunderstanding of normal and abnormal mental function. Also, forpractically determining the danger-risk factor for the individualincluding determination of his functional level personally,vocationally and socially in this society. The effect onpersonal-social-vocational function is highly individualized anddifficult to predict at present. Although reports of anxiety attacks and psychotic episodesare more frequent as marihuana use spreads, they are stillexceedingly rare and their incidence appears to be decreasing asuse becomes more acceptable to more diverse populations. Forexample, during the nine-year period of 1961 to 1969, out of701,057 admissions to Los Angeles County Hospital, located in a,city with very high marihuana use, only three patients requiredhospitalization for psychic sequelae of marihuana smoking(Lundberg, et al., 1971). In contrast, many cases are being seen in Vietnam soldierswhere a extremely potent material is available and daily stressesare high, but, these probably represent only a small fraction ofmarihuana, users (Talbott and Teague, 1969; Talbott, 1968;Heiman, 1968). During the, academic year 1968 and 1969, eight students wereseen in the mental hygiene division of a private EasternUniversity student population (8,500) with acute anxietyreactions (Bialos, 1970). The frequency of marihuana-associatedacute adverse, anxiety reactions requiring attention at BostonUniversity Student Health Service (student population 20,000) isbetween five and seven yearly (Pillard, 1970). In a recent survey of newly admitted patients to a largemental hospital, marihuana was the direct cause of thehospitalization in only 0.9 per thousand admissions (Keup, 1970). PERSISTENT EFFECTS AFTER ACUTE DOSE Investigators have not noted persistent effects after smokingmarihuana for periods of more than three to five hours (Fink etal., 1971; Weil et al., 1968; Pillard, 1970). Users report only minimal hangover effects (Mayor'sCommittee, 1944; Haines and Green, 1970; McGlothlin et al., 1971)after very heavy use. Feelings of lassitude and heaviness of thehead, lethargy, irritability, headaches and loss of concentrationare reported especially when associated with lack of sleep(Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Indian Hemp, 1893). This may be relatedto preliminary data (Rickles et al., 1970) suggesting a subtleincrease in REM sleep time primarily seen in the last one-thirdof the night in individuals who smoked one to two cigarettes perday usually at night for at least a year. EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA USE ON CONCOMITANT BEHAVIOR Mendelson et al. (1972), under contract to the Commission,analyzed the effects on behavior of acute marihuana intoxicationon an extensive variety of assessine nts including a simpleoperant task, mood states, individual and group observationsbefore, during and after smoking and clinical psychologicalevaluations. Sleep-inducing properties were confirmed. Increased amountsof total sleep were observed in both number and length of shorterand longer blocks of consecutive hours of sleep related tomarihuana smoking. Examination of mood assessments prior, during and aftermarihuana smoking indicates that the acute effects were areduction of negative moods (anxiety, hostility, and guilt-shame)and an increase in the positive moods (carefreeness andfriendliness). Examinations of the mood prior to smoking revealedthat the subjects tended to smoke marihuana when they reportedgenerally positive moods. The effect of the drug was to increasethis positive mood. One paradoxical finding was that the subjectsalso reported feeling more depressed after smoking. Acute effects of marihuana on cognitive and motor functionswere studied with a battery of tests sensitive to brain function(Halstead Category Test, Tactile Performance Test, SeashoreRhythm Test, Finger Tapping Test, Trail Making Test and theWeschler Adult Intelligence Scale). No alterations in performanceas a result of acute intake of marihuana were noted in any ofthese. The acute effect of marihuana smoking on social behavior wasinvestigated, by observing the individual and his interaction insmall groups. The data indicated very strongly that marihuanasmoking, in addition to being a subjective drug experience, isalso a social activity around which verbal interaction and othertypes of social behavior are centered. Although marihuana smoking tended to be, a group activity,subjects did not always engage in verbal communication whilesmoking. Subjects often were observed withdrawing from the socialinteraction and then participating in some type ofnoncommunicative passive activity, such as watching television,listening to music, reading or staring at objects or people. Thisdecrement in total interaction appeared to be a drug effect. Heavy marihuana users tended to be more withdrawn than theintermittent users, often listening to the stereo and focusing onthe personal effects of the drug. The intermittent users tendedto watch television which provided group entertainment, thusenhancing the social effects of the drug. Verbal interaction in formal task-oriented discussion groupsdiminished when several group members were simultaneouslyintoxicated. How-ever, groups engaged in problem-solving tasksperformed more efficiently because less suggestions anddiscussion ensued before proposing a workable solution. Thegroups tended to become more convivial and less task-orientedalthough none failed to arrive, at the goal. Marihuana did notappear to increase hostility during these sessions andfurthermore tended to change the nature of hostile communicationfrom direct criticism to indirect sarcasm. Assessment of risk-taking behavior revealed that under theinfluence of marihuana, users tend to become more conservative inthe decision making. In summary, it appears that marihuana does exert subtleeffects on measurable components of social behavior andinteraction. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B24-43IA086-000614-B047-184http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1f.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022634 text/html 23096HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:26:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:17 GMTContent-length: 22878 Marijuana -- Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use ANIMAL STUDIES (PRECLINICAL) Studies have only begun in this area in the last 10 years.Subacute toxicity studies in rats involving 30 dailyintraperitoneal injections of up to 30 mg/kg THC were recentlyreported by Phillips et al. (1971). No fatalities were observed.Total body and organ weight (rains were significantly retardedover the period. However, no significant differences in organhistology were detected although in a few animals there weresuggestions of change in liver and testicular cells. Aninteresting phenomena also observed was a suggestion of increasedsensitivity to effects of Delta 9 THC occurring after two weeksof daily treatment. Thompson et al. (1971) under contract to NIMH studied thetoxicity in rats treated daily for seven, 28, 91 and then 119days with oral Delta 9 THC, A" THC and crude marihuanaextract at doses from 50 to 500 mg/kg. The findings weregenerally similar for all three preparations although A"effect was greater than All THC which in turn was greater thanCME. A bimodal pattern of behavorial toxicity was exhibited by thecannabinoids for all time periods of dosing ranging from five to119 days. Initially, a dose-related generalized central nervoussystem depression was noted. This was characterized by huddledposture, inactivity, drowsiness, slow movements, unkemptappearance, loss of appetite, wide stance, constipation, weightloss, depressed respiration and heart rate and fall in bodytemperature. Tolerance gradually developed to the initialdepressant effects starting after two to five doses and continuedat different rates for different parameters. Concomitant to the development of tolerance, rats exhibitedprogressively more hyperactivity, manifesting increasedexploratory behavior, grooming and motor activity. The dailyduration of the altered behavior progressively shortened.Tolerance to the hyperactivity was not seen in the rats. Later,in the experimental period, the rats became hyper-irritable andexhibited fighting behavior, especially at lower doses.Additionally, tremors and later chronic convulsions occurred insignificant numbers of rats. The onset and frequency of chronic convulsions weredose-related and the severity increased as the duration of dosagewas extended. Cumulative toxicity, as evidenced by increasedmortality, was observed in the rats but most deaths and maximaltoxicity (central depression) occurred 36 to 72 hours followingfirst treatment. Drug dose-related histopathological changes inall treated rats (in addition to decreased body and organ weightgains) were hypocellularity of the spleen and bone marrow,vacuolization of the adrenal gland and degeneration of the testes(seminiferous tubules) or ovarian stronia. Extended doses fromfive to119 days were not significantly more toxic except to theadrenals. No evidence of abstinence syndromes were noted uponabrupt cessation of these doses. Similar behavorial and clinical findings were observed inmonkeys given 50-500 mg oral Delta 9 THC, All THC and equivalentCME for up to 91 days. Cumulative toxicity was less severe andall monkeys survived the initial moderately severe centralnervous system depression. Tolerance to the depression occurredand the monkeys returned to their undrugged behavior. Mildhyperactivity was noted only in several of the median dosedanimals. Three of 28 monkeys studied became moribund on days 10, 14 and16 respectively. These were sacrificed and the onlyhistopathology seen was severe hemorrhagic and probablydrug-related enterocolitis. The bone marrow and kidney changesseen probably were due to severe electrolyte imbalance resultingfrom the intestinal lesion. The thymus lesion is consistent withstress due to this electrolyte imbalance. Pancreatic atrophy wasdue to weight changes. Eight additional monkeys were sacrificedat 28 days in fair-to-good condition and no histopathology wasdemonstrable. Several other monkeys had bloody diarrhea, butrecovered spontaneously without demonstrable histopathology. The remaining 17 monkeys were all in fair-to good condition at28 days and hyperactivity was no longer observed. They weretreated at the same dose for an additional 63 days. Tolerance tothe central depression continued to develop so that the effectslasted only one to two hours at 91 days. No additional monkeyfatalities were recorded -and the remaining 17 monkeys werenormal histopathological at autopsy. Urine and ophthalmologicalexaminations were all within normal limits. Hematological andblood chemical changes after 28 and 91 days were minor and littleaffected in the surviving monkeys. Thus, a. minimal toxicity in monkeys, either physical orbehavorial, is evident after 91 daily doses orally of enormousamounts of Delta 9 THC. However, significant cumulative toxicity,primarily a generalized central nervous system depression, isevident in the first few days but tolerance rapidly develops tothese effects. A dose-related hemorrhagic enterocolitis occurredwhich may lead to electrolyte imbalance and death in a fewmonkeys. This probably is a direct irritative phenomena. Again, the enormous daily doses of THC that were administeredto these animals cannot, be compared to the daily doses used inman even by the heaviest users. The effects were observed of 28 daily administrations tomonkeys of intravenous Delta 9 THC in sesame oil-Tween 80-salinevehicle at doses of 5, 15 and 45 mg/kg. Behavioral, clinical,hematological and hemochemical changes were similar for monkeysgiven single or repeated injections. However, the duration wasextended in the 28-day groups and tolerance gradually developed.Delayed death indicative of cumulative toxicity occured on dayseight and 19 in two of four animals given the largest dose. Histopathological changes, noted in the two animals whichsuccumbed and in one of the highdose monkeys, were acutehemorrhagic pneumonia resembling the finding in thesingle-intravenous studies at doses of 128 mg/kg or greater.Additionally in the repeated dose study, edema, ulceration andfibrosis at the injection sites probably contributed to minorhematological and hemachemical alterations. In summary, the 1972 Marihuana and Health Report to theCongress from the Secretary of HEW noted that these doses wereemployed in rodents and mammals to test the limits of toxicity.The doses are much higher than those used by man and the routesof administration substantially dif ferent. These studies haveshown that the margin of safety between the lethal dose and thepharmacologically active doses of Delta 8 and All THC and crudemarihuana extract is large. Consequently, it has been determinedthat these compounds could be safely administered to man forPhase I and early Phase II clinical studies (Secretary of HEW,Feb. 11, 1972, p. 158-160). HUMAN EXPERIMENTS (CLINICAL) Only a few investigators have studied the subacuteadministration of marihuana to man. Marihuana cigarettes ofunknown potency were made available to 34 military prisoners inPanama by Siler et al. (1933). The mean daily consumption wasfive cigarettes (range one to 20). The usual behavior effectsassociated with marihuana use were noted. No ill effects wereobserved nor abstinence syndrome seen. Williams et al. (1946) made available marihuana cigarettes ofunknown potency to six prisoner addicts who were experiencedmarihuana users in the Public Health Service Lexington Hospital.The subjects were permitted to freely consume the drug in anyquantity desired. The number of cigarettes consumed increasedonly slightly over a 39-day period. The daily range was from nineto 26 per day with a mean of 17. Only minimal evidence oftolerance was seen. There was no evidence of physical dependence;that is, no observable abstinence, syndrome was observed afterabrupt termination of the drug. In general, the following observations were made on thesesubjects: daily rectal temperature increased slightly; pulse,rate increased for three weeks, then returned to normal; nochange was noted in respiratory rate, coordination, or rotememory ; increase was noted in sleep and body weight whilecaloric intake initially increased then progressively decreased;mild confusion was observed; general intelligence tests wereslightly impaired while psychomotor tests were performed fasterbut less accurately; EEG showed inconsistent changes but returnedto normal five days after cessation; and mood was euphoric forseveral days followed by general lassisitude and indifference. In a recent uncontrolled preliminary study (PersonalCommunication, 1970), marihuana extract was administered daily toeight terminal cancer patients from four to 13 days (mean 8.5days). Daily doses were purposefully raised by the investigatorfrom 7.5 mg (mean daily dose 19.8 mg THC). The total dose perindividual patient averaged 168 mg with a range from 75-210 mgs. Euphoria was experienced by all eight subjects and one had atransient anxiety episode at a high dose. Three subjectsdemonstrated decreased-opiate analgesic needs indicating ananalgesic-effect of the drug. Five subjects reported improvedappetite and five, of six tested, demonstrated objectiveimprovement in depression on Back scale. No new changes were seenin physiological parameters, neurological status, blood cell andchemistry values or urine examination. During the period of drugeffect, drowsiness was common but not lethargy, lassitude orindifference. In fact, all became more active on the ward. Noevidence of abstinence symptoms were seen after abruptdiscontinuation of the drug. Volavka et a]. (1971) in preliminary experiments administeredtwo marihuana cigarettes daily (13 mg Delta 9 THC) to fourdetoxified heroin addicts. Pleasant effects peaked during thesecond week and then leveled off. Prominent dysphoric effects anddepressive reactions with paranoid thoughts appeared during thethird to sixth days and persisted causing cessation of the studyby one subject after 10 days and after 17 days by another. Theother two subjects completed the entire planned 22 days. Again no abstinence syndrome was seen and the dysphoricsymptoms disappeared within five days after the last dose.Consistent electroencephalogram changes developed in three offour subjects indicating increased synchronization. Their EEGchanges first appeared immediately after smoking. In two of the f our subjects they were detectable, in thepresmoking records after days 12 and eight, and did not begin tosubside until 48 hours after the last dose in two subjects andpersisted for the entire 72 hours follow-up in a third subject. Fink et al. (1971) subsequently studied five medical andgraduate students who had been almost daily marihuana smokers incollege and were currently weekend smokers. Each subject smokedunder laboratory conditions one marihuana cigarette containing 14mg of THC each morning daily for 21 days. No subject reported any adverse effects from smoking. Thesubjects were generally able to conduct their usual dailyactivities including jobs. However, they reported they did notfunction completely up to par during the several hour duration ofthe acute drug effect. There were no effects which persisted formore than three to five hours and cumulative effects were notnoted day to day. No persistent decrements were seen in behavior,mental status, EEG, heart, rate, short-term memory, orpsychomotor function tests. In sum, daily marihuana smoking for21 days was well tolerated by well-adjusted graduate students. Mendelson et al. (1972) performed a Commission-sponsored studyof the biological and behavioral concomitants of 21 days repeateddoses of marihuana. Subjects were individuals whose life style,activities, values and attributes were more characteristic of theunconventional youthful subculture than most of their peers inthe general population. Their mean age was 23. Based on I.Q.testing they were superior intellectually although they hadcompleted, on the average, two-and-a half years of college. Theirjob histories were rather erratic and characteristic of a patternof itinerant living. Their family background was a middle orlower-middle socioeconomic status. In addition alcohol use wasinfrequent while use of drugs, especially hallucinogens andamphetamines, was significant. Two groups of 10 subjects each were investigated over separate31-day periods of confinement on a comfortably furnished researchward equipped with an array of recreational materials. A large,open yard was available for outdoor recreational activities. Theresearch period was divided into three periods: a pre-drug periodof five days during which the subjects were drug free; a,subsequent 21-day period when marihuana, could be earned byperforming a, work-contingent operant task, then purchased andsmoked on a free-choice basis; and a five-day post-drug periodwithout access to marihuana. All attempts were made to not interfere in any way withperformance of the operant task or free choice marihuana smokingalthough the subjects were under constant observation. A vastarray of behavioral and biological assessments were made duringthe experimental period to determine any effect of repeat dosesof marihuana over this time. Two groups of subjects, studied separately, differed primarilyin the frequency of marihuana smoking over the past year. Bothgroups had averaged about five years of marihuana use (range twoto 17 years). The first group studied, referred to as the"casual" users by the authors, reported an averagefrequency of marihuana use, of 7.7 occasions per month (rangethree to 15 occasions). The second group studied, referred to asthe "heavy" users by the authors, reported almost dailyuse of marihuana (average 33 sessions per month; range 20+ to 75,including one substitute subject to fill the group who onlysmoked about 10 times a month). During the first 20 days of the smoking period, the casualgroup's consumption averaged three cigarettes daily (individualaverage was one-half to six) while that of the heavy usersaveraged six-and-a-half cigarettes daily (individual averagethree to eight-and-a-half). Both groups demonstrated a,progressive trend toward increased daily consumption during theexperiment. Close examination of the consumption patterns forindividual subjects showed that the trend toward increased useoccurred in the subjects who were initially the heaviest users.Several subjects who were initially the least frequent users didnot increase their use of marihuana over the course of the study. Subjects in both groups tended to smoke practically all ofeach cigarette including the butt. Each cigarette contained about20 mg- Delta 9 THC. Therefore, the heavy users average dailyintake was 130 mg of THC or a total of almost, Joni- -grams ofTHC over the 21-day period. The casual users average intake wasslightly less than half this amount. No abstinence syndrome or physical dependence was observedafter abrupt termination of smoking. Signs of mild to moderatepsychological dependence. were possibly seen in the heavy groupbut no evidence of psychological dependence was seen in thecasual users. No consistent clinically significant physiological orbiochemical changes were demonstrated during or after the periodof repeated use of marihuana. Urinalysis, complete blood counts, cell morphologies anddifferentials, and blood chemistry determinations (calcium,phosphorous, glucose, blood urea nitrogen, uric acid,cholesterol, total protein, albumen, total bilirubin, alkalinephosphatase, lactic dehydrogenase, and serum glutamic oxalacetictransaminase) were unaffected. Weight gain occurred in all but one subject. Maximal gain wasseen during the marihuana smoking period. The subjects were notjudged to be clinically malnourished prior to the experiment. Normal body temperature was not altered. No significantchange, in pulmonary function (decreased. vital capacity or acutebroncho spasm) was observed during the marihuana smoking period. Variable inconsistent changes in upright blood pressure werenoted. Effects on pulse rate were related only to acute drugadministration and were more pronounced during the initialsmoking phases. This suggests that tolerance developed todrug-induced tachycardia. No significant electrocardiographicchanges were observed. Marihuana smoking had no apparent effecton exercise related cardiac vascular function. Physical examinations revealed only the development ofpersistent conjunctival injection, lateral gaze nystagmus andfine, finger tremors. These findings were believed to be acutedrug effects and of no clinical significance. No signs ofneurological abnormality were observed. No cumulative effect ofmarihuana to cause, impairment of cognitive function was noted ona battery of tests sensitive to organic brain function. An increased amount of sleep in both shorter and longer blocksof consecutive hours was observed. Also an increase in the numberof discrete episodes of sleep, especially one to three hourepisodes also occurred during the marihuana use period.Reappearance of pre-drug pattern was seen during the post-drugperiod. This reversion appeared to begin toward the end of thedrug period which may be indicative of tolerance, to the acutedepressant-like effects of marihuana. Generally, performances on short-term memory, psychomotorskills and time estimation suggests that repeated marihuanasmoking had no discernible effect on the ability to improveperformance with practice on these measures. Tolerance appearedto develop to the acute decrement in performance on thesemeasures. On the time estimation task, a tendency appeared forthe subjects to increasingly overcompensate for the acute drugeffect with repeated testing in the nonintoxicated state. Both casual and heavy users had a marked decrement in totalsocial interaction during the first portion of the marihuanasmoking period. Total interaction of the casual subjectscontinued to diminish subsequently. Heavy users subsequentlytended to exceed presmoking levels of interaction indicating theyaccommodated to the depressant effects of repeat doses ofmarihuana. Both groups became progressively more convivial and lesstask-oriented in group discussions. They offered less suggestionsin problem-solving tasks but continued to efficiently solve theproblem. Casual users reported general relative increases in negativedaily moods and decreases in positive daily moods during thecourse of the study. The trend began with the onset of smokingand persisted through the post-smoking period. This trend couldbe a sequelae of repeated marihuana use or related to non-drugvariables (set and setting). The heavy users did not evidence this trend toward relativeincreases in dysphoric mood until the post-smoking period. Againthis may be related to repeated marihuana use, reflectpsychological dependence or be related to set and settingvariables, such as boredom and tension associated with theprolonged study period. Finally, repeated use of marihuana over the 21day period didnot decrease motivation to engage in a variety of social andgoal-directed behaviors. Almost without exception, every subjectearned the maximum number of points every day throughout allnon-drug and drug periods. No consistent alteration in pattern ofwork could be related to repeated marihuana use. Subjects oftenperformed very high work output while they were smoking marihuanaand experiencing the maximum drug effects. Repeated marihuana use, did not decrease subject's motivationto complete the study. Nor was any noticeable effect observed oninterest and participation in a variety of personal activities,such as, writing, reading literature, keeping up with currentnational and world events, and participation in both athletic andesthetic endeavors. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-44IA086-000614-B047-214http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1g.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022721 text/html 56245HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:27:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:05 GMTContent-length: 56027 Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use Patterns of marihuana use in Western countries, particularlythe United States are primarily long term (two t o 10 years).Additionally, Western investigators have been able to observethose who use marihuana at most, daily and more often, moderatelyor intermittently. Consequently, observed effects are rare.Knowledge is incomplete but certain trends appear to be emergingin regard to American usage patterns. The relevance of Eastern reports of heavy hashish use isuncertain. Nutrition, disease prevalence and quality of medicalcare impose limits on transferring Eastern observations toWestern conditions of use. DEPENDENCE AND TOLERANCE Neither severe physical dependence, nor prominent withdrawalsymptoms after abrupt termination of very heavy usage issuggested by some overseas experience (Charen and Perelman, 1946;Fraser, 1949; Ludlow, 1857, Marcovitz and Myers, 1944; Siler etal., 1933; Walton, 1938). Other studies, however, suggest markedpsychological dependence from heavy use producing compulsive drugtaking in very heavy users (Indian Hemp, 1893; Chopra and Chopra,1957; Bouquet, 1944; Lambo, 1965). Psychosomatic abstinence syndromes often reported werephysical weakness, intellectual apathy, loss of appetite,flatulence, constipation, insomnia, fatigue, abdominal cramps andnervousness, restlessness, and headache. For most heavy users thesyndrome of anxiety and restlessness seem to be comparable tothat observed when a, heavy tobacco smoking American attempts toquit smoking. However, the psychological dependence appears to be severe asevidenced by the f act that one group of subjects were unable tocease their habitual use although the frequency of use, was onlyeight to 12 times per month (Soueif, 1967). This psychologicaldependence may have made some users claim physical dependence sothat the government did not terminate dispensing them their drug.Studies in the United States using must lower doses for shorterperiods of time have revealed little if any evidence ofpsychological dependence (Bromberg, 1934 Mayors Committee, 1944;Williams et al., 1946). Tolerance to the subjective and depressant effects of the drug(discussed in an earlier section) does probably occur in man,with heavy use. Thus, increasingly larger and more frequent dosesbecome necessary to experience the desired effects. Several investigators have recently studied the question ofphysiological and psychological dependence to Delta 9 THC inmonkeys using intravenous self-injection techniques. Deneau and Kaymakcalan (1971) demonstrated that no monkeyinitiated self-administration over a three-week period when giventhe opportunity to self-inject a behaviorly effective dose of 100micrograms per kilogram of Delta 9 THC in a Tween solution. Theresearchers subsequently administered to these monkeys this doseevery six hours. Tolerance developed to the behavioral effectswithin a few days. Dose administered was progressively increasedup to 400 micrograms per kilogram over the course of a month.When the injections were abruptly discontinued, all six monkeysshowed after twelve hours, behavioral and physiological changesdescribed by the researchers as mild abstinence signs. Two of thesix monkeys then initiated and maintained for several weeks theself-administration of THC. The investigators believe these findings are evidence for mildpsychological and physiological dependence on THC. However,vehicle controls were not included in the research design. Thus,the abstinence signs and subsequent behavior may possibly beaccounted for by the biological effects in of the Tween vehicle. Harris et al. (1972) utilized several procedures to maximizethe possible conditions necessary for developing self-injectionin monkeys. These procedures included: spontaneous Delta 9 THCself administration with no previous training to the technique;self-administration of A' THC after training, with cocaine aloneand a mixture of cocaine and Delta 9 THC. Doses utilized rangedfrom 20 to 500 micrograms per kilogram suspended inpolyvinylpyrrolidone. In all cases, monkeys failed to self-administer Delta 9 THC. The researchers conclude that A' THC lacks the reinforcingeffects of psychomotor stimulants and depressants which monkeysreadily self infuse with no auxiliary incentives. Also Delta 9THC lacks a reinforcing function even for monkeys that arewell-trained with cocaine and have experienced several days ofrather large quantities of Delta 9 THC during the early pleasesof extinction of the cocaine reinforced response. Finally, the results demonstrate that a two week period ofexposure to Al THC (in a mixed solution with cocaine) does notresult in the degree of homeostatic imbalance which occurs withmorphine, ethanol, barbiturates and sometimes the amphetamineswhich accounts for the continued self-administration of thesedrugs. PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS Permanent congestion of the transverse ciliary vessels of theeye and accompanying yellow discoloration is the only physicaleffect firmly linked to long-term marihuana use (Ames, 1958;Chopra, and Chopra, 1957; Dhunjibhoy, 1928). Although there areseveral suspected or reported effects, none has been conclusivelydemonstrated in a valid study. Some (Chopra and Chopra, 1939;Indian Hemp, 1893) claim that bronchitis, asthma and otherrespiratory problems may be produced by chronic and excessive useof potent compounds in India. Eastern smoking, preparations areoften a mixture of tobacco and hashish. Indian users reportedly exhibit digestive tract abnormalities,weight loss and disturbed sleep (Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Soueif,1967). However, the contributing factors of poor livingconditions, malnutrition and prevalence of communicable diseasecould not easily be separated. A high percentage of heavy Moroccan users have developedobliterative arteritis of the lower extremities (Sterne, 1960)possibly related to the occurrence of tropic foot ulcers (Ganja-foot) (Miras, 1965). The progression of this abnormality isclaimed to parallel prolonged use of the drugs. Mendelson et al. (1972) were unable to demonstrate clinicallysignificant abnormalities in the extensive battery of testsperformed which could be attributed purely to the subjectslong-term use of marihuana. No histories were obtained ofneurological, hepatic, renal, pulmonary, cardiac,gastrointestinal, (renitourinary, or nutritional disorders. Nohistory of psychotic illness was given. All subjects were Judged to be in normal mental, health bypsychiatric interview and psychological tests (MMPI and EdwardsPersonality Preference Inventory). Three subjects were felt to beneurotic. Pre-drug complete physical exams, chest X-ray,electrocardiogram, urinalysis, complete blood count and bloodchemistry profile did not demonstrate, any clinically significantabnormalities. No subject showed evidence of poor nutrition. Pulmonary vital capacity and one second forced expiratoryvolume were reduced in 12 of the 20 subjects initially. Thesechanges were not correlated with either current cigarette smokingor f requency or duration of marihuana smoking. Histories of pastcigarette use, past patterns of marihuana use and past or presentcontact with environmental air pollutants were inadequate toattempt to account for these pulmonary findings. Many of the subjects were in fair to poor physical conditionas judged by a cardiac exercise tolerance test. Four of the 20 subjects' initial performance on a battery ofcognitive functions tests was poorer than would have beenpredicted by high average to superior I.Q. scores and educationalbackgrounds. One of the casual subjects demonstrated improvementwith retesting consistent with good brain function. Thus,behavioral impairment was present in three subjects. Whether the impairment is related to prior drug histories,particularly the excessive use of LSD by the two heavy users,cannot be ascertained. For the casual users, nothing in the casehistories possibly elucidated the reason for relatively poorperformance based on the exceptionally high I.Q., 139 and 128. Many Western investigators have suggested that smoking hashishor marihuana may possibly cause bronchitis, asthma orrhinopharyngitis (Bloomquist, 1967; Waldman, 1970; Tylden andWild, 1967; Schwartz, 1969). Tenant et al. (1971) described bronchitis, sinusitis, asthmaand rhinopharyngitis in 22 American soldiers in Germany whosmoked daily enormous quantities (100 grams or more) of hashishfor six to 15 months. These conditions, believed to be caused byirritation of the respiratory tract by hashish smoke, seemed toimprove, with diminished hashish use. Twenty-one of the subjects were tobacco cigarette, smokers andoccasionally smoked hashish rolled in a tobacco cigarette. Ninepatients had symptomatic bronchitis. Five of these subjectsunderwent pulmonary function tests while consuming their usualdaily amount of hashish and again three days after discontinuinguse. A mild obstructive pulmonary deficit was demonstrated whichwas at least partially corrected with diminished hashish intake.Hashish contributed to rbinopharyngitis in 12 of the patients andthis effect was not allergic in origin. Urticaria, acne, diarrheaand gastrointestinal cramps were less frequent complaints.Extensive hemotological and hentochemical studies including liverfunction tests were performed and were within normal limits. Mann et a]. (1970, 1971) and Finley (1971) studied the effectof marihuana smoking on the pulmonary function of eightnon-cigarette smoking marihuana smokers (20-27 years old).Marihuana smoking history was defined in marihuanacigarette-years, that is, one marihuana cigarette daily for oneyear or the equivalent over a longer or shorter period. The meanmarihuana cigarette years for the group was 11 and the range from2.5 to 26. Three of the marihuana users also used hashish. ChestX-ray, comprehensive spironietry deterinitiations, lung volumesand carbon monoxide diffusion studies were observed and retestedwith prednisone. Pulmonary functions were essentially normal forall of the non-cigarette smoking marihuana smokers andnon-smoking controls. These investigators were able to distinguish differences inquantity and structure and function in pulmonary macrophages andminor material between marihuana smokers and nonsmokers. Intobacco smokers more marked changes were noted. These changes donot indicate a diminution in defensive capacity of these cells. Kew et al. (1969) has suggested a possible hepatotoxic effectof marihuana. right persons who smoked marihuana for two to eightyears, at least six times a week, evidenced mild liverdysfunction by liver function tests and liver biopsy. Several ofthe patients admitted to the use of alcohol and oral amphetaminesbut denied use of intravenous drugs. The authors concluded thatthe findings were not unequivocally due to marihuana. Hochman and Brill (1971) noted abnormal liver function testsin 10 of 50 frequent marihuana users. However, all admitted tolong-term, regular and heavy use of alcohol. When these subjectsabstained from alcohol for one month but continued their usualmarihuana usage, evidence of disturbed liver function cleared innine out of 10 subjects. Recently, Liskow et al. (1971) reported the appearance of ananaphylactoid reaction in a 29year-old woman after smokingmarihuana for the first time. Skin tests were positive for anallergy to marihuana, constituents. Allergy to marihuana,especially in areas of the country where it grows wild, may bemore common than generally believed. Campbell et al. (1971) presented evidence of ventriculardilatation consistent with cerebral atrophy by airencephalography in 10 young males (average age 22) with historiesof consistent marihuana use for three to 11 years as well as lessfrequent use of LSD and amphetamines. The first four of thepatients had been referred originally for neurologicalinvestigation of behavioral change, memory loss or headache. Theremaining six subjects were selected from patients tindertreatment for drug abuse because of their long history ofmarihuana use and concomitant neurological and behavioralsymptoms. However, the patients showed personality behavioral and mentaldisorders, as well as histories of head trauma and psychomotor orgrand mal epilepsy that are commonly associated withventriculographic changes. Also alcoholism can be associated withthese findings. Additionally, the authors compared their subjectsventriculograms with those of normal young adults originallyreferred for loss of consciousness, syncope and headache withoutsubsequent development of neurological illness. Thus, the authors demonstrated dilation of the thirdventricle, of the frontal or temporal horn, or of the trigone ofthe lateral ventricle. All of these are commonly associated withpersonality and mental disorders such as these patients shelved.However, whether these changes are caused by marihuana is notproven because no specific neuropathological cause for thecerebral atrophy was identified. Further carefully designedstudies are required to clarify this finding. The LaGuardia Report (Mayor's Committee, 1944) indicated nodamage to the cardiovascular, digestive, respiratory and centralnervous system, nor the liver, kidney or blood in individuals whohad used from two to 18 cigarettes of unknown potency (averageseven) for a period of two-and a-half to 10 years (averageeight). However, this study was not up to modern standards as itlacked double-blind precautions and placebo controls and adequatestatistical analysis of the data. Bias was present in reporting.Small numbers of prisoners were used as subjects. Another less comprehensive American study of 310 individualswho used marihuana on the average of seven years was performed onsoldiers (Freedman & Rockmore, 1946). It did not demonstrateany evidence of physical or mental deterioration. Another team of investigators (Meyer et al., 1971; Mirin etal., 1970) examined a group of 10 male marihuana users (averageage 25) who had consumed the drug about 20 to 30 times a monthfor all average of 4.4 years (one-half to five year range) andhad smoked daily for three of the 4.4 years. Heavy use wascorrelated with psychological dependence, search for insight ormeaningful experience, multi-drug use, poor work adjustment,diminished goal directed activity, decreased ability to masternew problems, poor social adjustment and poorly establishedheterosexual relationship. No physical or neurological orpsychiatric abnormalities were noted in their work-up. Indeed, numerous American investigators have not reportedabnormalities in baseline, examinations of their experimentalsubjects who have various patterns of marihuana use from veryinfrequent to many times a day. GENETICS AND BIRTH DEFECTS Much concern about possible effects on the unborn generationshas arisen because of marihuana's use by persons in theirreproductive years. Presently, most studies are preliminary. There are three isolated case reports in man (Gelehrter, 1970;Carakiishansky et al., 1969; Heelit et al., 1968) of birthdefects in mail in the offspring of parents who had usedmarihuana and LSD. However, due to their complex gestationalhistories and the high level of birth defects seen in a"normal" population, a causal relationship cannot beattributed to cannabis or anything else. At present, there is nosubstantial evidence indicating that marihuana at the dosecommonly used is a teratogen in man. Marihuana has been implicated as a teratogen in animals byseveral groups at high doses. One study (Miras, 1965) showedreduced fertility in rats impregnated after being fed a dietcontaining marihuana extract for several months. However, theoffspring were normal. The reduced fertility may be related tothe finding of marked decrease rate of cellular division, butwithout chromosomal damage, -when Delta 9 or All THC is added towhite blood cell cultures (Neu et al., 1969 Martin, 1969). Dorrance et al. (1970) and Gilmore et al. (1970) detected nosignificant difference in lymphocyte chromosomes in groups ofusers and nonusers. No significant differences were, found inlymphocyte chromosomes between heavy, long-term. Jamaican ganjausers and matched nonusers. (Rubin and Comitas, 1972) Pregnant mice injected with cannabis resin on day six ofgestation caused stunted but not malformed offspring. Fetalreabsorption occurred when the dose was given on days one to six(Persand and Ellington, 1967). A second experiment using ratsinjected on days one to six produced a high frequency ofmalformed progeny. Another investigator (Geber, 1969; Geber andSchramm, 1969) demonstrated congenital malformations in fetalhamsters and rabbits after large multiple doses of cannabisextract. Another group (Pace et al., 1971) have administered a widerange of dosages of Delta 8 and Delta 9 THC and marihuana extractby subcutaneous, intraperitoneal and intravenous routes atvarying intervals pre- and post-conception to rats, hamsters andrabbits. Delta 9 THC up to 200 mg/kg in variety of dose schedulesproduced reduced average litter size and stunted pups at highdoses but no birth defects. A low incidence of abnormalitiesoccurred in rats and rabbits with marihuana extract, but a highincidence of neonatal deaths was observed apparently due toinadequate material lactation. Studies with radioactive labeled THC (Idanpaaiini-Heikkila etal., 1969) indicated that it did cross the placenta in highconcentrations early in gestation during the developmentallylabile phase. These studies suggest that Delta 9 THC itself is not ateratogen. Instead, perhaps some unidentified substance orsubstances in the plant extract may be causing the teratogeniceffect noted by this group and others when injected. It isuncertain whether this theoretical substance(s) volatilizesduring smoking or enters the pulmonary vasculature (Pace et al.,1971). Consequently, the following FDA label required of manycurrently prescribed psychoactive drugs warning about use inPregnant women and women of childbearing age, appeals indicated."Safe use of the drug during pregnancy and lactation has notbeen established; therefore, in administering the drug toPregnant patients, nursing mothers, or women of childbearingpotential, the potential benefits must be weighed against thepossible hazards. Animal reproduction studies have yieldedinconclusive results. . . . There have been clinical reports ofcongenital malformation associated with the use of this drug, buta causal relationship has not been confirmed." ORGANIC BRAIN DAMAGE Deterioration of mental functioning allegedly due to long-termuse of marihuana can be subdivided into four major categories:organic brain damage, mental illness-psychosis, amotivationalsyndrome, and recurrent-pnuenomenia. As with alcoholism, it isquite often impossible to distinguish whether the describedeffects result from drug use or represent personality traits orchanges which would have been present without the drug use. When marihuana consumption was irregular, mental deteriorationwas not evidenced (Freedman and Rockmore, 1946) in 310 users withan average history of seven years of use. Sixty-seven heavy usersin New York showed no evidence of dementia attributable to druguse although they did have underlying personality disorders.Another investigation (Mayor's Committee, 1944) of individualswho used a daily average of seven marihuana cigarettes (two to 18range) for average of eight years (two-and-a-half to 16 range)showed no evidence of brain damage or mental deterioration. Reports from India (Chopra, 1935; Chopra, 1940; Chopra andChopra, 1939; Chopra, Chopra, and Chopra, 1942) relate minorimpairment of judgment and memory, limited self -neglect andinsomnia, when potent preparations are consumed regularly inlarge amounts for many years. No evidence for mentaldeterioration or brain damage has been noted. Miras (1967) has described a Greek population of heavy hashishsmokers who appear as outcasts from the community after 15 to 20years of heavy hashish use. They appear mentally sluggish anddepressed. They are reported to exhibit laziness, psychicinstability, amorality and apparent lack of drive and ambition.Their speech and behavior has been described as -peculiar. Somedegree of responsibility is retained in that some do work tocover their living and drug purchasing expenses. Some of them arestill quite intelligent. Memory is not deteriorated except duringthe intoxication. They appear overly suspicious. Samples of theirelectroencephalograms were believed to demonstrate abnormalities. However, Miras believes that this effect is related to thequantity and frequency of hashish use. He describes threecategories of long-term hashish users. Type A uses low dosesintermittently and is socially and mentally unaffected. Type B1uses low doses daily and no interference is caused in function.Type B 2 uses high doses daily causing dependence and performancedecrements. Type C uses very high doses daily allegedly causingmental deterioration and abnormal behavior described above. Finkand Dornbush (1971) are currently intensively studying thispopulation. The results will be described in a later section. Non-differentiated psychosis noted in foreign populations mayalso be included within this diagnostic category. These will bediscussed with the psychosis. PSYCHOSIS The alleged connection between mental illness and cannabisderives from Africa, the Middle East and India. These areas arecurrently developing economically and scientifically, but formany years medical care and especially psychiatric care weregiven low priority. Many chronic illnesses still persist in thesecountries which may affect mental functioning. Furthermore,well-trained psychiatrists and methodologists are very rare inmental hospitals in these countries. Consequently, the findingsof earlier studies are questionable due to lack of controls,biased sampling and poor data collection and failure to accountfor variables like nutrition, living standard, cultural factorsand socioeconomic status. India's mental institutions were widely quoted to support the,connection between excessive cannabis consumption and insanity.The Indian Hemp Commission performed a thorough and objectiveinvestigation of this question, although methodologically it wasnot up to modern standards. The Commission was unconvinced of thereliability of hospital statistics, where often the diagnosis wasnot made by a psychiatrist but by a referring policeman. Therefore, the Commission examined all admissions to Indianmental hospitals for one year. They found that cannabis risecould not be considered a factor in more than seven to 13% of allcases of both acute and chronic psychosis. Chopra et al. (1942) carefully performed the same examinationof admission to Indian mental hospitals from 1928 through 1939when cannabis use was extremely high. They found 600 cases ofacute and chronic psychosis which could be traced to cannabisuse. Other reports from India have produced varying estimates ofthe incidence of cannabis psychosis (Peebles and Mann, 1914;Chopra, 1971; Dhunjibhoy, 1930 Evens, 1904). In Egypt 27% to 33%of mental hospital admissions were cannabis related (Ireland,1893; Warnock, 1903). Benabud (1957) reported that cannabis users comprised 68% ofall mental hospital admissions in Morocco but only 25% of theseadmissions could be called cannabis psychosis. Watt (1936 and1961) reported that 2% to 3% of mental hospital admissions inSouth Africa were due to the use of dagga (cannabis). Boroffka (1966) and Asuni (1964) reported that 14% ofpsychiatric admissions in Nigeria used cannabis. Toxic psychosisaccounted for half of these and cannabis was felt to aggravateunderlying schizophrenia in the remainder. Several statistical studies from other countries includingJamaica, Colombia, Algeria, Panama and Tunisia support this typeof data (Prince et al., 1970; Beaubrun, 1971 Allentuck andBowman, 1942; Bouquet, 1951; Chevers, 1870; Defer and Dielil,1968; Fraser, 1949; Freedman and Rockmore, 1946; Porst, 1942;Siler et al., 1933; Reales-Aroyco, 1953; Medical Staff, 1938). Very little information is available on the prevalence ofpsychosis in the overall population of cannabis users. Chopra andChopra (1939) classified 2% of the ganja and charas smokers and0.5% of the bhang drinkers in their sample of 1,200 as psychotic. Roland and Teste (1958) estimated that no more than 0.5% ofkif (cannabis) smokers in Morocco suffer from recurrent mentalconditions. Prince et al. (1970), in a study in Jamaica, noted that about20 patients per year are admitted to mental or general hospitalswith acute psychotic reactions allegedly precipitated by ganja.In one general and one mental hospital the, ganja smokerscomprised 20% of the psychiatric admissions. Furthermore, thepercentage of heavy ganja smokers in the community wassignificantly higher than 20%. Thus, a larger percentage ofpsychiatric admissions were, derived from non-ganja smokers in acomparable lower socioeconomic segment of the population. This finding contrasts with the 68% prevalence of cannabis useamong psychiatric admissions reported by Roland and Teste (1958)which is considerably higher than the prevalence of cannabis usein the general population of Morocco. Studies based on several hundred cases indicate that the largemajority of individuals hospitalized in mental institutions for"cannabis psychosis" have suffered acute toxicpsychoses associated with a sharp toxic overdose or massiveexcesses among habitual users. Occasional smokers and moderatehabitual users seldom had psychotic reactions and then only whenthere were substantial predisposing factors. The acute clinical picture seen in these delirium withconfusion, disorientation, terror, and subsequent amnesia is thatof a severe exogenous psychosis. It does not typically involvethe type of thought disorder characteristic of schizophrenia.Short recovery times ranging from a few days to six weeks areuniformly reported in sharp contrast to the lengthy recoveryperiod of functional psychoses (Chopra et al., 1942; Roland, andTeste, 1958; Defer and Diehl, 1968; Beaubrun , 1971; Stringaris,1939). Consequently, the psychiatric literature on cannabis-inducedchronic psychosis is quite confused. In general, it appears thatcannabis use probably produces a specific psychosis, but thismust be quite rare, since the prevalence of psychosis in heavycannabis users, world-wide, is only doubtfully higher than theprevalence in general populations (Murphy, 1963). However,incidence and prevalence data for these countries on psychosis ofusers and non-users of cannabis does not exist. A Morroccan investigator, Christozov (1965), studied 140chronic heavy hashish users hospitalized in a mental hospital.Their behavior was characterized by a confusional state ofconsciousness, an impulsivity, an irresponsible attitude, and aninstability of mood and character. The patients were oftenpsychotic with persistent hallucinations. Intellectual functionswere reduced in over half the cases although this was related toa low intellect prior to drug use. Electroencephalography showedno specific changes. In addition, it was noted that half of thepatients were also alcoholics. The majority of the patients were, sedated and showed a rapidimprovement, allowing them to be discharged and be employed,Although it appeared that these characteristics are reversible,the patient often returned to heavy drug use again causing returnof the syndrome. Thus, the existence of a more long lasting cannabis-relatedpsychosis is poorly defined. Some evidence indicates theexistence, of a, quite rare slow-recovery, residualcannabis-psychosis following heavy chronic use. Patients oftenexhibit schizophrenic-like withdrawal, mental confusion and mildresidual hallucinations; but there is little tendency for the,symptoms to become organized or proliferate. The symptoms developgradually and then subside gradually before proceeding tofull-blown psychotic symptoms. These may produce gradual psychicdeterioration in the habitual excessive user after prolongedperiods of time. Several authors theorized that the chronicpsychosis consists of recurrent acute attacks with gradualdeterioration in habitual excessive users (Roland and Teste,1958; Chopra, et al., 1942; Stringaris, 1939; Sigg , 1963). Most investigators, therefore, find it exceedingly difficultto distinguish a psychosis due to cannabis from other acute andchronic psychoses because, few, if any symptoms, are uniquelyfound in it and not observed in other psychoses. Often thediagnosis of cannabis psychosis is made because of the history ofheavy marihuana or hashish use. Several have suggested that acharacteristic cannabis psychosis does not exist and thatmarihuana will not produce a psychosis in a well-integrated,stable person (Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Reales-Aroyco, 1953). In addition, alcohol often played a part in producing themental derangement (Medical Staff, 1938; Porst, 1942). Most datarefers to any form of psychosis in marihuana users; notspecifically cannabis psychosis. Although it is fairly well-established that cannabis useattracts the mentally unstable, the prevalence of major mentaldisorder among cannabis users appears to be little if any higherthan that in the general population. Therefore, true cannabispsychosis must be earlier, very rare or it must substitute forother forms of psychosis. Perhaps, cannabis use alternatively isprotecting some less stable individuals from a psychosis (Murphy,1963). Because of these many difficulties, the role of cannabis usein acute and especially chronic psychoses in these countries isimpossible to determine with certainty. Finally, the Eastern literature often mentions the existenceof a characteristic psychic degeneration among older habituesafter prolonged excessive use (Chopra et al., 1942; Christozov,1965; Indian Hemp Commission, 1893; Roland and Teste, 1958;Stringaris, 1939; Warnock, 1903). They are frequently describedas showing a single minded, carefree state, such as"Kif-happy vagabonds." Soueif (1967) administered psychomotor and cognitiveperformance tests to imprisoned hashish users and non-hashishusers in Egypt. Preliminary results indicate that, on most of thetests, the hashish sample scored 10% to 20% below the control,and differences were larger for those with higher educationallevels. These results do not necessarily indicate a causalrelationship. Assessment of the significance of these findingsmust await further description of the samples utilized. Experience in the U.S. and Western Europe has not involved alevel of marihuana use comparable to the above-mentionedcountries. Consequently, the associated chronic psychoticdisturbances have not been seen. In Western countries, Bromberg (1939) and Allentuck and Bowman(1952) reported on acute psychotic episodes with clear-cut onsetduring the marihuana intoxication. Most symptoms cleared within afew days although several had a, prolonged illness. These rareacute psychotic episodes, discussed earlier, have been describedrecently by a variety of authors in scattered countries (Smith,1968; Weil, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Keeler, 1967; Milman, 1971;Pesyko, 1970 Kaplan, 1971; Prince et al., 1970; Baker and Lucas,1969; Grossman, 1969; Beaubrim, 1971; Spencer, 1970). Some of these reported cases are quite transient and clearrapidly with support of others and may be more like acute panicreaction than psychosis. Still others appear to fit the pictureof transient toxic psychosis. A few cases of marihuana psychosis reported by Kaplan (1971)recovered very slowly after extensive psychotherapy. However, thehigh incidence of schizophrenia and borderline states describedin these patients and their families may indicate that marihuanause merely aggravated or precipitated an underlying psychosis inthese individuals. George (1970) reported a case in Britain in which an acuteepisode of confusion, disorientation, hallucination, anxiety,paranoia, agitation and memory loss related to cannabis use wasfollowed by a more chronic schizophrenic-like syndrome withthought disorder, incongruous affect and hallucinations. Thisindividual was experiencing considerable financial and maritalstress prior to these two separate acute episodes. The chroniccondition eventually responded to psychotherapy. Bernhardson. (1969) reported aggravation by cannabis ofschizophrenic conditions in several Scandinavian patients. Perna(1969) reported a case in which marihuana appeared to aggravatean extended psychosis for which the patient had requiredpsychiatric treatment prior to the use of marihuana. Keup (1970) reported 14 cases of prolonged psychotic symptomsrequiring hospitalization associated with the use of marihuana.He noted evidence for the existence of a, high level ofpsychopathology in many of them which predated their marihuanause. Kolansky and Moore (1971) in a widely publicized report ofcases of individuals ages 13-to-24 has claimed profound adversepsychological effects from smoking marihuana two or more times aweek. Of 38 individuals reported, all had decompensatedpersonalities, eight had psychoses (four attempted suicide) and13, according to the authors became sexually promiscuous due tomarihuana. These clinical impressions were, all based on, atmost, a few interviews with the, individuals who were referred tothese psychiatrists for consultation for problems (includingone-third by legal authorities after arrest for possession ofmarihuana). Unfortunately, the authors made sweeping generalizations toall young adolescent marihuana users from this biased andnon-representative sample. No attempt was made to interview otheryoung marihuana users who have not been referred for psychiatrichelp, and the high prevalence of promiscuity and psychopathologyin comparable adolescent populations was totally disregarded. Inaddition, case histories of previous mental health were obtainedintrospectively from the patient, their families or the referralsource. Thus, it is impossible, to state unequivocally, as the authorsdo, that since marihuana use and psychiatric problems occurred atthe same time the former is causative of the latter. Several authors have reported acute toxic psychosis followingmarihuana use by soldiers in Vietnam (Talbott and Teague, 1969;Colbach and Crowe, 1970, Bey and Zecchinelli, 1971). All these cases represented transient reactions and clearedrapidly with treatment. In many cases, personality disorders orborderline personality states appeared to be predisposing factorsin the development of the psychotic state. Often revealed wereproblems of identify diffusion, ego weakness, low self-esteem andinability to form close interpersonal relationships. Also thestressful conditions of the setting in which the drug was useddeserves emphasis. Halikas et. al. (1971, 1972) performed intensive psychiatricinterviews on a population of 100 regular marihuana users and acontrol group of 50 of their non-using or casually using friends.Half of each group met the criteria for some psychiatricdiagnosis. Psychiatric illness and antisocial behavior most oftenpreceded marihuana use. Some attempts have been made to estimate the incidence, ofpsychosis and other adverse reactions to marihuana in Westerncountries. Obviously, such estimates depend on how thesereactions are defined-one questionnaire study of 2,700psychiatrists, psychologists, internists and generalpractitioners in the Los Angeles area reported 1,887"adverse reactions" to marihuana in an 18-month period(Ungerleider et al., 1968). Adverse reactions were not defined bythe authors in the survey. Those reported ranged from mildlyunpleasant parental objections to use to severe anxiety or acutepsychosis. Keeler (1967) reported on "adverse reactions" tomarihuana (paranoid feelings, etc.) which are limited to theimmediate period of intoxication. These phenomena occasionallyoccur in such a light proportion of regular users that they areof little interest in the present discussion, e.g., 80% of usersreport they sometimes have paranoid reactions during themarihuana intoxication (Tart, 1970). Other estimates have been based on hospital admissions inwhich marihuana use was the recognized precipitating cause.Lundberg et al. (1971) reviewed the admission records for the LosAngeles County General Hospital for the period 1961-1969 andfound marihuana use was listed as the reason for admission inonly nine out of 700,000 cases, and five of these were forintravenous injections. Keup (1970) reports that 0.9 per 1,000 of the 1968 admissionsto a Brooklyn psychiatric hospital were directly related tocannabis use, and in another 1.9 per 1,000 it was found to be acontributory factor. In 1966, psychiatric hospitals in England listed 82 admissionsfor which cannabis use was considered a factor (Baker and Lucas,1969) in 1967, the number was 140 (George, 1970). For the 1966data, further analysis revealed that eight of the 82 cases wereacute psychotic reactions to cannabis, 20 were related to"cannabis addiction as a way of life," and cannabiscould not be established as a definite factor in the remainder(Baker and Lucas, 1969). Colbach and Crowe (1971) estimate that among a population of45,000 U.S. soldiers in Vietnam in 1969, some 40 to 50 per monthwere hospitalized for psychiatric reasons and about five of thesewere associated with (usually heavy) marihuana use. Among college populations, Pillard (1970) estimates five toseven marihuana-associated anxiety reactions are, seen per yearby the Boston University Health Service which cares for a studentpopulation of 20,000; and Bialos (1970) reported 11 cases duringa one-year period (1968-1969) for a student population of 8,500. If it is assumed that about one-third of the Vietnam andcollege populations are using marihuana to some degree, theannual incidence of hospitalized cases in Vietnam would be aboutfour per 1,000 users; the rate for student-health cases, 0.3 to1.3 per 1,000 users. The 1972 Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare's reporton Marihuana and Health prepared by the National Institute ofMental Health noted in summary that marihuana can clearlyprecipitate certain less serious adverse psychiatric reactions,such as simple depression and panic, particularly ininexperienced users. In these reactions, non-drug factors may be the most importantdeterminants. Psychotic episodes may also be precipitated inpersons with a preexisting borderline personality or psychoticdisorder or those persons under excessively stressful conditions.These acute psychoses appear to share considerable clinicalsimilarities with the acute toxic psychoses noted in the Easternliterature. Both these psychoses resemble an acute brain syndromein that they occur primarily after heavier than usual usage andare self-limited and short-lived after the drug is removed fromthe body. Some reports describing a prolonged psychotic course after aninitial acute episode cannot rule out the role of pre-existingpsychopathology. At the present time evidence that marihuana is asuf ficient or contributory cause of chronic psychosis is weakand rests primarily on temporal association. This issue may beclarified by extensive epidemiological and controlled clinicalstudies. (Secretary, HEW, 1972) AMOTIVATIONAL SYNDROME Another type of possible mental deterioration or subtlepersonality and behavioral changes associated with heavylong-term cannabis use is the amotivational syndrome. This syndrome has been described world-wide in its extremeform when the most potent preparations are, used (Miras, 1967;Chopra. and Chopra, 1957; Chopra et aL, 1942; Christozov, 1965;Indian Hemp, 1893; Benabud, 1957; Warnock, 1903). Its mostextreme form depicts a loss of interest in virtually allactivities other than cannabis use. The resultant lethargy socialand personal deterioration and drug preoccupation may becomparable to the skid row alcoholics' state. Benabud (1957) describes the occurrence of this syndrome inindividuals chronically intoxicated with hashish. Theseindividuals are unlikely to show conventional levels ofmotivation. Also the time required to obtain and consume enoughdrug to maintain this state is not likely to leave much time forother pursuits. The passive user tends to lose interest in workand other long-term goals. The question of whether there exists a significant causal asopposed to an associative or correlational relationship, onlyattracted attention when the traditionally achievement-orientedWestern youth adopted cannabis use. The traits of passivity oramotivation are commonly described among heavy cannabis userthroughout the world. A number of Eastern authors have expressed the opinion thatthis is a result of organicity from chronic cannabis use in largeamounts, without objective studies being performed. Recently the term has been used to describe the behavior ofnumbers of young Americans who are for a variety of reasonsdropping out of school, refusing to prepare themselves fortraditional adult roles and smoking marihuana. This type of social maladjustment is not comparable inmagnitude to that described in other cultures. However, theindividual may lose the desire to work, to compete, to facechallenges. Old interests and concerns are lost and theindividual's life, becomes centered around his compulsive druguse. In addition, the individual may ignore personal hygiene,experience loss of sex drive and avoid social interaction (Mirinet al., 1970; Smith, 1968). West (1970) and McGlothlin and West (1968) have described aclinical syndrome as a result of observations of regularmarihuana users for four years. Their clinical impressions arethat these individuals show subtle changes in personality overtime which might represent an organic syndrome. These includediminished drive, lessened ambitious decreased motivation,apathy, shortened attention span, loss of effectiveness,introversion, magical thinking, derealization anddepersonalization, decreased capacity to carry out complex plansor prepare realistically for the future, a peculiar fragmentationin flow of thought, and a progressive loss of insight. Another psychiatrist, Powelson (1971), has also concluded onthe basis of over five years clinical experience with drug usersat the University of California, Berkeley, that the effects ofmarihuana are cumulative. He, feels that after a period ofprolonged use a disorder of thinking characterized by a lack ofcoherence and a pathological thinking process results. These disturbing findings are being reported more frequently,especially in adolescent and young-adult groups. Recently,tentative and preliminary data (Francois et al., 1970; White etal., 1970) has been presented on a group of 19 hospitalized14-to-20-year-old patients with behavioral disorders who had usedmarihuana and other drugs heavily. In addition to "amotivation," they showed primitiveand magical modes of thought and low frustration tolerance.Subtle EEG patterns were detected although this finding is notuncommon in adolescents with behavior problems. The researchers are presently carrying out a study innon-hospitalized adolescents without behavioral disorders whohave similar patterns of drug use in order to clarify theirfindings. Kornhaber (1971) believes that at least twice daily marihuanause for a year, in a 13-to-18-yearold population, has adeleterious effect upon the developing adolescent. Theintoxicated state facilitates a regression fromlogical-mathematical thought processes to a more primitiveconceptual mode of fantasy and magical thinking and impairslearning ability and judgment by decreasing attention andconcentration. Thus, the developing youth turns away from realitytoward fantasy and from structure and activity to passivedependency. Kornhaber suggests that marihuana facilitates the developmentof normal adolescent turmoil into a pathological state. However,he feels that the existence of the syndrome depends partially onthe individual's vulnerability to the drug influence. A possibly milder variation of this syndrome has beenclinically observed by Scher (1970) in individuals in the20-to-30 age group who have used marihuana daily for five yearswhile apparently functioning normally in society with good jobs,often creative ones. These individuals begin to experience avague sense of functioning at reduced efficiency level. Thus, thedisabilities experienced are personal and internal ,andconstitute a vague neurotic depressive-like syndrome,. In addition to the methodological problems of (Establishingcausative as opposed to associative relationships, it is alsovery difficult to obtain a sample of heavy cannabis users in theWest who have not had substantial experience, with other drugs,especially the strong hallucinogens. Koridiaber (1971) has described a sample of 50 adolescentpsychiatric patients who used marihuana daily and also took otherdrugs. He concluded that marihuana exercised a "chronic,tranquilizing, psychomotor-depressant effect" among thesepatients, and facilitated regression, fantasy and magicalthinking. School performance, participation in sports, andpersonal hygiene also declined. He reported improvement in schoolperformance, mood and the underlying depressive symptoms for manypatients four to six weeks after discontinuing marihuana use. Given there is a fairly strong tendency for heavy cannabisusers to be passive and apathetic, to emphasize the present overthe future, and to choose fantasy over rationality, there areseveral ways by which this relationship might come about(McGlothlin, 1972). First,, persons who already exhibit these, traits may simplybe attracted to the use of cannabis. Sociologists tend to favorthis explanation, arguing that the relationship between cannabisuse and various behavioral indicators is not causal, but simplyone manifestation of a general pattern of youthful deviance orrebellion (Goode, 1970). Utilizing a large sample, Johnson (1971) found that marihuanause is associated with impaired school performance and severalforms of deviance; however, other indicators such as premaritalsex and high school truancy predicted the dependent variable aswell or better. Tobacco and alcohol use were nearly as goodpredictors as marihuana. A second related explanation is that the illegal. context inwhich the drug is taken forces the adoption of a nonconforminglife style. The users is thus further alienated from the dominantculture through his close ties with the cannabis-using group. Third, cannabis use and associated activities may largelysubstitute for other interests. The individual may focus so muchof his time and energy on cannabis that he has little time forother endeavors. Fourth, heavy cannabis use may act pharmacologically toproduce a chronic tranquilized state. Although the acute phase ofintoxication is relatively short, there is some evidence of alethargic hangover effect (Haines & Green, 1976). Fifth, personality and behavior changes may result through theroutine process of learning via exposure. If an impressionableyouth spends a great deal of his time in the world of cannabisintoxication, he may learn to think in a similar manner when notintoxicated. In particular, he may learn to choose the drugfantasy as an alternative to solving personal problems and facingadult responsibility. A related explanation is that cannabis acts as a catalyst,creating a condition which facilitates change, providing othernecessary conditions are present. Cannabis, along with the stronghallucinogens, produces a kind of mind-loosening effect in whichmechanisms providing structure and stability to perception ofself-image, environment, time sense,, etc., are temporarilysuspended. The, more frequent users welcome this effect and reportutilizing the loosening effect of the drug to achieve furtherpersonality change in the direction of less conformity and morespontaneity, that is. the "hang-loose ethic" (Suchman,1968; Simmons and Winograd, 1966). In addition, the cannabis intoxication produces a heightenedsuggestibility which likely makes the user more amenable toadopting the attitudes and values of the subculture in which thedrug is taken. At a minimum, it may be concluded that the effectsof cannabis can reinforce and provide a rationalization forpreviously existing tendencies. Finally it is possible that chronic cannabis use can result inorganicity (Soueif, 1967). In summary, if cannabis use produces personality and behaviorchanges via one or more of the above mechanisms, the extent ofsuch changes is likely to be strongly related to the amountconsumed and the age of the user. According to evidence found inWestern literature, frequent use may be quite disruptive duringthe formative years of adolescence. On the other hand, the Eastern literature indicates that,although the very heavy user (200 mg. THC or more per day) islargely incapacitated, manual laborers often function adequatelywhile consuming amounts containing 30 to 50 mg. THC per day(Roland and Teste, 1958; Chopra and Chopra, 1939). Similarly,many musicians and entertainers in the United States have livedproductive lives while using marihuana (Winick, 1960). RECURRENT PHENOMENON Another poorly understood phenomenon is the spontaneousrecurrence of all or part of the drug intoxicated state (somaticand visual sensations) when not under the influence of the drug.This phenomenon has been called a "flashback" when itoccurs spontaneously or "a contact high" when it occursin the presence of others who are intoxicated. Flashbacks have been reported with marihuana use alone.However, these occurrences are apparently predominant inmarihuana users, who have taken hallucinogenic drugs previously.These marihuana, users occasionally find that marihuana highschange for them after their hallucinogenic. experiences. Forexample, a simple hallucination experienced previously mayreoccur while high on marihuana. These flashbacks may be interpreted as pleasant, even desiredexperiences by some but unwelcome and disturbing to others. Therecurrences are benign in most individuals and tend to disappearas the hallucinogenic experience recedes in time (Keeler, 1967;Smith, 1968; Weil, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Blumenfield, 1970). Truly vivid experiences which recapture most of the elementsof the original experience are extremely rare (Smith and Meld,1970). More often they resemble an anxiety state occurring afteran unpleasant high or the recurrence of a new perceptualawareness gained while high. It is difficult to differentiatethese recurrences from the not uncommon deja vu phenomenon inwhich a person has the illusion that a perceived situation hasoccurred before. These recurrences are intermittent and usuallyoccur within a few days to weeks following the use of marihuana. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-45IA086-000614-B047-235http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1h.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022736 text/html 90475HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:27:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:52 GMTContent-length: 90257 Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term CannabisUsers Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse Investigations of Very Heavy, Very Long-Term Cannabis Users Proving a causal relationship between the use of any substanceand an associated illness or condition is extremely difficult.Ideally, prospective longitudinal studies on large populations ofboth substance users and nonusers matched for socioeconomic andpsycho-cultural variables should be performed for many years inorder to detect subtle or cumulative effects. Unfortunately, theenormous expenditures of research effort and finances that wouldbe required for a large scale investigation of this nature areprohibitive. Consequently, carefully designed and controlled, clinical andepidemiological studies of very heavy, very long-term cannabisusers in foreign countries must be relied upon to provideimportant data on possible effects because these populations arenot obtainable in the United States. GREECE Preliminary results (Freedman and Fink 1971, Fink and Dornbush1971, Fink 1971) from an intensive medical, neurological, andpsychiatric study of 31 male chronic hashish users in Greece,performed under contract to the National Institute of MentalHealth, have revealed few abnormalities in these individuals.Non-users matched for socioeconomic, and psycho-cultural factorsincluding life style, alcohol and tobacco consumption andnutrition and general health have not been studied. In collaboration with Professors Miras and Stefanis in Athens,Fink and co-workers are studying a population of chronic hashishusers that Professor Miras has known for many years. Thepopulation studied is composed of 31 male subjects ranging in agefrom 26 to 69 years with a mean of 46 years. The subjects report starting hashish use at 13 to 35 years ofage with a mean of 19. They have -used hashish from 10 to 49years, with a median of 28 years. In the past they used anaverage of eight grams of hashish daily with a range of 2 to 24:grams daily. (The hashish it estimated to contain 4% THC on theaverage. Therefore, average daily use was 320 mg. of THC). In the past, 27 of the subjects were daily -users and fourused every other day. Frequently of hashish use per day was: onceper day-2 subjects, twice per day-6 subjects, three times perday-14 subjects, four times per day-4 subjects, and five, or moretimes per day-5 subjects. The men reported a reduction in drug use with time ascribed toincreasing difficulty in obtaining adequate supplies due toincreased enforcement of the drug regulations. At present theyuse an average of three grams of hashish daily (320 mg. of THC)with a range of one to 10 grams daily. Twelve now use hashish daily, eight use, every other day and11 use less frequently. Frequency of daily hashish use is: onceper day-5 subjects, twice per day-12 subjects, three times perday-10 subjects, four times per day-2 subjects, and gve(sic) ormore times per day-2 subjects. The men are primarily hashish users. One has used opiates. Twoare heavy users of alcohol and six report occasional to frequentuse of alcohol at the present time. Tobacco is smoked by allsubjects averaging 40 cigarettes per day. Twenty-three of the subjects report periods of abstinence fromhashish averaging ten months but up to three years. Hashish useis primarily social by 20 subjects, and 15 subjects smoke insolitude. Pipes and cigarettes in which hashish is mixed with tobaccoare used interchangeably. The usual time of smoking is after work(21 subjects) but 12 subjects smoke before work and five smokeanytime. In this population, the median education is three-and-a-halfyears of school with a range of none to nine. Five of the men areilliterate. Twenty-one of the men are married, one is cohabiting,four are single and five are divorced or separated. All of the married men are employed and support theirfamilies. The subjects report changing their jobs frequently and11 had periods of unemployment from three to 120 months. Ten wereclassified as skilled workers and 21 as unskilled workers. Theirjobs include selling scrap metals, general labor, cartage,messenger, maintenance assistants, etc. Arrests are common and 19 report at least one non-hashishrelated arrest. Eighteen have been in regular military service,six were exempt because of hashish use and seven for otherreasons. Interestingly, 10 of the 15 wives interviewed prefer thebehavior and attitudes of their husbands when they are usinghashish compared to when they are drug-free. In regard to family and personal background 20 had refugeeparents, 13 had alcoholic or hashish using fathers, 26 had threeor more siblings, 19 had dominant mothers. Fifteen of 21 haddominant wives. Seven reported broken homes under age 16. Apparently, the subjects participation in society isconsistent with their lower socioeconomic background. No grossbehavioral deviation was detected I in this population. Psychiatric status was evaluated by history and psychiatricinterview. Nine have had psychiatric hospitalization of whichthree were in the military and related to hashish use. Two have,had psychiatric outpatient treatment. Eight had histories ofneurotic traits during childhood. In their psychiatricevaluation, three men are considered to have psychiatricpathology. Two of these were considered sociopaths on the basisof homosexuality and criminal behavior. The third was diagnosedas a schizophrenic. No overt signs of any organic mental syndromewere detected. None of the three men were believed to requirepsychiatric intervention. The schizophrenic, although suspiciousand withdrawal, is a successful business man and lives with hisfamily on weekends. Complete physical and neurological examination revealed threeprominent findings. All had very poor dentition which the menascribed to hashish smoking. Chronic bronchitis was detected in14 of the men and emphysema in three others. This finding is notsurprising because all subjects were tobacco cigarette smokersaveraging 40 cigarettes per day, in addition to their very heavyhashish consumption. Enlarged livers were also found in nine ofthe 31 subjects. Because no extensive psychological test battery has beendeveloped or standardized in Greece, American tests were used.These tests are not culture-free, and it is possible that certainitems or subtests were inappropriate for the subjects becausethey had not acquired the type of knowledge or skills requireddue to their poor level of education. The Wechsler-Bellevue I.Q. tests were translated into Greekand administered. Because of these, factors, comparison of levelof performance between these subjects and white middle classAmericans is meaningless. The mean I.Q. is 86 with a range of 69 to 109. The mean verbalis 90.3 and the mean performance was 83.6. The group of subjectsperformed lower than expected on digit symbol, digit span andsimilarities but higher than expected on comprehension,arithmetic, vocabulary and picture completion. The RavensProgression Matrices showed a similar pattern and mean I.Q. Thesignificance of these findings will depend on a comparison with amatched nonuser population. Resting electroencephalograms were obtained in 30 subjects andevaluated independently by four experts. Twenty-five were withinnormal limits. Testing was incomplete in one record. One record in a subjectwho had a head injury within the prior three months showed focalslowing. Two of the four experts judged the remaining three, records asshowing low degrees of average to low voltage theta activityindicative of cerebral dysfunction. The remaining two expertsjudged these records as within normal limits. This medical and psychological data suggests some effects ofvery long term, very heavy hashish use. Without a matchedcomparison group, factors independent of hashish use, such asage, socioeconomic conditions, or environmental conditions, mayaccount for the observed changes. However, the researchers note that these men have survivedchronic hashish use in high doses without gross behavioraldeviation. JAMAICA Another foreign investigation (Ruben et al., 1972) conductedin Jamaica (under contract for the National Institute of MentalHealth) studied chronic cannabis users and matched nonusercontrols. Preliminary findings have shown little evidence ofsignificant differences between the two groups in the extensiveanthropological, medical, psychiatric and psychologicalinvestigations. Ganja use is widespread and endemic in the Jamaican lowestsocioeconomic strata, and in particular in a millenial-religioussect known as the Rastafarians. More than 50% of all maleJamaicans are estimated to use some form of cannabis, andprobably about 20% are regular heavy users of ganja. The drug was brought to Jamaica from India over 130 years agoby indentured East Indian laborers. However, presently theheaviest ganja users are Afro-Jamaicans who comprise 90% of thepopulation. The Rastafarian religious sect, founded by Marcus Garvey,preach a "Back to Africa" destiny and claim HaileSelassie to be God. The Rastafarians have always worn. long hairand beards and dressed eccentrically. They believe that "theherb" was given them by God to help them to understand hiswisdom exemplified in their greeting, "Peace and Love." The Rastas reject the values of the dominant society andregard the government as "the powers of Babylon". Theyhave, chosen to opt out of conventional society and instead workand live in a communal existence in poverty. They emphasize thevalue of ganja in achieving a new level of meaning in thisexistence. The Rastafarians add ganja to their infant first bath andstart feeding the drug to their infants from the time of weaningin an infusion known as ganja tea. They continue to smoke anddrink the drug throughout life. They, like many other Jamaicans, believe in its medicinalproperties especially for asthma and indigestion and promotion ofhealing; that it gives protection from evil spirits; that itcleanses the skin and purifies the blood; that it promotes sexualvigor; that it gives energy for work and relieves fatigue andprovides relaxation after work. Extensive in-depth studies have been carried out by a team ofanthropologists from The Research Institute for the Study of Manin conjunction with The Departments of Psychiatry, Pathology,Physiology and Medicine, of the University of the West Indies.Anthropology field workers lived for extensive periods of time infive rural communities (including fishing, farming and canecutting areas) and two urban districts. Over 2,000 people were observed and studied in thesecommunities. Overall life styles of the ganja users were notnotably different from nonusing individuals in the Jamaicanlowest socioeconomic strata. Users are working, maintainingstable families and homes, and actively participating in theirsociety. No evidence was noted of crime or aggressive behavior ordrug use other than alcohol related to ganja use. No evidence ofphysical dependence was demonstrated. Minimal psychologicaldependence was observed but no drug craving was expressed. Thirty long-term ganja smokers and 30 nonusers matcheddemographically to control factors other than ganja use, werechosen as representative of this functioning lower socioeconomicpopulation and selected for intensive hospital study in order todetermine, differences between the two groups. The mean age of the subjects was 33 with a range of 23 to 51.The primary occupation of one-third of the subjects was farming.The next most common occupations were, fishing, skilled andsemiskilled laborers. Half practiced no formal religion, fivewere Rastafarians and the remainder practiced a wide variety oftraditional religious. Almost three-fourths of the males hadstable "marriages" and the remaining single subjectswere predominantly the younger ones. The subjects were divided into three groups. Twenty-three werenonganja smokers, 28 were regular daily ganja smokers and 9 wereoccasional ganja smokers using the drug several times a we orless. Three types of regular ganja smokers were delineated: lightsmokers using one to four spliffs daily moderate smokers usingfour to seven spliffs daily; and heavy smokers using eight ormore spliffs per day. Age of first use ranged from 8-36 years of age. Regular use ofganja occurred at a median age of 16 years with a range of 9-25years. All ganja smokers had used the drug at least 7 years andsome up to 37 years with a mean of 17.5 years. The ganja users consumer on the average seven spliffs of ganjadaily with a range of one to 24 per day. The typical ganjacigarette or cigar, termed a spliff is roughly a four-inch-longpaper cone and contains about two to three grams of ganja with adelta 9 THC content of about 2.9% on the average (range of0.7-10.3%) mixed with about half of a Tobacco cigarette. Alsomany smoke ganja in a Chillum pipe using very deep inhalation tofill their lungs with smoke. They consume 14 pipe fulls per weekon the average, with a range of 1-25 per week. No significant differences in neurological abnormalities,electroencephalographic abnormalities, hemochemical changesincluding liver function, urinalysis, chest X-ray abnormalitiesor chromosome damage in lymphocytes were found in the users orcontrols. One user had a long history of bronchial asthma and anotherhad a mild case of Jamaican neuropathy, but nothing suggeststhese disabilities were in any way related to ganja use. Minorelectrocardiographic abnormalities were present in aboutone-third of both users and controls. This may be related to asyndrome of unknown etiology known as Jamaican cardiomiyopathy. Thorough physical examination and hematological studiesrevealed only minimal significant differences between ganjasmokers and non-ganja smoking controls. Comprehensive evaluationof red blood cell indices revealed that the ganja smokers hadsignificantly higher hemoglobin levels and packed red cellvolumes (hematocrit) than the non-ganja smokers. These hematologic findings are compatible with those reportedrecently (Sangan and Balberzak, 1971) for heavy tobacco cigarettesmokers. The authors noted that cigarette smoking causes afunctional tissue hypoxia due to deficits in lung func tionwithresultant arterial oxygen unsaturation. Thus, an increased demandis placed on the bone marrow to provide more red blood cells toincrease the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. In addition to the heavy smoking of ganja in spliffs andpipes, 27 of the 30 ganja smokers were tobacco smokers, andseveral have smoked tobacco cigarettes heavily. 19 of the 30non-ganja smokers were tobacco cigarette smokers and tended to belight tobacco cigarette smokers. Thus, the data appears to suggest that a combination offactors including number of years and quantity of cigarettesmoking, ganja spliff smoking and ganja chilum pipe smoking issignificantly correlated with the hematological changesindicative of functional hypoxia. However, pulmonary functionstudies did not demonstrate significant decrements correlatedwith ganja or tobacco smoking. No significant differences were found between groups by athorough psychiatric and psychological examination. All subjectswere judged to be in normal mental health. Subjects wereadministered a battery of standardized reliable Americanpsychological tests known to be sensitive to impairment in brainfunction. These tests were not culture free so that comparison ofperformance, between Jamaicans and Americans is meaninglessNineteen tests evaluating 47 variables were performed includingone personality test, three tests of intelligence and verbalabilities, and 15 neuropsychological tests. Two of 47 variables had statistically significant differencesbetween ganja smokers and non-smokers. The smokers scored higheron the digit span subtest of the Wechsler Adult IntelligenceScale and bad a more centralized personality organization on theLowenfeld Mosaic Test. Non-smokers had the best performance on the number of edgecontacts with the non-dominant hand on the Holes Test. These fewsignificant differences were considered chance findings by theinvestigators. In general no consistent differences were found on thesepsychological tests between ganja smokers and non-smokers. Thedata clearly indicate that the long-term ganja use by these mendid not produce demonstrable intellectual or ability deficitswhen they were without the drug for three days. No evidence inthese results suggest permanent brain damage. The alleged role of ganja in producing personality change inthe direction of a loss of competitive striving and anunwillingness to work, termed the amotivational syndrome was alsoinvestigated. Based on clinical impressions gained from careful sociologicaland psychological techniques, the investigators noted that thechronic ganja smoker differed little in work habits or recordfrom his matched control. No evidence of an amotivationalsyndrome was found. In fact, the subjects believe ganja has afunctional value as a work adjunct. It provides energy for workand helps them do arduous boring jobs. In the Jamaican culture, ganja may produce a"motivational syndrome". In an objective videotapeevaluation of work energy output and ganja smoking, ganja use didnot lower productivity on simple repetitive tasks, such aswoodcutting which requires compulsive concentrated effort. A study of cultivators points up the relationship ofpopulation, land, and economic pressures to ganja use. In thearea studied land resources are scarce, farms small andcultivation difficult on the hilly slopes. Market conditionsdetermine income from cash crops and restrictions on migrationmaintain population pressures on limited resources. For these farmers, the researchers suggest that ganja use,decreases total cultivated acreage and consolidates productionwhile disruption of competition and social cohesiveness among thefarmers is avoided. These data may indicate that heavy ganja use duringcultivation in farming situations with limited alternatives mayserve to maintain the status quo. However, it is possible thatthe compulsive concentrated effort experienced by the cultivatorswith heavy ganja use may be productive in areas with good soiland climatic conditions where systematic weeding can increasecrop yields. As a result of the extensive anthropological study, theinvestigators believe that ganja use in Jamaica is a culturallydetermined phenomenon. A "ganja complex" exists whichconsists of closely related, learned patterns of behaviormanifested by the members of the society. The ganja complex appears to be functional for theworking-class Jamaican. Various elements Of the complex includingeconomic, social and personal are interrelated in ways thatcontribute to operation of the whole culture. AFGHANISTAN Dr. Salamuddin Weiss (1971) studied 1011 chronic hashish usersin Kabul in order to obtain a general picture of the charas habitin Afghanistan. Cannabis is cultivated in this tropical country. Aconcentrated product, charas, the resin obtained from theflowering tops of the female plant, is the preparation generallyused. The most common method of smoking charas is in a clay waterpipe called a Chelum. Next most commonly used is a pipe or needleand straw. Infrequently, charas is smoked in tobacco cigars orcigarettes. Chewing the leaves or drinking a charas mixture as aconfection is quite rare. Although charas smokers are found throughout society, they arepredominantly found in certain groups. The ages of the subjectsstudied ranged from 13 to 70 years old. More than 75% were,married. Almost all were males. Socioeconomic status was as follows: 70%, lower, 28% middleand 2% upper. 82% are illiterate, 27% had a primary schooleducation and less than 1% had any higher education. Most smoking occurs in groups of two to 20 friends in quietout of the way places. Most users smoke several times a day. Thelonger one has smoked charas, the shorter the duration of thehigh and the more often the individual can smoke each day. Weakness, sexual difficulties and physical impotence arecommonly reported by smokers. Most report they have a goodappetite and eat more than normal, but malnutrition is common. One hundred chronic smokers were selected at random andexamined medically: 93 were malnourished; no evidence of illnesswas found in 79 subjects; 13 showed signs of respiratory illness(bronchitis) ; 7 showed sleep disturbances and one had pulmonarytuberculosis. No deaths have been reported from charas overdose.One subject out of the 1,011 was known to be chronicallypsychotic. A review of over 150,000 outpatient and inpatient psychiatricvisits per year over the past 10 years revealed 20 short-termpsychotic episodes yearly involving charas alone and 16,short-term psychotic episodes yearly involving both charas andother drugs. An absence of chronic mental illness related tocharas use was noteworthy. Most charas smokers commence use during their teens, graduallyincreasing their use about five or six times until they reachtheir highest dose between the ages of 20 to 40 years. At the extreme, smokers have raised their daily dosage up to10 times their starting dose within the first two years. Theythen gradually decrease their daily requirement by about 50% uponreaching their 60's. Generally, most smokers cease charas useafter their 60's, but some. use extremely low doses for the restof their lives. I These patterns of use are consistent with the development oftolerance. Additionally, chronic smokers note they are able touse larger doses than they did when they began use without anysignificant signs of intoxication. Also after stopping charas usefor a few days or months, the users report they restart use atsmaller doses to achieve the desired effect. No physical dependence was noted. Marked psychologicaldependence was present which makes it difficult to stop theirhabitual use. Discontinuation of charas use produced mildpsychologic abstinence signs. These signs, generally includerestlessness loss of appetite, sleeplessness, nervousness,headache, and gastrointestinal upset. Most smokers after discontinuation of use are quite able tolive with their families and perform their jobs withoutdiscomfort. Most chronic smokers return to charas use within daysor months. Out of a group of 100 randomly selected ex-smokers whohad used for eight to 22 years, 42 have not returned to charasuse, 16 use occasionally and 42 have returned to daily use withinone to 13 months. Most common explanation given by the subjects for restartinguse were to continue close relationships with charas usingfriends and lack of a busy job. A group of 100 opium addicts were selected at random from thecommunity; 51 of these started their drug use with charas andlater substituted opium for charas. Generally, charas smokers report that they become faster intheir daily jobs, but observation reveals a slowness in theseactivities. The ability to perform a non-complicated job iscomparable to non-charas smokers. They tend to be cooperative butlazy persons. They tend to be more theoretical than practical andavoid making decisions. They do not demonstrate creativity orcontribute significantly to the improvement of their community. Summary Marihuana has been used by man in countries around the worldfor many centuries. Scientifically, more is known aboutmarihuana's effects than many other botanical substances consumedby man. Marihuana is one of several preparations from the plant,cannabis sativa. The plant contains many different chemicals, buttetrahydrocannabinol appears to be the major activepsychopharmacologic ingredient. The potency of the preparation isdetermined by the THC content, which varies according to theorigin of the seed, the conditions of cultivation, and the extentof manicuring. Several important factors exert significant influences on thepsychopharmacological effect. These include dose, method of use,set and setting, and pattern of use including frequency andduration of use. The acute subjective experience is dose-dependent. At lowdoses commonly used in this country a mild intoxication occurs,but at higher doses psychotomimetic experiences can occur. Fewconsistent physiological effects are noted. No pathologic bodilychanges have been conclusively demon, strafed from acute use.Subtle effects on recent memory, psychomotor function, and socialbehavior have been demonstrated. The margins of safety between the effective dose and the toxicdose is quite large. No human fatalities have been noted in thiscountry caused by marihuana. The most common adverse reactionsare becoming too intoxicated, and the acute anxiety panicreaction. Both of these are transient and related to doseconsumed as well as set and setting factors. Acute psychotic, reactions are quite rare. They usually last afew days to weeks and occur in predisposed persons either withpreexisting mental disorders or borderline personalitiesespecially under stressful conditions. Transient acute brainsyndrome or toxic psychosis is possible at extremely large doses. Evidence has accumulated which indicates that differentialtolerance does develop at least, in persons who smoke largeamounts of marihuana several times a day. Development oftolerance to the depressant effects on behavior appears toprecede development of tolerance to the intoxicant effect. Physical dependence has not been demonstrated. Little, if any,psychological dependence is present in most intermittentmarihuana users. Moderate psychological dependence occurs inmoderate to heavy users and marked psychological dependence hasbeen described in very heavy chronic users. Some detrimental effects have been conclusively linked toshort- and long-term marihuana use for very heavy users. The mostfrequently reported change in the heavy, long-term smokers oflarge quantities of potent preparations is chronic bronchitiscomparable to that developed by a heavy, long-term tobaccocigarette smoker. A chronic cannabis psychosis probably occursrarely in heavy chronic, hashish smokers in Eastern countries.Most psychotic episodes are the acute variety and clear in a fewdays to weeks. No objective evidence has been demonstrated thateven very heavy, long-term hashish use causes organic braindamage. Objective studies of chronic, heavy smokers of potentpreparations have not causally linked this drug with theamotivational syndrome which has been described by manyclinicians. Almost all chronic, heavy hashish smokers areindistinguishable from their peers in the lower socioeconomicstrata of their respective societies in social behavior, workperformance, mental status and overall life style. REFERENCES ,Abel, E: "Marihuana and Memory," Nature, 227 (5263)1151-1152 (1970). Abel, E. L.: "Effects of Marihuana on the Solution ofAnagrams, Memory and Appetite," Nature, 231: 260-261 (1971). Abel, E. L. "Marihuana and Memory: Acquisition orRetrieval," Science, 173: 1038-1040 (1971). Abel, E. L.: "Retrieval of Information After Use ofMarihuana, " Nature, 231 (5297) : 58 (1971). Abelson, H. Cohen, R. and Sehrayer. D.: Public AttitudesToward Marihuana, Princeton: Response Analysis (1972). Adams R.: "Marihuana," Bulletin of the New YorkAcademy of Medicine, 18: 705-730 (1942). Adams, R.: "Marihuana," Harvey Lectures, Series 37:16,8-197 (1941-1942). Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence, Cannabis (WoottonReport), London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office (1968). Agurell, S. and Leander, K.: "Stability, Transfer andAbsorption of Cannobinoid Constituents of Cannabis (Hashish)During Smoking," Acta Pharmaceutica, Succica, 8: 685 (1971). Aldrich, C. K.: "The Effect of a Synthetic Marihuana-LikeCompound on Musical Talent as Measured by the SeashoreTest," Public Health Reports, 59 (13) : 431-433 (1944). Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M.: "The Psychiatric Aspectsof Marihuana Intoxication," American Journal of Psychiatry,99: 248-251 (l942). Ames, F.: "A Clinical and Metabolic Study of AcuteIntoxication With Cannabis Sativa and Its Role in the ModelPsychoses," Journal of Mental Sciences, 104 (437): 972-999(1958). Asuni, T.: "Socio-Psychiatric Problems of Cannabis inNigeria," United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 16 (2) 17-28(1964). Aubin, J.: "Le Test Evolutif dans l'IntoxicationChronique per le Kif," Algerie Med (1944). Baker, A. A. and Lucas, E. G.: "Some Hospital AdmissionsAssociated With Cannabis," Lancet, 1 (7580) : 148 (1969). Baker-Bates, E. T.: "A Case of Cannabis IndicaIntoxication," Lancet, I: 811 (1935). Barry, H. and Kubena, R. K.: "Repeated High Doses ofDelta-l-Tetrahydrocannabinol Enhance Acquisition of ShockAvoidance in Rats," Proceedings 79th Annual Convention ofthe American Psychological Association, 749-750 (1971) Bartolucci, G. Fryer, L., Perris, C. and Shagass, C.:"Marihuana Psychosis: A Case Report," CanadianPsychiatric Association Journal, 14 (1) 77-79 (1969). Baudelaire, C.:In: Ebin, D. (Ed.) The Drug Experience. FirstPerson Accounts of Addicts, Writers, Scientists and Others, NewYork: The Allon Press (1961), pp. 1640. Beaubrun, M. H.: "The Pros and Cons of Cannabis Use inJamaica," Prepared by the Department of Psychiatry,University of the West Indies as a Working Paper for Panel onYouth and Drugs, Costa Rica (January 8, 1971). Benabud A.: "Psychopathological Aspects of the CannabisSituation in Morroco: Statistical Data for 1956," UnitedNations Bulletin on Narcotics, 9(4) : 1-16 (1957). Ben-Zui, Z., Mechoulam, R. and Burstein, S.:"Identification Through Synthesis of an Active A' (6)Tetrahydrocannabinol Metabolite,," Journal of American,Chemical Society, 92 (11) : 3468-3469 (1970). Bercht, C. A. L., Kuppers, F. J. E. M., Lousberg, R. J. J. Ch.and Kalemink, C. A.: "Constituents Volatiles du CannabisSativa L.," United Nations ST/SOA/SER .5/29: 1-11 (July22,1971). Beringer, K., et al.: "Zur Klinik desHashisclirausches," Der Nervenarzt, 5 (7) : 337-350 (1932). Bernhardson, G.: "Cannabis Psychosis," SvenskaLakartidn, 66: 1230-1234 (1969). Bey, D. R., and Zecchinelli, V. A.: "Marihuana as aCoping Device in Vietnam," Military Medicine, 136 (5) :448-450 (1971). Bialos, D.: "Adverse Marihuana Reactions: A CriticalExamination of the Literature with Selected Case Material,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (6) : 119-123 (1970). Bloomquist, E. R.: "Marihuana: Social Benefit or SocialDetriment?" California Medicine, 106: 346-353 (1967).Blumenfield, M.: "Flash-back Phenomena in Basic Trainees whoEnter the U.S. Air Force," Presented 17th Annual Conferenceof Air Force Behavioral Scientists, School of Aerospace Medicine,San Antonio (January 1970). Roroffka, A.: "Mental Illness and Indian Hemp inLagos," East African Medical Journal, 43 (9) : 377-384(1966). Bouquet, J.: "Cannabis," United NationsBulletin on Narcotics, 2 (4) : 14-30 (1950) ; 3 (1) : 22-45(1951). Bouquet, J.: "Marihuana Intoxication (letter),"Journal of the American Medical Association, 124: 1010-1011(1944). Bright, T. D., Kiplinger, G. F., Brown, D. Phillips, J. andForney, R. B.: "Effects of Beta Adrenergic Blockade onInduced Tachycardia," Committee on the Problem of DrugDependence, II: 1737-1744 (1971). Brill, N. 0. Crumpton, E., Frank, 1. M., Hochman, J. S.,Lomax, P., McGlothlin, W. H. and West, L. J.: "The MarihuanaProblem," Annals of Internal Medicine, 73 (3) : 449-465(1970). Bromberg, W.: "Marihuana, A Psychiatric Study,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 113: 4-12 (1939). Bromberg, W.: "Marihuana Intoxication, A Clinical Studyof Cannabis Sativa Intoxication," American Journal ofPsychiatry, XCI (2) : 303-330 (1934). Burstein S. and Rosenfeld, J.: "The Isolation andCharacterization of a Major Metabolite of Delta 9-THC," ActaPharmaceutica, Suecica, 8: 699-700 (1971). Burstein, S. H., Alenezes, F., Williamson, E. and Mechoulam,R.: "Metabolism of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. An ActiveMarihuana Constituent," Nature, 225: 87-88 (1970). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. P. and Merriam, P.E.: "Auditory and Visual Threshold Effects of Marihuana inMan," Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29: 755759 (1969). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. F. and Merriam, P.E.: "Auditory and Visual Threshold Effects of Marihuana inMan," Addendum, Perceptual and Motor Skills, 29: 922 (1969). Caldwell, D. F., Myers, S. A., Domino, E. F. and Merriam, P.E.: Psychotomimetic Drugs, New York: Raven Press(1970),pp.299-321. Campbell, A. M. G., Evans, Al., Thomson, J. L. G. andWilliams, M. J.: "Cerebral Atrophy in Young CannabisSmokers," Lancet, II: 1219-1226 (1971). Carakushansky, G., Neu, R. F. and Gardner, L. I.:"Lysergide and Cannabis As Possible Teratogens in Man,"Lancet, 11: 150-151 (1969). Carlini, E., Hanaoni, A., Bieniek, D. and Korte, F.:"Effects of (-)Delta 9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol and aSynthetic Derivative on Image Performance of Rats,"Pharmacology, 4 (6) : 359-368 (1970). Carlini, E. A.: "Tolerance to Chronic Administration ofCannabis Sativa (Marihuana) in Rats," Pharmacology 1:135-142 (1968). Charen, S. and Perelman, L.: "Personality Studies ofMarihuana Addicts," American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:674-682 (1946). Chopra, G. S.: "Alan and Marihuana." InternationalJournal of the Addictions, 4 (2) : 215-247 (1969). Chopra, G. S.: "Marihuana and Adverse PsychoticReactions," U.N. Bulletin on Narcotics, 23 (3) :15-21(1971). Chopra, 1. C. and Chopra, R. N.: "The Use of theCannabis Drugs in India," United Nations Bulletin onNarcotics, 9 (1) : 4-29 (1957). Chopra, R. N.: "Drug Addiction in India and ItsTreatment," Indian Medical Gazette, 70 (3) : 121 (1935).Chopra, R. N.: "Use of Hemp Drugs in India," IndianMedical Gazette, 75 (6) : 356-367 (1940). Chopra, R. N. andChopra, G. S.: "The Present Position of Hemp-Drug Addictionin India," Indian Medical Besearch Memoirs, (31) : 1-119(1939). Chopra, R. N., Chopra, G. S. and Chopra, 1. C.: "CannabisSativa. in Relation to Mental Diseases and Crime in India,"Indian Journal of Medical Research, 30 (1) 155-171 (1942). Christensen, H. D., Freudenthal, R. I., Gidley, J. T.,Rosenfeld, R., Boegli, G., Testino, L., Brine, D. R., Pitt, C. G.and Wall, .M. E.: "Activity of A' and Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Related Compounds in the Mouse,"Science, 172 (3979) : 165-l67 (1971.). Christozov, C. : "Morrocan Aspects of CannabisIntoxication in the Light of Studies on Chronic MentalPatients," Maroc Medical, 44: 630-642, 866-889 (1965).Clark, L. D., Hughes, R. and Nakashima, E. N.: "BehavioralEffects of Marihuana: Experimental Studies," Archives ofGeneral Psychiatry, 23 (3) : 193-198 (1970). Clark, L. D. andNakashima, E. N.: "Experimental Studies of Marihuana,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 125: 379-384 (1968). Claussen, U. and Korte, P.: "Haschisch XV," LiebigsAnnals of Chemistry, 713: 162-165 (1968). Colbach, E. Al. and Crowe, R. R.: "Marihuana AssociatedPsychosis in Vietnam," Military Medicine, 135 (7) : 571573(1970). Cole, J. Al., Pieper, W. A. and Rumbaugh, D. M.: "Effectsof Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Spaced Responding in GreatApes," Communications in Behavioral Biology, 6: 1-9 (1971). Curtis, H. C. and Wolfe, J. R.: "Psychosis Following theUse of Marihuana with Report of Cases," Journal of theKansas Medical Society, 40: 515-517, 526-528 (1939). Dally, P.: "Undesirable Effects of Marijuana,"British Medical Journal, 367 (1967). Deakin, S.: "Death from Taking Indian Hemp," IndianMedical Gazette, 71 (1880). Defer, B. and Diehl, M. L.: "Les Psychoses CannabiquesAigues: A Propose de 560 Observations," Annales MedicoPsychologiques, 126 (2) : 260-266 (1968). Deliyannakis, E. C., Paragopoulos, C. and Huott, A. D.: "The Influence of Hashish on the Human EEG,"Clinical EEG, 1: 108-117 (1970). Deneau, G. A. and Kaymakcalan, S.: "Physiological andPsychological Dependence to Synthetic Delta9-Tetrahydroeannabinol (THC) in Rhesus Monkeys," ThePharmacologist, 13 (2) :246 (1971). Dhunjibhoy, J. E.: "A Brief Resume of the Types ofInsanity Commonly Met With in India With a Full Description of'Indian Hemp Insanity' Peculiar to the Country," Journal ofMental Science, 76: 254-264 (1930). Dhunjibhoy, J. E.: "The Role of 'Indian Hemp' InCausation of Insanity in India," Far Eastern Association ofTropical Medicine, Transactions of 7th Session, I : 400407(1928). Dingell, J. W., Wilcox, H. G. and Klausner, H. A.:"Biochemical Interactions of Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabiol," The Pharmacologist, 13: 296 (1971). Domino, E. F.: "Human Pharmacology of MarijuanaSmoking," Presented 71st Annual Meeting of American Societyfor Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics (1970). Domino, E. F.: "Neuropsychopharmacologic Studies ofmarihuana : Some Synthetic and Natural THC Derivatives in Animalsin Man," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:166-191 (1971). Domino, E. F., Hardman, H. F. and Seevers, Al. H.:"Central Nervous Systems Actions of Some SyntheticTetrahydrocannabinol Derivatives," Pharmacological Review(in press 1972). Doorenbos, N. J., Fetterman, 11. S., Quinby, M. W. and Turner,C. E.: "Cultivation, Extraction and Analysis of Cannabissativa L.," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:3-14 (1971). Dornbush, R. L., Fink, M. and Freedman, A. M.:"Marijuana, Memory and Perception," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 128 (3) : 194-197 (1971). Dorrance, J., Janiger, 0. and Teplitz, L.: ".In VivoEffects of Illicit Hallucinogens on Human LymphocyteChromosomes," Journal of the American Medical Association,212 (9) : 1488-1491 (1970). Dott, A. B.: "Effect of Marihuana on Risk Acceptance inan Automotive Simulator," Prepared by the U.S. Public HealthService, Injury Control Research Laboratory, Providence, RhodeIsland: Contract No. ICRL-RR-71-3 (June 1971). Elsmore, T. P.: "Some Behavioral Effects ofDelta-9Tetrahydrocannabinol," Current Trends in Army MedicalSciences Psychology, 12-19 (1970). Ewens, G. P. W.: "Insanity Following the Use of IndianHemp," Indian Medical Gazette, 39: 401-413 (1904). Fahrenholtz, K. E., Lurie, M. and Kierstead, R. W.: "TheTotal Synthesis of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Four of ItsIsomers," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 89:5934-5941 (1967). Fahrenholtz, K. E., Lurie, M. and Kierstead, R. W.:"Total Synthesis of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and ofdl-Y.Tetrahydrocannabinol, Racemates of Active Constituents ofMarihuana," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 88:2079-2080 (1966). Favazza, A. and Domino, E. F.: "Recurrent LSD Experience(Flashbacks) Triggered by Marihuana," University of MichiganMedical Center Journal, 35: 214-216 (1969). Fere, C.: "Note sur l'Influence du Haschisch sur leTravail," Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de laSociete de Biologic, (Ileme serie), 3: 696-700 (1901). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, 1). AL and Lynch, W. C.:"Behavioral Effects of Small Doses of Marihuana Extract inChimpanzees," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. HSM 42-21-75, Department of Psychology,University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (November 1971). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, D. M. and Lynch, W. C.:"Comparison of Behavioral Effects of Synthetic Delta9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Marihuana Extract inChimpanzees," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. HSM 42-21-75, Department of Psychology,University of New Mexico, Albuquerque (November 1971). Ferraro, D. P., Grilly, D. M. and Lynch, W. C.: "Study ofLong-Term Effects of Marihuana in Chimpanzees," Prepared forthe National Institute of Mental Health, Contract No. HSM42-21-75, Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico,Albuquerque (November 1971). Fetterman, P. S., Keith, E. S., Waller, C. W., Guerrero, O.,Doorenhos, N. J. and Quimby, M. W.: "MississippiGrownCannabis Sativa 1: Preliminary Observation on Chemical Definition'of Phenotype and Variation in Tetrahydrocannabinol ContentVersus Age, Sex, and Plant Part," Journal of PharmaceuticalSciences, 60 (8) :1240-1249 (1971). Fink, M.: "The Biology of Cannabis; The State of OurKnowledge, 1970," Presented at American Public HealthSymposium on Cannabis, San Francisco (May 1970). Fink, M.: "Summary Report: Marihuana Study Program278M7C," Prepared for the National Institute of MentalHealth, (November 1971). Fink, M., Professor of Psychiatry and Dornbush, R. L.,Assistant Professor of Psychiatry, Personal Communication, NewYork Medical College, December 30, 1971. Fink, M., Stefanis, C. and Staffs: "Interim Report: Studyof Marihuana Users in Greece," Prepared for the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Contract No. HSM 42-70-98, Departmentof Psychiatry, New York Medical College (October 1971). Finley, T. N., Personal Communication, Director, PulmonaryLaboratory, 'Mount Zion Hospital and Medical Center, SanFrancisco, California, December 13, 1971. Foltz, R. L., Fentinan, A. F., Leighty, E. G., Walter, J. L.,Drewes, 11. R., Schwartz, W. E.. Page, T. P. and Truitt, E. B.:"Metabolite of Trans-Delta 8-Tetrahydrocannabinol:Identification and Synthesis," Science, 168: 844-845 (1970). Foltz, R. L., Kinzer, G. W., Mitchell, R. I., and Truitt, E.B.: "The Fate of Cannabinoid Components of Marihuana DuringSmoking," to be published (1972). Forney, It. B.: "Toxicology and Pharmacology ofMarihuana," Presented at New York Academy of Science, (May1971). Forrest, D. V.: "Marihuana to Heroin . . . A MissingLink?" American Journal of Psychiatry, 127 (5) : 164165(1970). Francois, G. R., Barrat E., Russel, G.. Barker, T. and White,R. B.: "The Marihuana Dilemma-A Clinical and ExperimentalApproach," Presented at Annual Meeting of the AmericanPsychiatric Association, (May 1970). Frank, 1. M., Hopler, R. S., Stier, S. and Rickles, W. H.:"Marihuana, Tobacco and Functions Affecting Driving,"Presented at Annual Meeting of the American PsychiatricAssociation, (May 1971). Frank, 1. R., Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Hepler, R.S., Assistant, Professor of Opthmalogy, Personal Communication ofPreliminary Data, University of California, School of Medicine,Los Angeles, California, September 1971. Frankenhein, J. M., McMillan, D. E. and Harris, L. S.:"Effects of I-Delta 9 and I-Delta 8Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Scheduled Controlled Behavior ofPigeon," Journal of Pharmacology Experimental Therapeutics,178: 241-252 (1971). Fraser, J. D.: "Withdrawal Symptoms in Cannabis IndicaAddicts," Lancet, II: 747-748 (1949). Freedman, A. M. and Fink, M.: "Cannabis Psychosis,"Presented at Symposium on Biochemical and Pharmacological Aspectsof Dependence and Reports on Marihuana Research, Amsterdam(October 1971). Freedman, H. L. and Rockmore, M. J.: "Marihuana, a Factorin Personality Evaluation and Army Maladjustment," Journalof Clinical Psychopathology, 7: 765-782 (Part 1) ; 8: 221-236(Part H) (1946). Galanter, M., Wyatt, It. J., Weinberger, L., Weingartner, H.,Vaughan, T. B. and Roth, W. T.:"Delta-9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol Administered by Smoking:Studies of Blood Levels, Pulse and Subjective Effects,"Science, (in press 1972). Gaoni, Y. and Mechoulani, R.: "Isolation, Structure, andPartial Synthesis of an Active Constituent of Hashish,"Journal of the American Chemical Society, 86: 16461647 (1964). Gary, N. E. and Keylon, V.: "Intravenous Administration-of Marihuana," Journal of the American Medical Association,211 (3) : 501 (1970). Gaskill, 11. S.: "Marihuana, An Intoxicant,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 102: 202-204 (1945). Geher, W. F.: "Effects of Marihuana Extract on PetalHamsters and Rabbits," Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology,14: 276-282 (1969). Geber, W. F. and Schramm, L.: "Teratogenicity ofMarihuana Extract as Influenced by Plant Origin and SeasonalVariation," Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamie etde Therapie, 177 (1) : 224-239 (1969). Gelehrter, 1. D.: "Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) andEstrophy of the Bladder," Journal of Pediatrics, 77:1065-1066 (1970). George, H. R.: "Two Psychotic Episodes Associated WithCannabis," British Journal of Addiction, 65: 119-121 (1970). Gill, E. IV.: "Propyl Homologue of Tetrahydrocannabinol: Its Isolation from Cannabis, Properties and Synthesis,"Journal of the Chemical Society Organic, (3) : 579-582 (1971). Gill, E. W., Paton, W. D. M. and Pertwee, R. G.:"Preliminary Experiments on the Chemistry and Pharmacologyof Cannabis," Nature, 228: 134-136 (1970). Gilmour, D. G., Bloom, A. D., Leli, K. P., Robbins, E. S. andMaximilian, C.: "Chromosomal Aberrations in Users ofPsychoactive Drugs," Archives of General Psychiatry, 24:268-272 (1971). Goode, E.: "Drug Escalation: Marihuana Use as Related tothe Use of Dangerous Drugs," (October 1971). Goode, E.: The Marihuana Smokers, New York: Basics Book, Inc.(1970). Grinspoon, L.: "Marihuana," Scientific American,221: 1725 (1969). Grossman, W.: "Adverse Reactions Associated With CannabisProducts in India," Annals of Internal Medicine, 70 (3) :529-533 (1969). Haines, L. and Green, W.: "Marihuana Use Patterns,"British Journal of Addiction 65 (4) : 347-362 (1970). Halikas, J.A., Goodman, D. W. and Guze, S. B.: "Marihuana Effects: ASurvey of Regular Users," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 217: 692-694 (1971). Halikas, J. A., Goodman, D. W. and Guze, S. B.:"Marihuana Use and Psychiatric Illness," Department ofPsychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,Missouri, (submitted for publication 1972). Hamaker, S. T. A.: "Case of Overdose of CannabisIndica," Therapeutic Gazette, 7: 808 (1891). Harris, R. T., Personal Communication, Psychological Research,Texas Research Institute of Mental Sciences, Houston, August,1971. Harris, R. T., Watters, W. H. and Henderson, G.:"Evaluation of Abuse Potential A' THC in RhesusMonkeys," (unpublished) 1972). Harris, R. T., Watters, W. H. and McLendon, D.:"Behavioral Effects in Rhesus Monkeys of RepeatedIntravenous Doses of Marihuana Extract Distillate,"(unpublished 1972). Hecht, F., Beals, R. K., Lees, M. H., Jolly, H. and Roberts,P.: "Lysergic-Acid-Diethylamide and Cannabis as PossibleTeratogens in Man," Lancet, II: 1087 (1968) Heiman, E. M.: "Marihuana Precipitated Psychosis inPatient Evacuated to CONUS," USARU Medical Bulletin, 40 (9):75-77 (1968). Henderson, A. H. and Pugsley, D. J.: "Collapse AfterIntravenous Injection of Hashish," British Medical Journal,3: 229-230 (1968). Hepler, R. S., Frank, I. A. and Ungerleider, J. T.: "TheEffects of Marijuana Smoking on Pupillary Size,"(unpublished 1971). Heyndrickx, A., Scheiris, C. and Schepens, P.:"Toxicological Study of a Fatal Intoxication in Man Due toCannabis Smoking," Journal de Pharmacie de Belgigue, 24:371-376 (1969). Hively, R. L., Mosher, W. A. and Hoffmann, F. W.:"Isolation of Trans-Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol FromMarijuana," Journal of the American Chemical Society, 88:1832-1833 (1966). Ho, B. T., Fritellie, G. E., Englert, L. F., McIsaac, W. M.and Idanpaan-Heikkila, J. E.: "Marihuana: Importance of theRoute of Administration," Journal of Pharmacy andPharmacology, 23: 309--310 (1971). Hochman, J. S. and Brill, N.: "Chronic Marihuana Usageand Liver Function," Lancet, 11 (7728) : 818 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Human Pharmacological Studies onCannabis," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 673 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Hunger and Appetite After Single Dosesof Marihuana, Ethanol and Dextroamphetainine," ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, 12 (1) : 44-49 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Marilhuana in Man: Three YearsLater," Science, 172: 21-29 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Status Report on Clinical Pharmacologyof Marihuana," Annals of the New York Academy of Science,191: 132-141 (1971). Hollister, L. E.: "Steroids and Moods: Correlations inSchizophrenics and Subjects Treated with Lysergic AcidDiethylamide (LSD), Mescaline, Tetrahydrocannabinol, andSynhexyl," Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 9: 24-29(1969). Hollister, L. E. and Gillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana,Ethanol and Dextroamphetamine: Mood and Mental FunctionAlterations," Archives of General Psychiatry, 23 (3) 199-203(1970). Hollister, L. E.. Moore, F., Kanter, S. and Noble E.: "Delta-l-Tetrahydrocannabinol, Synhexyl and MarihuanaExtract Administered Orally in Man: Catecholamine Excretion,Plasma Cortisone Levels and Platelet Serotonin Content,"Psychopharmacologia (Berlin), 17 (4): 354-360 (1970). Hollister, L. E., Richards, R. K. and Gillespie, H. K.:"Comparison of Tetrahydrocannabinol and Synhexyl inMan," Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9 (6) 783-791(1968). Hollister, L. E., Sherwood, S. L. and Cavasino, A.:"Marihuana and the Human Electroencephalogram,"Pharmacological Research Communications, (in press 1971). Hughes, J. E., Steahly, L. 11. and Bier, M. M.:"Marihuana and tile Diabetic Coma,"Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 214 (6) : 1113-1114 (1970). IdinpiRin-Heikkila, J., Fritchie, G. E., Englert, L. F., Ho,B. T., and McIsaac, IV. 'M.: "Placental Transfer ofTritiated (l)-NO-Tetrahydrocannabinol," New England Journalof Medicine, 281: 330 (lW9). Iddanpaan-Heikkila, J. E., McIsaac, W. M. and Ho, B. T.: ",A' THC Distribution in Monkeys, Mice andHamsters," Presented at the International Symposium on theChemistry and Biological Activity of Cannabis, Stockholm (October1971). Indian Hemp Drug Commission Report 1893-1894, Silver Spring:Thomas Jefferson Publishing Company (RAprinted 1969), 1). 3281. Isbell, H., Gorodetzsky, C. W., Jasinski, D. R., Claussen, U.,Von Spulek, F. and Korte, F.: "Effects of (-)-Delta9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Psychopharmacologia (Berlin), 11 184-188 (1967). Isbell, H. and Jasinski, D. R.: "A Comparison of LSD-25With (-)-Delta-9-Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and AttemptedCross Tolerance Between LSD and THC," Psychopharmacologia,14: 115-123 (1969). Isbell, H., Jasiuski, D. R., Gorodetsky, C. W., Korte, P.,Claussen, U., Haage, M., Sieper, H. and Von Spulak, F.:"Studies on Tetrahydrocannabinol," Bulletin, Problemsof Drug Dependence, National Academy of Science, Division ofMedical Science, 4832-4846 (1967). Joachlinoglu, G.: Ciba. Foundation Study Group 21, 10, (1965). Johnson, B. D.: "',social Determinants of the Use of'Dangerous Drugs' by College Students," Columbia University,Doctorial Thesis (.June, 1971). Johnson, S. and Domino, E. F.: "Some CardiovascularEffects of Marihuana Smoking oil Normal Volunteers,"Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 12 (5) : 762768 (1971). Jones, R. and Stone, G.: "Psychological Studies ofMarihuana and Alcohol in Man," Psychopharmacologia (Berlin),18 (1) : 108-117 (1970). Jones, R. T.: "The Marihuana Induced 'High': Influence ofExpectation, Setting and Previous Drug Experience,"Presented at Annual Meeting of the Federations of AmericanSocieties for Experimental Biology, Chicago (April 1971). Jones, R. T.: "Tetraliydrocannabinol and the MarihuanaInduced Social 'High' or The Effects of the Mind onMarihuana," Annals of the New York Academy of Scienee, 191:155-165 (1971). Kalant, N., LeBlanc, A. E. and Gibbins, R. J.: "ToleranceTo, and Dependence On Some Non-Opiate Psychoactive Drugs,Pharmacological Reviews, 23 (3): 135-491 (1971). Kaplan, H. S.: "Psychosis Associated withMarihuana," New York State Journal of Medicine, 71 (4) : 433-435 (1971). Katz, M. Al., Waskow, 1. E., Almon, J.: "Characterizingthe Psyehological State Produced by LSD," Journal ofAbnormal Psychology, 73: 1-14 (1968). Keeler, 11. H.: "Adverse Reaction to Marihuana,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 124: 674-677 (1967). Keeler, M. H.: "Alarihuana Induced Hallucinations," Diseases of the Nervous System, 29: 314-315 (1968). Keeler, M.H. and Reifler, C. B.: "Grand Alai Convulsions Subsequent toMarihuana Use: Case Report," Di8eam of the Nervous System,28: 474-475 (1967). Keeler, M. H., Reifler, C. B. and Liptzin, M. B.:"Spontaneous Recurrence of Marihuana Effect," AmericanJournal of Psychiatry, 125: 384-386 (1968). Kennedy, J. S. and Waddell, W. J.: "Whole BodyAutoradiography of the Pregnant Mouse After Administration ofC14-Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol. (Delta 9-THC)," FederationProceedings, 30: 279 (1971). Keup, W.: "Psychotic Symptoms Due to CannabisAbuse," Diseases of the Nervous System, 31 (2) : 119-126(1970). Kew, Al. C., Bersohn, L. and Siew, S.: "PossibleHepatotoxicity of Cannabis," Lancet, 1: 578-579 (1969). King, A. B. and Cowen, D. L.: "Effect of IntravenousInjection of Marihuana," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 210 (4) : 724-725 (1969). King, A. B., Pechet, G. S. and Pechet, L.: "IntravenousInjection of Crude Marihuana," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 214: 30 (1970). Kiplinger, G. F., Manno, J. E., Rodda, B. E. and Forney, R.B.: "Dose-Response Analysis of the Effects ofTetrahydrocannabinol in Alan," Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 12 (4) : 650-657 (1971). Klausner, H. A. and Dingell, J. V.: "The Metabolism andExcretion of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in the Rat," LifeScience, 10: 49-59 (1971). Klein, F. K., Rapoport, H. and Elliott, H. W.: "CannabisAlkaloids," Nature, 232: 258-259 (1971). Kolansky, H. and Moore, W. T.: "Effects of Marihuana onAdolescents and Young Adults," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 216 (3) : 486-492 (1971). Kornhaber, A.: "Marihuana in an Adolescent PsychiatricOut Patient Population," Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, 215 (12) : 1988 (1971). Kubena, R. K., Perlach, J. L. and Barry, H.:"Corticosterone Elevation Mediated Centrally byDelta-1-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats," European Journal ofPharmacology, 14: 89-92 (1971). Lambo. T. A.: "Medical and Social Problems of DrugAddiction in West Africa, With Special Emphasis on PsychiatricAspects," United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics, 17 (1) :3-13 (1965). Lemberger, L.: "The Metabolism of theTetrahydrocannabinols," Advances in Pharmacology andChemotherapy, 10: (in press 1972). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, I. J.: "ClinicalStudies on the Disposition and Metabolism of A' THC and TheirCorrelation With Its Pharmacological Effects." ActaPharmaceutical Suecica, 8: 692 (1971). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, J.: "Metabolism andDisposition of A' Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Pharmacological Review, 23: 371-380 (1971). Lemberger, L., Alexrod, J. and Kopin J.: "The Metabolismand Disposition of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,"Federation Proceedings, 30: (1971). Lemberger, L., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, J.: "Metabolism andDisposition of Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Naive Subjects andChronic Marihuana Users," Annals of New York Academy ofScience, 191: 142-154 (1971). Lemberger, L., Silberstein, S. D., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, 1.J.: "Marihuana studies on the Disposition and Metabolism ofDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," Science, 170 (3964) :1320-1322 (1970). Lemberger, L., Tamarkin, N. R., Axelrod, J. and Kopin, L:"Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol: Metabolism and Disposition inLong Term Marihuana Smokers," Science, 173 (3991) : 72-74(1971). Lemberger, L., Weiss, J. L., Watanake, A. Al., Galanter, 1.M., Wyatt, R. J. and Cardon, P. V.:"Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol's Temporal Correlation of thePsychological Effects and Blood Levels After Various Routes ofAdministration," New England Journal of Medicine (March1972). Lerner, P.: "The Precise Determinations ofTetrahydrocannabinol Isomers in Marihuana and Hashish," U.N.Bulletin on Narcotics, XXI(3) : 39-42 (1969). Lewin, L.: Phantastica, Narcotic and Stimulating Drugs, NewYork: E. P. Dutton and Co., Inc. (1964), pp. 107122. Lindemann, E.: "The Neurophysiological Effects ofIntoxicating Drugs," American Journal of Psychiatry, 90:1007-1037 (1933-1934). Lipp, M. R.: "Marihuana Use By Medical Students,"American Journal of Psychiatry, 128: 208-212 (1971). Lipparini,F., Decarolis, A. and Longo, U. A.: "NeuropharmacologicalInvestigation of Some Tetrahyrocannabinol Derivatives,"Physiology and Behavior, 4 (4) 527-532 (1969). Liskow, B., Liss, J. L. and Parker, C. W.: "Allergy toMarihuana," Annals of Internal Medicine, 75: 571-573 (1971). Loewe, S.: "Studies on the Pharmacology and AcuteToxicity of Compounds With Marihuana Activity," Journal ofPharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 88: 154-161 (1946). Lomax, P.: "Acute Tolerance to the Hypothermic Effect ofMarihuana in the Rat," Research Communications, ClinicalPathology and Pharmacology, 2: 159-167 (1971). Ludlow, F.: The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages from the Lifeof a Pythagorean, New York: Harper and Brothers (1857). Lundberg, G. D., Adelson, J. and Prosnutz, E. H.:"Marihuana Induced Hospitalization," Journal ofAmerican Medical Association, 215 (1) : 121 (1971). Magus, R. D. and Harris, L. S.: "Carcinogenic Potentialof Marihuana Smoke Condensate," Federation Proceedings, 30(2) : 277 (1971). Mann, P. E. G., Cohen, A. B., Finley, T. N. and Ladman, A. J.:"Alveolar Macrophages. Structural and Functional DifferencesBetween Non-Smokers and Smokers of Marihuana and Tobacco,"Laboratory Investigation, 25 (2): 111-120 (1971). Mann, P. E. G., Finley, T. N. and Ladman, A. J.:"Marihuana Smoking: A Study of Its Effects on AlveolarLining Material and Pulmonary Macrophages Recovered byBronchopulmonary Lavage," Journal of ClinicalInvestigations, 49 (6) : 60a-61a (1970). Manno, B. R., Manno, J. E., Kilsheimer, G. S. and Forney, R.B.: "Response of the Isolated Perfused Rat Heart toDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)," Toxicology and AppliedPharmacology, 10: 98 (1970). Manno, J. E.: "Clinical Investigations With Marihuana andAlcohol," Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, IndianaUniversity, Doctoral Thesis (1970). Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G., Bennett, 1. F., Haine, S. E. and Forney, It. B. : "Comparative Effects of SmokingMarihuana On Motor and Mental Performance lit Humans,"Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 11 (6) : 808--815 (1970). Manno, J. E., Kiplinger, G., Scholz, N. E., Forney, R. B., andHaine, S. E, : "The Influence of Alcohol and Marihuana onMotor and Mental Performance," Clinical Pharmacology andTherapeutics, 12: 202-211 (1970). Marcovitz, E. and Myers, H. J.: "The Marihuana Addict inthe Army," War Medicine, 6: 382-391 (1944). Marten, G. W.: "Case Report: Adverse Reaction to the Useof Marihuana," Journal of the Tennessee Medical Association,62 (7) : 627-630 (1969). Martin, P. A.: "Cannabis and Chromosomes," Lancet,I: 370 (1969). Masur, J. and Khazan, N.: "Induction by Cannabis Sativa(Marihuana) of Rhythmic Spike Discharges Overriding REM SleepCortigram in Rats," Life Sciences, 9 (1) 1275-1280 (1970). Mayer-Gross, W., et al.: Clinical Psychiatry, London: Cassell(1960). Mayor's Committee on -Marihuana: The Marihuana Problem in theCity of New York: Sociological, Medical, Psychological andPharmacological Studies, Lancaster: Cattell Press (1944). McGlothlin, W. H.: "Marihuana: An Analysis of Use,Distribution and Control," Prepared for the Department ofJustice, Washington, D.C. (June 1971). McGlothlin, W. H.: "Use and Effects of Cannabis,"Prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,Washington, D.C. Department of Psychology, University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles (January 1972). McGlothlin, W. H., and Arnold, D. O.: "LSD Revisited: ATen-Year Follow-Up of Medical LSD Use," Archives of GeneralPsychiatry, 24: 35-49 (1971). McGlothlin, W. H., Arnold, D. O., and Rowan, P. K.:"Marihuana Use Among Adults," Psychiatry, 33: 433443(1970). McGlothlin, W. H. and West, L. J.: "The MarihuanaProblem: An Overview," American Journal of Psychiatry, 125:126-134 (1968). McIsaac, W., Personal Communication, Director, Texas ResearchInstitute, Houston, Texas, October 28, 1971. McIsaac, W., Harris, R. T. and Ho, B. T.: "BehavioralCorrelates of Brain Distribution of Tetrahydrocannabinol,"Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 703 (1971). McMillan, D. E., Dewey, W. L. and Harris, L. S.:"Characteristics of Tetrahydrocannabinol Tolerance,"Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191: 83-99 (1971). McMillan, D. E., Harris, L. S., Frankenbeim, J. M., andKennedy, J. S.: "(I)-Delta 9 Trans-TetrahydrocannabinoI inPigeons: Tolerance to the Behavioral Effects," Science, 169:501-503 (1970). Mechoulam, R.: "Marihuana Chemistry," Science, 168(3936): 1159-1166 (1970). Mechoulam, R., Personal Communication, Professor, School ofPharmacy, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, October 28, 1971. Mechoulam, R.: "Recent Advances in CannabinoidChemistry," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 675-676 (1971).Mechoulam, R. and Gaoni, Y.: "The Absolute Configuration ofDelt 1-Tetrahydrocannabinol, The Major Active Constituent ofHashish," Tetrahedron Letters, 12: 1109-1111 (1967). Mechoulam, R., Shani, A., Edery, H. and Grunfeld, Y.:"Chemical Basis of Hashish Activity," Science 169:611-612 (1970). Medical Staff, Pretoria Mental Hospital: "Mental SymptomsAssociated With the Smoking of Dagga," South African MedicalJournal, 12: 85 (1938). Melges F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and TemporalDisintegration," Science, 168 (3935) :1118-1120 (1970). Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and the Temporal Span ofAwareness," Archives of General Psychiatry, 24: 464-567(1971). Melges, F. T., Tinklenberg, J. R., Hollister, L. E. andGillespie, H. K.: "Temporal Disintegration andDepersonalization During Marihuana Intoxication," Archivesof General Psychiatry, 23: 204--210 (1970). Mendelson, J. H., Meyer, R. E., Rossi, A. M., Bernstein, J.,Patch, V. D., Babor, T., O'Brien, J., Sagotsky, G., Reid, H.,Salzman, C., Koehansky, G. E., Porrino, L., Becker, D., DeRubis,E., Cambria, T. J., Gallimore, P. B., Klinkert, C. E., Pope, S.,Savitsky, J. B., Thompson, J.: "Behavioral and BiologicalConcomitants of Chronic Marihuana Smoking by Heavy and CasualUsers," Prepared for the National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse, Department of Psychiatry, Boston City Hospital(January 1972). Merkus, F. W. H. M.: "Cannabivarin andTetrahydrocannabivarin, Two New Constituents of Hashish,"Nature, 232: 579 (1971). Meyer, R. E., Pillard, R. C., Mirin, S. M., Shapiro, L.S.:"Administration of Marihuana to Heavy and CasualUsers," American Journal of Psychiatry, 128 (3) : 198204(1971). Meyers, S. A. and Caldwell, D. F.: "Effects of Marihuanaon Auditory and Visual Sensation," Research Bulletin, 20-22(1969). Meyers, S. A. and Caldwell, D. F.: "Effects of Marihuanaon Auditory and Visual Sensation, A Preliminary Report," TheNew Physician, 18: 212-215 (1969). Mikes, P. and Waser, P. G.: "Marihuana Components:Effects of Smoking of Delta 9-Tetrahydrocannabinol andCannabinol," Science, 172: 1158-1159 (1971). Milman, D. H.: "Adverse Effects of Cannabis," NewYork State Journal of Medicine, 71 (13) : 1675 (1971). Miras, C. J.: "Some Aspects of Cannabis Action" In:Hashish: Its Chemistry and Pharmacology, Ciba Foundation GroupNo. 21, London: J. & A. Churchill (1965). Miras, C. J.: Drugs and Youth, Springfield: C. C. Thomas(1969), pp. 191-198. Miras, C. J.: Hashish, Its Chemistry and Pharmacology, Boston:Little, Brown & Co. (1965), pp. 37-52. Miras, C. J.: "Marihuana and Hashish," UCLA lecture,(September 11, 1967). Miras, C. J. and Coutselinis, A.: "The Distribution ofTetrahydrocannabinol in Humans," Report No. 24, UnitedNations Secretariat publication ST/SOA/SER. S/24 (November 1970). Miras, C. J. and Coutselinis, A.: "The Presence ofCannabinoids in the Urine of Hashish Smokers," Report No.25, United Nations Secretariat publication ST/SOA/ SER. S/25(November 1970). Mirin, S. M., Shapiro, L. M., Meyer, R. E., Pillar, R. C.,Fisher, S.: "Casual Versus Heavy Use of Marihuana, ARedefinition of the Marihuana Problem," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 127: 11.134-1140 (1971). Moreau, J.: "Du Hachisch eit de I'Alientation,Mental," Etudes Psychologiques, 34: Libraire de Fortin,Masson, Paris (1845). Nahas, G. C.: "Lethal Cannabis Intoxication," NewEngland Journal of Medicine, 284: 792 (1971). Nakazawa, K. and Costa, E: "Induction by Mothyloholan.threne of Delta 9 Tetrahydrocannabinol (A-THC) Metabolism in RatLung,11 Pharmacologist, 13: 297 (1971). Neu, R. L., Powers, H. O., King, S. and Gardner, L. I.:"Cannabis and Chromosomes," Lancet, I-675 (1969). New York Police Department, Annual Reports 1969 and 1970, Cityof New York (1969, 1970). Nilsson, L. M., Agurell, S., Leander, K., Nilsson, J. L. G.and Widman, M.: "Cannabidiol: Structure of Three MetabolitesFormed in Rat Liver," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 701(1971). Nisbet, C. T. and Vakil, F.: "Some Social and EconomicCharacteristics of UCLA Marihuana Users," Social ScienceQuarterly (in press 1971). Ohlsson, A., Abou-Chaar, C. I., Agurell, S., Nilsson, 1. M.,Olofsson, K. and Sandberg, F.: "Cannabinoid Constituents ofMale and Female Cannabis Sativa," Bulletin on Narcotics, 23(1) : 29-32 (1971). Osinger, 0. and Fulginiti, S.: "Effects of CannabisSativa On Learning in Rats," Pharmacology, 3: 337-344(1970). Pace, H. B., Davis, '.%I. W., Borgen, L. A.:"Teratogenesis and Mariliuana," Annals of the New YorkAcademy of Science, 191: 123-131 (1971). Paton, W. D. M. and Pertwee, R. G.: "The GeneralPharmacology of Cannabis," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8:691 (1971). Peebles, A. S. M. and Mann, H. W.: "Ganja as a Cause ofInsanity and Crime in Bengal," Indian Medical Gazette, 49:395-396 (1914). Perez-Reyes, M. and Lipton, M. A.: "The Rate ofAbsorption and Excretion of Orally Administered Delta 9Tetrahydrocannabinol to Man," Prepared for the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Contract #HSM 4269-62, Department ofPsychiatry, University of North Carolina (July 1971). Perez-Reyes, M., Lipton, M. A. and Wall, M. E.: "TheMetabolism of Delta-9-Tetrahydroeannabinol in HumanSubjects," Paper presented at the 5th World Congress ofPsychiatry, Mexico City (December 1971). Perna, D.: "Psychotogenic Effect of Marihuana,"Journal of American Medical Association, 209: (7) 1085-1086(1969). Persaud, I. and Ellington, A.: "A Teratogenic Activity ofCannabis Resin," Lancet, 11 (7564) : 406-407 (1968).Persaud, 1. and Ellington, A.: "Cannabis in EarlyPregnancy," Lancet, II: 1306 (1968). Personal Communication To The Food and Drug Administration,Rockville, .Md., of Preliminary Experimental data-names withheldby request of the investigators, unpublished (1970). Persyko, T.: "Marihuana Psychosis," Journal of theAmerican Medical Assocation, 212 (9) : 1527 (1970). Petrzilka, T. and Sikemeier, C.: "Uber Inlialtsstoffe desHashish II," Helvitia Clinica Acta, 50: 1410-1419 (1967). Petrzilka, T. and Sikemeier, C.: "Uber Inlialsstoffe desHashish III," Helvitia Chinica Acta, 50: 2111-2113 (1967). Phillips, R. N., Turk, R. F. and Forney, R. B.: "AcuteToxicity of A' Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats and Mice,"Proceedings of Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine,136(l) :260-263 (1971). Phillips, R., Turk, R., Manno, J., Jain, N. and Forney R.:"Seasonal Variations in Cannabinolic Content of IndianaMarihuana," Journal of Forensic Sciences, 15(2) 191-200(1970). Phillips, R. N., Brown, D. J., Martz, R. C., Hubbard, J. D.and Forney, R. B.: "Subacute Toxicity of WaterSuspended(-)Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Rats, Toxicology and AppliedPharmacology, 19(2) : 414 (1971). Pillard, R. C.: "Marihuana," New England Journal ofMedicine, 283(6) : 294-303 (1970). Pirch, J. H., Colin. R. A., Barnes, P. R. and Barrett, E. S.:"Tolerance to EEG and Behavioral Effects of Marihuana inRats," The Pharmacologist, 13(2) : 246 (1971). Pivik, T., Zareone, V. Hollister, L. E. & Dement, W.:"The Effects of Hallucinogenic Agents on Sleep,"Paychophysiology, 6(2) : 261 (1969). Podolsky, S., Pattavina, C., and Amaral. M.: Effects ofMarihuana on Glucose Tolerance Test (G.T.T.)," Annals of theNew York Academy of Science, 191: 54-6 (1971). Porot, A: "Le Cannabisme," AnnalesMedico-Psychologique8z 1(1) : 1-24 (1942). Powelson, H. D., Personal Communication, Chief Psychiatrist,University of California, Berkeley, "Clinical Notes on theUse of Marihuana," (1970). Prince, R., Greenfield, R. and Marriott: "Ganja: TheBenevolent Alternative? Observations on Use of Cannabis andAlcohol in Jamaica," Mental Health Institute, Montreal,unpublished manuscript 1970). Reales-Orozeo, et al.: "Aspectos Generales de laIntoxicacion Por Marihuana y Sus Manifestaciones Psiquiatricas enBarranquilla," Revista de Medicina Legal de Colombia, 13:142-148 (1953). Renault, P. P., Schuster, C. R., Heinrich, R. and Freedman, D.X.:"Marihuana: Standardized Smoke Administration and DoseEffect Curves on Heart Rate in Humans," Science, 174 (4009): 589-591 (1971). Rickles, W. H., Kales, A., and Hanley, J.: "Effects ofMarihuana on Evoked Heart Rate and Skin ConductanceResponses," Presented at Society for PsychophysiologicalResearch Meeting, New Orleans (November 22, 1970). Rickles, W. H., Kales, A., and Hanley, J.:"Psychophysiology of Marihuana," Presented to LangleyPorter Nueropsychiatrie Institute, San Francisco (May 1970). Robins, L. N. and Murphy, G. E.: "Drug Use in a NormalPopulation of Young Negro Men," American Journal of PublicHealth, 57 (9) :1580-1596 (1967). Rodin, E. and Domino, E. F.: "Effects of Acute MarihuanaSmoking in the Electroencephalograms,"Electroencephalography and Clinical Ncurophysiology, 29: 321(1970). Rodin, E., Domino, E. P., and Porzak, J. P.: "TheMarihuana-Induced 'Social High'-Neurological andElectroencephalographic Concomitants," Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 213 (8) : 1300-1302 (1970). Roth, W. T., Galanter, M., Weingartner, H., Vaughan, T. B.,and Wyatt, R. J.: "The Effect of Marihuana and Syntheticdelta-9-THC on Auditory Evoked Response and Background EEG inHumans," Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology, NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland (unpublished1972). Rubin, V. and Comitas, L.: "A Study of the Effects ofChronic Ganja Smoking in Jamaica," Research Institute forthe Study of 'Man, New York, in preparation for tration and DoseEffect Curves on Heart Rate in Huthe National Institute of MentalHealth, Contract No. 11811 42-70-77 (1972). Sagone, L., Laurence, T. and Balcerzak, S. P.: "SmokingACause of 'Spurious' Polyeythemia," Blood: The Journal ofHematology, XXXVIII (6) : 118 (1971). Scher, J. M.: "The Marihuana Habit," Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, 214 (6) : 1120 (1970). Schuster, C.R. and Renault, P. F.: Personal Communication, Department ofPsychiatry, School of Medicine University of Chicago, January1972. Schwartz, C. J.: "Toward a Medical Understanding ofMarihuana," Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal 14:591400 (1969). Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: "Marihuanaand Health," A Report to the Congress (January 1971). Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare: "Marihuanaand Health," A Report to the Congress (February 1972). Shean, G. D. and Fetchtman. P.: "Purpose in Life Scoresof Student Marihuana Users," Journal of Clinical Psychology,27 (1) :112-113 (1971). Sigg, B. W.: "Le Cannabisme Chronique. Fruit (le SonsDevelopment et du Capitalisnie: Etude Socio-Econo que etpsycho-pathologique," Algiers (1963). Siler, J. P., Sheep, W. L., Bates, L. B., Clark, G. F., Cook,G. W. and Smith, W. A.: "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"The Military Surgeon, 73 (5) : 269-280 (1933). Silva, M. T. A., Carlini, E. A., Claussen, U. and Korte, F.:"Lack of Cross-Tolerance in Rate Among (-) Delta9-TransTetrahydrocannabinol (Delta 9-THC), Cannabis Extract,Mescaline and Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD-25),"Psychopharmacologia, 13: 332-340 (1968). Sim, V. M. and Tucker, L. A.: "Summary Report on EA 1476and EA 2233," U.S. Army Chemical Research and DevelopmentLaboratories, Special Publication 1-44 (1963). Simmons, J. L. and Winograd, B.: It's Happening: A Portrait ofthe Youth Scene Today, Santa Barbara: MarcLaird Publications(1966). Smith, D. E.: "Acute and Chronic Toxicity ofMarihuana," Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 2: 37-41 (1968). Smith, D. E. and Mehl, C.: The New Social Drug, EnglewoodCliffs: Prentice-Hall, Inc. (1970), pp. 63-77. Sonnenreich, C., and Goes, J. P.: "Marihuana and MentalDisturbances," Neurobiologia, 25: 69-91 (1962). Soueif, M. I.: "Hashish Consumption in Egypt with SpecialReference to Psychological Aspects," UN Bulletin onNarcotics, 19 (2) : 1-12 (1967). Spencer, J. D.: "Cannabis Induced Psychosis,"British Journal of Addiction, 651: 369-372 (1970). Sterne, J. and Ducastaing, C.: "Les Arterites du CannabisIndica," Archives des Maladies du Coeur et des Vais8eaux,53: 143-147 (1960). Stringaris, M. G.: "Zur Klink der Hashchischpsychosen(Nach Studien in Griechenland)," Archiv fur Psychiatric andNervenkranhheiten, 100 (4) : 522-532 (1933). Suchman, E. A.:"The 'hang-Loose' Ethic and the Spirit of Drug Use,"Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 9: 146-155 (1968). Talbott, J. A. - "Pot Reactions," USARMY MedicalBulletin, 40-41 (1968). Talbot, J. A., and Teague, J. W.: "Marihuana, Psychosis:Acute Toxic Psychosis Associated With the Use of CannabisDerivatives," Journal of the American Medical Association,210 (2) :299--302 (1969). Tart, C. T.: "Marihuana Intoxication, CommonExperiences," Nature, 226 (5247) : 701-704 (1970). Tart, C.T.: "Marihuana Intoxication: Reported Effects On Sleep andDreams," Presented Association for Psychophysiological Studyof Sleep, Santa Fe (1970). Tart, C. T.: On Being Stoned, PaloAlto: Science and Behavioral Books (1971). Tennant, F. S., Preble, It., Prendergast, T. J. and Ventry,P.: "Medical Manifestations Associated With Hashish,"Journal of the American Medical Association, 216 (12) 1965-1969(1971). Thompson, G. R., Rosencrantz, 11. and Brande, M. C.:"Neurotoxicity of the Cannabinoids in Chronically TreatedRats and Monkeys," The Pharmacologist, 13 (2) : 296 (1971). Thompson, G. R., Schaeppi, U. T., Rosencrantz, H. and Brande,Al. C.: "Acute Oral Toxicity of Cannabinoids in VariousSpecies," Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, 19 (2) : 413(1971). Thompson, G. R., Schaeppi, U. IT., Rosencrantz, H. N.,Hagopian, M, Mason, M. M., Fleishman, R. W., and Hamniann, C. G.:"Determine, Toxicity of delta 8 and delta 9Tetrahydrocannabinol and Marihuana Extract," Mason ResearchInstitute, Worcester, Mass., Reports IXIX to the NationalInstitute of Mental Health Contract #HSM 42-70-95 (June 1970-June1971), #HSM 42-71-79 (June 1971-Jan. 1972). Tinklenberg, J. R., Melges, F. T., Hollister, L. E., andGillespie, H. K.: "Marihuana and Immediate Memory," Nature, 226 (5251) : 1171 1172 (June 1970). Truitt, E. B.: "Biologic Disposition ofTetrahydrocannabinols," Pharmacological Review, 23 (4) :273-278 (1971). Truitt, E., Mitchell, R., Foltz, R., Fentiman, A., Kinzer, G.,Grotta, II., and Leighty, E.: "Bioanalytical 'Studies ofCannabis Smoking," Report to the National Institute ofMental Health, Contract Number P11-43-68-1338, Battelle MemorialInstitute, Columbus, Ohio (1970). Ungerleider, J. T.: "Letter to the Editor," AmericanJournal of Psychiatry, 125: 1448 (1969). Ungerleider, J. T., Fischer, D. D., Goldsmith, R. S., Fuller,M., and Forgy, E.: "A Statistical Survey of AdverseReactions to LSD in Los Angeles County," American Journal ofPsychiatry, 125 (3) : 352-357 (1968). United Nations Economic and Social Council: "A Programmeof Studies of the Plan and Its Products, Survey of the CannabisSituation in India," U.N. Document No. E/CN.7/286, Addendum12 (March 1957). Volavka, J., Dornbush, R., Feldstein, S., Clare, G., Zaks, A.,Fink, M., and Freedman, A. M.: "Marihuana, EEG andBehavior," Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 191:206-215 (1971). Vree, T. B., Breinier, 1). D., Van Ginneken, C. A. M. and VanRossum, J. M.: "Identification of the Methyl and PropylHomologues of CBD, THC, CBN in Hashish by a New Method ofCombined Gas Chromatography-mass Spectrometry," ActaPharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 683684 (1971). Waldman, M. M.: "Marihuana Bronchitis," Journal ofthe American Medical Association, 211: 501 (1970). Wall, M. E.: "The InVitro and InVivo Metabolism ofTetrahydrocannabinol (THC)," Annals of the New York Academyof Science, 191: 23-39 (1971). Wall, M. E., -Brine, -1). R., J-1rine, G. A. Pitt, C. G.,Emudenthal, R. 1. and Christensen, H. D.: "Isolation,Structure, and Biological Activity of Several Metabolites of A'Tetrahydrocannabinol," Journal of the American ChemicalSociety, 92 (11) : 3466-3468 (1970). Wall, Al. E., Brine, D., Perez-Reyes, Al. and Lipton, M.:"Studies on the InVitro and InVivo Metabolism of A'Tetrahydrocannabinol," Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica, 8: 702(1971). Waller, C. W.: "The Chemistry of Marihuana,"Proceedings of the Western Pharmacology Society, 14: 1-3 (1971). Walters, P. A., Goethals, G. W. and Pope, H. G.: "DrugUse and Life Style Among 500 College Undergraduates"Archives of General Psychiatry, 26: 92-96 (1972). Walton, R. P.: Marihuana, America's New Drug Problem,Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co. (1938). Warnock, J.: "Insanity from Hasheesh," Journal ofMental Sciences, 49: 96-110 (1903). Waskow, 1. E., Olsson, J. E., Salzman, C. and Katz, Al. M.:"Psychological Effects of Tetraliydrocannabinol,"Archives of General Psychiatry, 22 (2): 97-107 (1970). Watt, J. M.: "Dagga in South Africa," UN Bulletin onNarcotics, 13 (3) : 9-14 (1961). Watt, J. M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M. B.: The Forensic andSociological Aspects of the Dagga Problem in South Africa,"South African Medical Journal, 10: 573-579 (1936). Weil, A. T.: "Adverse Reactions to Marihuana.Classification and Suggested Treatment," New England Journalof Medicine, 282 (18) : 997-1000 (1970). Weil, A. T.: Testimony before National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse, Washington, D.C. (May 1971). Weil, A. T., and Zinberg, N. E.: "Acute Effects ofMarihuana on Speech," Nature, 222: 434-437 (1969). Weil, A.T., Zinberg, N. E. and Nelsen, J. ',M.: "Clinical andPsychological Effects of marihuana in Alan," Science, 162:1234-1242 (1968). Weiss, J. L.: Personal Communication, Staff Fellow, NationalInstitute of Mental Health, Laboratory of Clinical Science,Bethesda, Maryland, August 1, 1971. Weiss, S.: "A GeneralPicture of Charas Habit in Afghanistan," Report from KabulUniversity Medical School (July 1971). White, R. B., Goolishian, H., and Barratt, E. S.:"Dilemmas Encountered by the Marihuana Researcher,"Presented 46th Annual Conference of the Central NeuropsychiatricAssociation, Galveston (October 1970). Wikler, A.: "Clinical and Social Aspects of MarihuanaIntoxication," Archives of General Psychiatry, 23: 320-325(1970). Wikler, A., and Lloyd, B. J.: "Effect of SmokingMarihuana Cigarettes on Cortical Electrical Activity,"Federation Proceedings, 4: 141-142 (1945). William,,;, E. G., Himmelsbach, C. K., Wikler, A., Ruble, D.C., and Lloyd, B.N.: "Studies on Marihuana and PyrahexylCompound," Public Health Reports, 61 (29) 1059-1083 (1946). Winick, C.: "Use of Drugs by Jazz Musicians," SocialProblems, 7: 240-253 (1960). Wurmser, L., Levin, L., and Lewis, A.: "Chronic ParanoidSymptoms and Thought Disorders in Users of Marihuana and LSD asObserved in Psychotherapy," Bulletin, Problems on DrugDependence, 31: 6154-6177 (1969). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-46IA086-000614-B047-252http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1i.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022744 text/html 11525HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:27:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:33 GMTContent-length: 11307 Marijuana and Public Safety Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse III. Marihuana and Public Safety The significant role of the law enforcement community and thepopular press in promoting the idea that marihuana use leads toundesirable and antisocial behavior has been discussed in theReport. The purpose of this chapter is to describe the genesis ofthe, perceived problem and the theoretical basis for theseallegations. The early campaigns against marihuana use can be viewed as anextension of the temperance and moral reform movements whichswept the country during the 1920's. They were generallyspearheaded by persons who opposed the use of opiates, alcoholand tobacco on the grounds that all such substances werephysically, mentally and morally debilitating. The presumeddependence of the user on the drug, the loss of self-control andthe unhealthy preoccupation with pleasure-seeking activitiespurportedly induced by these substances were seen as contrary tothe traditional values of our society. Reiteration of these themes by practicing professionals,respected members of officialdom and the popular press ultimatelygave rise, to what Lindesmith (rev. ed., 1968: 188-189) hastermed the "evil causes evil" fallacy, and which Goode(1972) has de-scribed as follows: The impetus behind public and even expert conceptions of drugsand drug use is that a phenomenon so patently undesirable anduniversally condemned as the use of narcotics or marihuana must,inevitably, have both pathological causes as well as pathologicalconsequences. Thus, the task of science and medical research isseen as "discovering" these negative concomitants ofillicit drug use. In this way, we can all feel better aboutcondemning the phenomenon itself because our moral andideological feelings can thereby be, backed up and verified bythe Indisputable data of positive science (p. 1). This same philosophical leaning of persons who view marihuanaas a significant danger to both the individual and societycarries with it a corollary that use be prohibited and the userpunished. Perhaps the most persistent controversy with respect tomarihuana use is the degree to which it poses a danger to publicsafety. Public and professional opinion surveys have repeatedlydemonstrated the existence of a widespread belief that marihuanause leads to the commission of deviant, delinquent, criminal andviolent acts. In addition, some persons have recently expressedconcern that marihuana impairs driving skills and performanceand, in this way, also constitutes a public safety hazards. This chapter will review the evidence pertaining to theeffects of marihuana on criminal and violent behavior, deviantand aggressive sexual behavior and driving skills andperformance. Then an effort will be made to assess both thenature and strength of the purported relationships betweenmarihuana use and these behaviors. Problems in Assessing the Effects of Marihuana The degree to which marihuana constitutes a danger to publicsafety is dependent, in large measure, upon the drug'sobservable, effects on the behavior of the user. No drug,including marihuana, produces the same effect at all times, underall conditions and in all individuals. Rather, the quality (formand intensity) and the quantity (extent and frequency) of theperceived effects are determined by the complex interaction ofboth pharmacological and extrapharmacological factors. As Goode(1972) has noted: We should bear this qualification in mind when looking atthe relationship between the ingestion of a drug and anysubsequent behavior-with the latter supposedly "caused"by the effects of the drug. Drug effects vary, and, in addition,even standard effects do not automatically translate intospecific forms of human behavior (P. 18). In a paper prepared for the Commission, Tinklenberg (1971 :1-8) has enumerated some of the basic factors which should betaken into consideration in evaluating the relationship betweenmarihuana and crime. They are equally relevant, however, for theassessment of any behavioral effect presumably attributable tomarihuana, and for that reason they are summarized below. Definition and Congeners. The concentration of theprincipal active chemicals in cannabis (THC and theirmetabolites) in any given amount of marihuana varies widelyaccording to where the plant is grown, how it is cultivated,harvested and cured. These variations permit a wide range ofpharmacological potencies and unknown variations in their effectson behavior. Drug-Drug Interactions. Given the strong possibility ofintentional or inadvertent adulteration of marihuana with otherpsychoactive drugs, it may be that behavioral changes attributedto marihuana may actually derive from the adulterants or from theinteraction of THC and the adulterants (which may well beoccasioned by the deliberate rather than unknown simultaneous orsequential use, of other psychoactive drugs). Dose-Response Functions. With respect to the questionof how drugs affect behavior, it is likely that marihuanainfluences behavior in different ways and degrees, depending upondosage levels. Although it is common to infer that higher dosesof a given drug will induce more of a particular response andlower doses less, such inferences may be inaccurate in that drugeffects can show a curvilinear dose-response relationship (asseems to be the case with alcohol). Time-Action Functions. Time-action function describesthe changing effects of marihuana during the course of the drugaction. During the brief periods in which the drug effects aremost intense, there may be a more pronounced alteration inbehavior than during most of the points on the drug time-actioncontinuum. Individual Variation. Different individuals apparentlyrespond quite differently to the same dose-time factors ofmarihuana as well as other drugs. In some laboratory studies,where, high doses of marihuana induced considerable euphoria andenhanced conviviality in most subjects, a few subjects whoreceived the same dosage in the same setting experiencedparanoia, excessive agitation and aggressive tendencies. Cumulative Effects. The effects of marihuana onindividual behavior have been shown to vary according to theamount of previous experience with the drug. There is increasingevidence that chronic users respond quite differently tomarihuana than do occasional users. The cumulative extent ofprevious experience may have an important influence on subsequentbehavioral responses. Psychological and Environmental Variables. Thebehavioral response to marihuana and to other drugs is at leastpartially dependent upon such psychosocial variables as theexpectations of the user regarding its influence on his behavior.These expectations are in turn derived from. the personalities ofthe, individuals involved, recent events in their lives, and thephysical, interpersonal and social milieu in which the marihuanause occurs. The behavioral responses to marihuana use are likelyto correlate with such psychological and environmental variablesquite independently of any pharmacological effects the drug mayexert. Personality Factors. A certain number of individuals inany given population demonstrate characteristic and relativelyenduring patterns of antisocial behavior regardless of theirimmediate circumstances, possible drug use and the like. Theseindividuals, variously described as antisocial, criminal oremotionally unstable, typically manifest, from childhood on,recurrent tendencies toward deviance in many areas of life. Forsome of these people, those predisposed toward both criminalityand drug abuse, crime and drug use do coexist. However, theassumption that the drug causes crime or vice versa is notnecessarily valid. One should not automatically conclude fromthis that the use of drugs has no influence on their criminalbehavior. Drug use may possibly provide a form of reinforcementwhich may increase or decrease the likelihood of a criminal act. Crime Process Factors. Crime process factors refer tothe complexities of criminal behavior and the possible influenceof marihuana on that behavior. A multifactored perspective of theetiology of crime , including personal, social and situationalvariables, allows for the possibility that at each step in thechain of events leading to the commission of a criminal act,marihuana use may contribute to enhance or diminish thepossibility of this outcome. In short, any interpretation of the data to be presented belowwhich fails to take into account at least some of these variableswill likely result in a "post hoc, ergo propter hoc"fallacy-that is, the invalid assumption that simply because oneevent occurs later than another event (one commits a crime aftersmoking marihuana) that the latter is caused by the former(marihuana caused the crime). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-47IA086-000614-B047-280http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1j.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022800 text/html 54311HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:27:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:28 GMTContent-length: 54093 Marihuana and Violence Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Violence (The evidence to be presented here applies not only toaggression and to violence but to marihuana's relationship tocrime in general, and is therefore equally relevant to a latersection on marihuana and non-violent crime. The effects ofmarihuana on sexual behavior, including the commission of sexualoffenses will be treated in the following section on marihuanaand sexual behavior.) The popular and professional literature contains numerousunsupported and often emotionally charged accusations regardingmarihuana's contribution to violence. In at least two dozen comparatively recent eases of murder ordegenerate sex attacks, marihuana proved to be a contributingcause (Anslinger, 1937). In a recent study of thirty-seven murders in New Orleans in ayear, seventeen were traced directly to marihuana. . . . Evilmarihuana is pock-marking this nation with murders, sex attacks,suicides, and crimes in every category from bank stick-ups topetty thievery . . . (LaRoe, 1940). Marihuana, while giving the hallucinations of cocaine, addsdelusions of impending physical attack by one's best friend orclose relatives. In addition, marihuana is intrinsically andinherently crime exciting. It has led to some of the mostrevolting cases of sadistic rape and murder of modern times(Rowell and Rowell, 1939: 67). Even sex does not satisfy the abnormal urges induced bymarihuana. There is still the necessity for further excitement,more emotional release. That is when the guns are grabbed, theknives waved and the razors swung. And all that is a marihuanauser's idea of what is normal! (Williams, 1969). To add greater credibility to their undocumented assertions,some persons describe the manner in which the drug purportedlyleads to violence. In the earliest stages of intoxication the willpower isdestroyed and inhibitions and restraints are released; the moralbarricades are broken down and often debauchery and sexualityresult. Where mental instability is inherent, the behavior isgenerally violent. An egotist will enjoy delusions of grandeur,the timid individual will suffer anxiety, and the aggressive oneoften will resort to acts of violence and crime ... (Anslingerand Tompkins, 1953: 22). Smoking of the weed is habit-forming. It destroys willpower,releases restraints, and promotes insane reactions ... Robberies,thrill murders, sex crimes and other offenses result (New YorkDaily Worker, 1940, in Solomon, 1968: 288). Others simply deny these allegations or assert that there isno evidence to support the thesis of an independent causalrelationship. The fact that so many witnesses testified to the peaceable andorderly character of the excessive consumers goes far to provethat in this country experience shows that as a rule these (hemp)drugs do not tend to violent crime and violence (Indian HempDrugs Commission, 1969: 258). A fair summary of the available evidence would be that veryrarely do major (particularly violent) crimes follow upon the useof the drug, and that, in instances where they do, therelationship is an indirect one (Ausubel, 1958: 103). One likely hypothesis is that, given the accepted tendency ofmarihuana to release inhibitions, the effect of the drug willdepend on the individual and the circumstances. It might, butcertainly will not necessarily or inevitably, lead to aggressivebehavior or crime (President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice, 1967: 13). The relationship between marihuana use land the commission ofaggressive acts or violent crime such as murder, rape and assaultremains one of the most controversial issues relating to thedrug. Persons who believe that such a relationship exists oftenargue that marihuana triggers the release of inhibitions andrestraints, destroys the will power and heightens aggressivetendencies of the user, serving as a catalyst for the commissionof aggressive or violent acts. This argument raises several fundamental questions: Are theeffects presumably induced by the drug commonly experienced bymarihuana users? Are these effects, to the extent that, they dooccur, generally or frequently translated into overt behavior?And is the behavior which presumably manifests itself ordinarilyviolent or aggressive? The answers to these questions may be obtained from severalsources, including the results of laboratory experiments designedto measure certain physiological and psychological reactions andto identify observable behavioral effects; and retrospectiveself-reports of effects purportedly experienced by marihuanausers. Additional clues may be gained from examination of thecriminal records of known marihuana users and the incidence ofmarihuana. use among persons arrested for or convicted of violentcrimes. However, while these latter methods may revealstatistical associations (which could prove to be spurious uponfurther analysis), they should riot be interpreted to demonstratethe existence of a causal connection between marihuana use andthe offenses committed. THE VIOLENT AND CRIMINOGENIC EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA The empirical evidence gathered to date lends no support tothe hypothesis that marihuana heightens aggressive tendencies inthe user or that its effects significantly increase thelikelihood of inciting the user to violence or crime. However,those findings summarized below do not mean that marihuana cannotbe related to aggressive or violent behavior but merely suggestthat the effects of the drug and the behaviors in question mayoperate independently. The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) studied thepsychomotor effects of marihuana on 72 prisoners, both users andnon-users. Marihuana was administered experimentally as both anoral extract and as cigarettes. The data show that the degree ofthe drug's effect on psychomotor activities is dependent upon thecomplexity of the function and, in some cases, on the strength ofthe dose administered. Although simple reaction time and taskswere only slightly affected, more complex functions like staticequilibrium and body and hand steadiness were significantly andadversely affected by both large (5 cc.) and small (2 cc.) dosesof the drug. In contrast to the ability of amphetamines to enhance muscularperformance and to increase physical activity (Weiss and Laties,1962; Tinklenberg and Stillman, 1970), marihuana has been foundto decrease the inclination toward physical activity and toactually reduce both physical exertion and activity (Mayor'sCommittee on Marihuana, 1944; Hollister, et. a]., 1968;Hollister, 1971), thereby decreasing the probability of incitingthe user to assaultive behavior. Although marihuana has been found to reduce inhibitions insome persons, it has not been shown to exaggerate extantaggressiveness to any appreciable degree; in some instances ithas, in fact, been shown to reduce aggressiveness, and to inducetimidity, fear and passivity in the user (Bromberg) 1934,1939;Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Allentuck, 1942; Chopra, and Chopra,1942; Charen and Perelman, 1946; Carstairs, 1954; Blumer, et.al., 1967; National Institute of Mental Health, 1970, 1972). In recent years, a number of studies have been conducted inwhich marihuana users were asked to describe the effects theyexperienced while under the influence of the drug. On the whole,their findings are similar to those obtained from the results oflaboratory experiments. Halikas, Goodwin and Guze (1971) found that the majority ofthe users in their sample reported "usually" feelingrelaxed (79%) and peaceful (74%). Tart (1971) administered a questionnaire to college studentsin California, one item containing a list of 206 possible effectsof marihuana. Respondents were asked to indicate whether, withinthe last six months, they had experienced the designated effectsnever, rarely, sometimes, very often or usually. Of the 153respondents, 69% gave one of the latter three responses to theitem: "My inhibitions are lowered so that I do things I'mnormally inhibited to do." To the item: "I lose control of my actions and doantisocial things (actions that harm other people) that Inormally wouldn't do," 22% said rarely, 1% said sometimes,and the remaining 77% replied "never." With respect toother more specific effects, 23% of the users stated they"usually" felt physically relaxed, and 49% said they"very often" felt physically relaxed and did not wantto get up or move around when high on marihuana (pp. 703-704). In a study by Brotman and Suffet (1970) of 74 users in NewYork City (both students and nonstudents) no one mentioned anyhostile feelings or actions when asked to describe what happenswhen they get high on marihuana (p. 264). Goode (1970) asked 204 respondents to describe theirexperiences when high on marihuana. Table 1 illustrates theresponses of the users to effects possibly related to aggressionor crime (pp. 53-54). In a more recent, Commission-sponsored survey of 15 to 34 yearold male residents of Philadelphia, respondents were interviewedabout the extent and frequency of their marihuana use, the extentto which marihuana figured in the commission of criminal ordelinquent acts and the effects they generally experienced whileunder the influence of the drug (Goode, 1972). With respect tothe effects experienced, nearly all the marihuana users (about75% of the total sample reported that they had tried marihuana atone time or another) denied that the effects of marihuana on themcould be interpreted as criminogenic or violent in nature. Table2 below presents the subjective effects of marihuana related tocrime and violence which were reported by the 559 respondents. Table I.-CRIMINOGENIC AND AGGRESSIVE EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA (Figures in Percentages) More relaxed, peaceful, calmer; marihuana acts as a tranquilizer - -- ---------------- ------ -- --------------------- 46 Exaggeration of mood: greater subjective impact, emotionalsignificance --- ------ ----- ------------------ -_ -_ 25 Time seems slowed down, stretched out, think more time has passed ---------- ----------- ------ ---- --------------- 25 Become more withdrawn, introverted, privatistic-- - __ 22 Become tired, lazy, lethargic, don't want to move---- - 19 Feel freer, unrestrained, uninhibited --------- ---- --------- 18 Feel paranoid ----- ----------- -------- ------ --------------- -- ------- 15 Have hallucinations ---------------------- - -- -- ----------- ------- 15 Feel sleepy ------ ----------- --- ---------------------------------- 14 More uncoordinated, clumsier, motor skills impaired 9 Other people annoy me more; find fault in others ------ 8 Become more active, want to move around more -_ __ - 6 Table 2.-REPORTED EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA AS RELATED TOCRIMINAL AND VIOLENT BEHAVIOR (Figures in Percentages) Almost More Less Never all than than or Effects reported the half half almost time the the never time time Feeling of wanting to hurt someone 0 3 96 Feeling of wanting to do something violent.. * 4 95 Feel more angry 1 3 8 88 Feeling of frustration 3 4 16 78 More willing to follow others' suggestions 4 12 25 59 Care less what others think of what you do. . 16 15 10 18 Feeling of being able to do anything 6 5 13 77 Have hallucinations 9 8 16 66 Feeling of relaxation.... 50 22 10 18 Feel less angry 31 22 13 34 Feeling of drowsiness or sleepiness 22 25 25 27 * Less than 1/2 of one percent. Source: Goode, 1972: 21. The data show that the overwhelming majority of therespondents report "never or almost never" experiencingeffects which can be characterized as producing frustration,anger, or aggression, and that they usually do Dot experienceeffects which could be taken to indicate an increase insuggestibility. On the other hand, substantial proportions of therespondents reported feeling relaxed (72%), less angry (53%) anddrowsy or sleepy (47 %, ) at least half of the time. In sum, these data suggest that marihuana does not commonlyproduce effects which are likely to increase aggression or incitethe user to violence. Numerous studies designed to assess therelationship more directly demonstrate, on the whole, thatmarihuana does not play a significant role in the commission ofviolent crimes. MARIHUANA AND VIOLENT CRIME: THE EVIDENCE Over the years a number of approaches have been utilized in aneffort to assess the relationship between marihuana use andviolent crime. Perhaps the simplest approach is to compile a.list of violent offenses allegedly committed by marihuana usersand to establish, retrospectively, the role of marihuana in thecommission of these offenses. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894), for example,investigated 81 cases of violence allegedly caused by hemp drugsin in effort to determine whether or not a causal relationshipexisted. Of these 81 cases, 11 were too old to permit adequateinvestigation. In 23 of the cases examined, however, 18 showed noevidence of a connection between the crimes and the use of hempdrugs. The Commission concluded that: In respect to his relations with society, however, even theexcessive consumer of hemp drugs is ordinarily inoffensive,. Hisexcesses may indeed bring him to degraded poverty which may leadhim to dishonest practices; and occasionally, but apparently veryrarely indeed, excessive indulgence in hemp drugs may lead toviolent crime. But for all practical purposes it may be laid downthat there is little or no connection between the use of hempdrugs and crime (Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-1894,reprinted 1969: 204). Similarly, in 1938 the Foreign Policy Association publishedthe accounts of 10 marihuana crimes, including murder andassault, "culled at random from the files of the U.S. Bureauof Narcotics" (Merrill, 1938: 28). These cases werepresented in such a way as to imply that marihuana caused theoffenses. According to Grinspoon (1971: 302), they "gave thereader the distinct impression that the -user of marihuana was aviolent criminal who was given to rape, homicide, andmayhem." Bromberg (1939), however, questions the validity ofthe causal assumption. It is difficult to evaluate these statements, because of theiruncritical nature.... Among the ten patients, the second, J. O.,was described as having confessed how lie murdered a friend andput his body in a trunk while under the influence of marihuana.J. 0. was examined in this clinic (Bellevue Hospital) ; althoughlie was a psychopathic liar and possibly homosexual, there was noindication in the examination or history of the use of any drug.The investigation by the probation department failed to indicateuse of the drug marihuana. The deceased, however, was addicted toheroin (p. 9). Based on retrospective case analyses, some observers haveattempted to specify more precisely. the nature of the purportedrelationship or the situations in which aggressive behavior mayresult from marihuana use. Bromberg (1939), for example,suggested that aggressive or violent behavior may arise when anaive subject develops a panic state in response tomarihuana-induced hallucinations. Allentuck and Bowman (1942)believed that aggressive or antisocial behavior following use mayoccur as a reaction to some unpleasant external stimulus duringthe phase, of hypersensitivity and heightened psychomotoractivity. Others have suggested that antisocial conduct of anaggressive or violent nature may occur when marihuana is used, asalcohol often is, to release repressed feelings of hostility(Siler, et al., 1933; Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Allentuck andBowman, 1942; Freedman and Rockmore, 1946; Murphy, 1963), and toserve as a fortifier for aggressive or violent crimes (Ewens,1904; South Africa Interdepartmental Committee on Abuse of Dagga,1952; Ames, 1958; Watt, 1961; Blumer, et al., 1967; Miller,1968). The available evidence bearing on these issues, however,suggests that panic reactions rarely occur; that psychomotoractivity is more often reduced than enhanced following use; thataggression rarely follows use, but when it does, it generallyoccurs among individuals with histories of maladjustment,emotional instability or impulse disorders (Bromberg, 1934, 1939;Charen and Perelman, 1946; Ausubel, 1958; Bloomquist, 1968;Grinspoon, 1971; Kaplan, 1971; National Institute of MentalHealth, 1972). After a series of studies of marihuana and crime, Chopra andChopra (1939) concluded that if any relationship existed betweenmarihuana use and violent crime, it was an indirect one. Theystated that: So far as premeditated crime is concerned, especially thatof a violent nature, hemp drugs . . . may not only not lead toit, but they actually act as deterrents.... One of the, importantactions of these drugs is to quieten and stupify the individualso there is no tendency to violence. . . . The result ofcontinued and excessive use of these drugs in our opinion is tomake the individual timid rather than lead him to commit a crimeof a violent nature (p. 92). Over the years, the conclusion of the Chopras has receivedincreasing support from many quarters of the research community(Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, 1944; Maurer and Vogel, 1962;White House Conference on Narcotic Drug Abuse, 1962; Murphy,1963; President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice, 1967; National Institute of MentalHealth, 1970, 1972). In the absence of possibilities for addressing the issue moredirectly, several researchers have relied on statistical studiesand have sought to establish the overall and comparativeincidence of detected violent crimes among cannabis users. Onemethod has been to compile lists of violent crimes committedduring specific periods of time and to determine the proportionof these offenses committed by cannabis users. Lambo (1965) compiled a list of crimes occurring in three WestAfrican countries during a recent two-year period. He claimedthat users of cannabis had committed 51% of the 73 murders, 31%of the 263 cases of assault and battery and 26% of the 472 casesagainst women. Some have preferred to base their statistical studies onsamples of offenders (rather than lists of offenses) drawn fromthe arrest or conviction files of law enforcement agencies.Several researchers adopting this method are content to identifythe marihuana users in their samples and then simply report thenumber of users charged with violent crimes or the proportions ofthe total number of violent crimes perpetrated by the users. The District Attorney of New Orleans, for example, testifiedbefore the House Ways and Means Committee that of the 450 menconvicted of major crimes in 1930, 125 were identified as regularmarihuana users. Approximately one-half of the murderers andone-fifth of those charged with assault, robbery or larceny weresaid to be regular marihuana users (U.S. House ofRepresentatives, 1937: 23-24). Bromberg (1939) reviewed the records of 16,854 offenders inthe psychiatric clinic of New York County's Court of GeneralSessions during the period 1932 to 1937. Of the 67 marihuanausers identified, only six had been charged with violent crimes.He concluded that there was no causal relationship betweenmarihuana use and aggressive crime. Others go one step further and attempt to compare the users'rates of violence with those of other selected populations suchas non-marihuana using offenders, offenders using other drugs, orall of fenders in a given file. Bromberg and Rodgers (1946) studied the civilian and militarycriminal records of 8,280 convicted offenders at the UnitedStates Naval Prison in Portsmouth, Now Hampshire between January1, 1943 and July 1, 1945. Of the total number of offendersinvestigated, 40 or .0048% were identified as marihuana users (23used to excess, 10 were moderate users and seven were describedas light users). Of these 40, only two reported being moreaggressive while under the influence of marihuana than they wouldbe under normal conditions and three had been charged withviolent crimes (assault or striking an officer) while in themilitary. Comparison of the users' criminal records with those of40 randomly selected non-using prisoners revealed that thenon-user group had committed more aggressive crimes than theusers. In conclusion, the researchers stated that: There is no positive relationship between aggressive crime and marihuana usage in the Naval service; . . . . . . there is no significant causal relationship between aggressive crime in civilian life (of the naval offenders studied) and the use of marihuana . . . . Marihuana usage is but an aspect of some type of mental disorder or personality abnormality (p. 826). Maurer and Vogel (1962) have stated a similar conclusion. "It has not been our impression from contact with manyhundreds of marijuana users that these people are violentcriminals; ... While there may be occasional violent psychopathswho have used marijuana, have committed crimes of violence, andwho have, in court, explained their actions as uncontrolledviolence resulting from the use of the drug, these are exceptionsto the general run of marijuana users.... Marijuana is notpossessed of any mysterious power to force people to commit actswhich they would not otherwise perform (p. 281). Blum (1969) reviewed the data provided in 1966 by the FederalBureau of Investigation as part of its Careers in Crime Project.The data showed that marihuana users did not differ significantlyfrom either heroin users or from all offenders (drug and non-drugusers) in their rate of violent crime relative to their totalnon-drug offenses (28%, 26% and 26%, respectively). There have been several statistical studies, also usingoffender populations, designed to assess the degree to whichpersons arrested for cannabis use have previous or subsequentarrests for violent crimes. Bromberg and Rodgers (1946) found that of the 40 offenders intheir sample identified as marihuana users, 12 had been chargedwith previous offenses, three of them for assault. Gardikas (1950) reviewed the criminal records of 379 personsarrested between 1919 and 1950 for publicly using hashish. Ofthese, 117 (31%) reportedly progressed from hashish use to othercrimes, about one-third of these subsequent crimes involvingviolence or weapons. Gardikas stated that one subgroup of these,offenders accumulated 420 offenses of assault, woundings,threats, robberies, and manslaughter (p. 5). In sum, these statistical studies based on samples of violentoffenses, violent offenders or arrested marihuana law violatorsindicate that some individuals identified as marihuana users docommit violent crimes, have committed them in the past and go onto commit them in the future. Their numbers, however, are generally small, both absolutelyand relatively. These studies therefore suggest a very weak andinsignificant statistical association between marihuana use andviolent crime which may itself be completely attenuated when theproper statistical controls are applied. These studies do not establish a causal relationship betweencannabis use and violent crime; nor do they permit an affirmativeresponse to the crucial question of whether the use of marihuanaalters the progression to violent crime at a significantlygreater rate than that which might be expected from some othercriminal subgroups, more representative samples of cannabisusers, or samples drawn from the general population. They alsofail to address themselves to the external conditions andcircumstances which might serve to mitigate the observedrelationships. Several recent and more sophisticated empirical investigationshave addressed some of the critical questions left unanswered bystatistical studies of offender populations. Namely, they setabout to determine whether marihuana users in the generalpopulation commit acts of aggression or violence significantlymore frequently than do nonusers; and whether any observeddifferences between users and non-users may be more directlyattributable to extra-pharmacological (social, cultural,psychological) variables than to the use of marihuana itself orto the pharmacological action of the drug per se. In 1965, Robins and his associates (1970) conducted a surveyof 20 black men born in St. Louis between 1930 and 1934. Themarihuana users in the sample were then compared with thenonusers relative to their ratings on a "violencesyndrome" constructed by the researchers. Respondents were rated high on the violence syndrome if theyreported having participated or felt like participating in threeor more of the following items, one of which was a judgment bythe interviewer that the respondent demonstrated hostility duringthe interview: 1. Getting hurt in a fight. 2. Ever feeling like killing someone. 3. Ever hitting people when angry. 4. Being quick to lose one's temper. 5. Throwing or breaking things when angry. 6. Ever hurting someone in a fight. 7. Ever fighting with a weapon. 8. Getting mean when drinking. 9. Interviewer's observation of respondent's hostility. The researchers found that those who had used marihuana duringadolescence were more likely to score high on the violencesyndrome than were those who did not use the drug for the firsttime until adulthood; 31% of the respondents who had usedmarihuana and no other drug during adolescence exhibited three ormore of these measures, 24% of those who used marihuana only butstarted as adults scored high, 16% of the non-users wereclassified as high on the violence syndrome, and 45% of those whoused marihuana and other drugs were so classified. The researchers also found that users were significantly morelikely to report the, commission of " adult person orproperty offenses" than were nonusers; 32 % of the nonusers,48 % of the marihuana only adult starters, 56% of the marihuanaonly adolescent starters, and 77% of the multiple drug usersreported committing crimes against persons or property as adults. Based on these data, marihuana users were said to besignificantly more likely to have exhibited violent behavior thanwere nonusers. This conclusion, however, seems somewhatpremature. First, upon the application of three "pathological"controls (dropping out of school, alcoholism and involvement injuvenile delinquency), the original relationship was reduced tosome unspecified extent; the researchers reported only that thesecontrols "failed to completely wipe out" thestatistical correlation. Secondly, several of the items would notappear to be sufficiently discriminating in that large numbers ofpeople, whether drug users or not, have probably been quick tolose their temper, hit people when angry (most parents, forexample), or felt like killing someone in a moment of anger. Thesubjective nature of the last item the interviewer's observationof hostility has already been noted. Thirdly, neither the drinkers nor those who were multiple drugusers were isolated in the analysis, making it impossible todetermine whether or not the apparent relationship betweenmarihuana use and violence may have been a. function of theseother drugs rather than the marihuana. Lastly, but perhaps most importantly, the researchers foundseveral other "pathological" variables correlated withthe use of marihuana in their sample: (a) low income, (b) lowstatus jobs, (c) unemployment, (d) receiving financial aid, (e)failing to graduate from high school, (f) fathering illegitimatechildren, (g) marrying women who had been married previously orwho had children, and (h) drinking "heavily enough tocreate, social or medical problems." Because none of these variables was controlled in the dataanalysis (despite the fact that most of them have been found tobe significantly related to delinquency and crime andcharacteristic of persons involved in delinquent, criminal anddrug subcultures), it is impossible to determine whether or notany or all of these variables played a mediating role in theobserved relationship between marihuana use and antisocialbehavior in the, sample. As Goode (1972) has noted, the fact thatthe three controls which were applied did reduce therelationship, makes it likely that "additional controlswould reduce the relationship even more, indeed, reduce it tozero, if applied simultaneously" (p. 13). As such, although this study represented a significant stepforward in investigating the relationship between marihuana andcrime or violent behavior, its methodological limitationspreclude generalizations of the findings to the larger universe. In a study of drug use among lower class minority group youth,Blumer and his associates (1967) found that marihuana users weremuch less likely to commit aggressive or violent acts than werethose who used amphetamines or preferred alcohol, and that mostof the marihuana using youths deliberately shunned aggressivebehavior and adopted, instead, a "cool," non-violentstyle. The researchers did find a small group of youths (termed"the rowdy") who were oriented toward aggressiveness.Generally, these youths preferred alcohol over other drugs andwere found, for the most part, to have been raised in anaggressive and combative social milieu. The researchers pointout, however, that most marihuana users in the sample were not ofthe rowdy type, even though it is this small group which oftenforms the basis of the public and police image of the youthfulmarihuana user. In commenting on the role of marihuana in thepassage of youth from rowdy to a cool style, the authors note,that the passage from the rowdy type to a cool and mellowyoungster, as it relates to the use of drugs, involves chiefly ashift to the smoking of marijuana. . . . [The youngsters']accounts and discussions also stress that the use of marijuanaboth produces and symbolizes a "mellow" mode of conductthat is opposed to that associated with rowdy behavior. Theyplace great weight on the "socializing" effects ofmarijuana use, declaring that its use not only leads youngstersaway from violence but has the effect of changing them intosocial human beings (p. 30). In a large scale, systematic survey (questionnaire andinterview) of more than 1300 students at five West Coast collegesand universities, Blum and his associates (1969) found that 19%of the total sample had used marihuana but that 94% had usedalcohol. One, percent of the marihuana users reported fights orother criminal behavior which they attributed to the drug. Ofthose who used alcohol, 8% reported fights and 2% reportedoffenses while under the influence of this drug. The researchersmake particular note of the fact that despite the increase ofmarihuana use on these campuses since the middle and latesixties, there has been no comparable increase in assaultivecrimes. In a Commission-sponsored household survey of 15 to 34year-old male residents of West Philadelphia, Goode (1972) foundthat not one of the violent crimes, including "forcingsexual intercourse," was significantly correlated withmarihuana use. Among the five offense types showing a very weakrelationship to the use of marihuana, the only so-called violentoffense, "hurting someone in a minor way," showed theweakest association. The author notes that "the statisticaldifferences in rates of offenses between users and nonusers reston adding together a small number of weakly correlated offenses.. . . [They do not indicate] massive differences, or differencesindicating higher rates of classic, violent crimes amongusers" (p. 32a). These more rigorous studies of the relationship betweenmarihuana use and violent crime suggest that marihuana users inthe general population do not commit acts of aggression orviolence significantly more frequently than do nonusers; thatmarihuana does not heighten aggressive tendencies in most usersand may, in some cases, serve to reduce aggressiveness; and thatmuch of the observed relationship between marihuana and violenceis probably a function of social, cultural or psychologicalvariables such as multiple drug use, set and setting andinvolvement in a criminal or drug subculture. There is no reason to believe that marihuana use will cause orlead to the commission of aggressive or violent acts by the largemajority of psychologically and socially mature individuals inthe general population. OPINIONS ABOUT MARIHUANA AND AGGRESSIVENESS: THE LAWENFORCEMENT AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMUNITIES Several references have already been made to anecdotal casehistories, to the claims made and to the opinions formerly heldby a number of law enforcement authorities relative to therelationship between marihuana use and aggressive behavior orviolent crime. A few systematic efforts have been made to explorethe current opinions and attitudes of law enforcement andcriminal justice officials. Probably the first detailed survey of the opinions of policeofficers was that conducted by a Stanford University law studentin 1968. Part of this unpublished study has been summarized byKaplan (1971) and is reprinted below. Law enforcement agencies have continuously supported theexistence of a strong causal relationship between the use ofmarijuana and acts of aggression and violence. In order todetermine the nature and basis for this belief, sixteen lawenforcement and narcotics officers were interviewed. The officersselected for the interview from each pollee department were thosewho spent the largest percentage of their time actually workingwith marijuana users. When the department had several officersworking full time on narcotics, the officer In charge wasinterviewed, on the supposition that as chief officer, he wouldhave the longest and widest range of experience with marijuanausers. Of those interviewed, seven spent 100% of their time onnarcotics problems; three spent 75% to 100%; I spent about 50%;and the remaining five spent 10% to 25%. All emphasized that oftheir narcotics work, a major proportion of the time is spent onmarijuana problems. The context in which the officers observe individuals underthe influence of marijuana is an important factor in evaluatingtheir observations. Only three had done stakeout work whereconduct could be observed while under cover. The remainingthirteen officers had only encountered marijuana users in eitherarrest or questioning situations. In response to the question ofwhether they had opportunities for informal contact with peopleusing marijuana while off duty or in a social situation, theofficers uniformly answered, "no." The specific subject of this project, i.e. marijuana andaggression, was never mentioned to the officers. They were toldonly that I was interested in the marijuana question. The firstquestion which I asked was to briefly characterize, from theirper8onal experience and observations, the behavior of individualswhile under the influence of marijuana. During this originaldescription, 10 of the officers mentioned violence or aggressivebehavior as a common characteristic. The six other officersdidn't mention aggression as a distinguishing characteristic intheir original description however, in the next question, whenspecifically asked if marijuana does lead to aggressive behavior,all said that it did. Every one of the officers pointed out the wide range ofconduct which they see exhibited by those that are"high" on marijuana. They emphasized that how a personreacts depends on his particular personality. As one officercommented, "Some individuals are very happy and to themeverything is beautiful, while others are always looking for afight." Six (6) of the officers emphasized how quickly theycan see one mood change into the other-at one moment docile andpassive, at another extremely aggressive. A few of the officers commented that along with the directinfluence of marijuana, another important factor in aggressivebehavior Is the arresting situation. One officer, Lieutenant A ofthe B Police Department, who has done quite a bit of stake-outwork as well as undercover investigation, pointed out that thischange from "silly, joking, funny and talkative" moodsto apprehensive and often aggressive postures is many timesprecipitated by the realization that a law enforcement officer ispresent. Sergeant C of the D Police Department also felt the"arresting situation" was probably the primary factorin aggressive behavior reports about marijuana users. Sergeant Ealso mentioned "the approach of a known policeman" as afactor in the aggressive behavior which they see. However,Sergeant E also estimated that one fifth of the males, when under the influence of [marijuana] and whenaware that they are being arrested, will break and run or resist.This he feels is a much higher percentage than for other types ofarrests. Similarly most of the officers did maintain that evenconsidering all other factors such as arrest, the marijuana wasthe force in most cases which was responsible for the aggressionand violence. Mr. F of the G County Sheriff's Office, however, maintainedthat in the last few years, those arrested for marijuana offenseshave tended to resist arrest less often than previously. Hestated, "They now feel they don't have to fight the officersbecause of the laws-because of legalizing attempts, they feelthey don't have to fight, for they will have their day incourt." Sergeant H of the I Police Department stated that recently(within the last year) he has seen no aggressive reaction tomarijuana because of the extremely weak grades of marijuana nowavailable. He felt that the determinative factor in how a personreacts while "high" is the strength of the grasssmoked. He reported that the grass they have recently beenfinding has a very low resin content and its effects are merely"a quick stimulant followed by a depressed mood."However, in another part of the interview, when discussing thetype of personality prone to using marijuana, Sergeant Hdistinguished between those now smoking and the "oldgrasshead." These latter were, only "Spanish-Americanor criminals." Now, however, "people without criminalrecords are joining the ranks of criminals." This majorshift in the personality type now using marijuana, it would seem,would be another factor leading to Sergeant H's observation thatthe problems with aggressive reactions have decreased. While all stated their belief that marijuana does lead toaggressive behavior, it was in most cases very difficult toelicit from the officers any specific instances where theypersonally had observed an aggressive reaction to the use ofmarijuana. Four (4) officers stated that they had neverpersonally seen someone aggressive under marijuana. They all,however, had heard reports of such instances from other officers.It should be noted also, that these four officers are from smallpolice departments located chiefly in middle class residentialareas. Me officers who did cite specific examples of aggressivebehavior from their personal observations cited such conduct asindividuals who possessed marijuana fighting among themselves,cases of resisting arrest, a [man] picking a fight in a bar,beating one's wife, sexual promiscuity, stealing, recklessdriving, and carrying knives and guns. While citing this type ofexample most officers emphasized the real difficulty in tellingwhen someone is "high." Except for a few symptoms suchas red or dilated eyes, they have to make the judgment from thegeneral actions of the subject. When the subject is actingpeculiar and there is no alcohol, or they find marijuana in hispossession, then they assume he is "high." It was also difficult to limit these discussions solely tomarijuana. When asked for personal case histories, they oftenrecounted incidents of individuals who had also been using otherdrugs or alcohol in combination with marijuana. The officers tendto group all of the drugs together, and discuss them together ingeneralities applying to all. One officer, from J County,recounted as one of his -personal experience histories withaggression and marijuana, a boy who went "berserk" onChristmas day, and who finally had to be shot by the police. Onchecking newspaper accounts, it appears that LSD was alsoinvolved in the episode. The officers all indicated that they have personally seen manyaggressive reactions to the use of alcohol. Most, however, didnot feel they could compare the frequency with that of marijuana.Most deal mainly with narcotic problems and thus spend most oftheir time with marijuana problems. The alcohol problems, andspecifically the aggressive or belligerent drunk, are handled bythe "beat" cops. It was also difficult to limit the discussion to personalexperiences of the officers themselves. Many of them, when askedfor specific examples, went immediately to their desks forreports and articles issued by other law enforcement agencies.This it seems is a problem which developed because of the samplechosen to interview. Because they were usually the mostexperienced and the chief narcotics officers, most of them arecalled upon to give speeches before PTA's, church groups, schoolclasses, etc. They all, therefore, were familiar with theliterature distributed by law enforcement.... Three of the officers cited as proof of marijuana's danger arecent distribution which pointed out that the "deathpenalty" Is now imposed on marijuana offenders in Nigeria. When questioned on passive reactions to marijuana, all of theofficers could think of personal encounters with people who were"high" and who were decidedly passive and docile. Yetonly four of the officers included this trait in their originalcharacterization of behavior under marijuana. Eight of theofficers, however, in their original description of behaviorwhile "high" described some persons as"happy," "funny," or "giggly." One question asked of the officers was aimed atdifferentiating the aggressiveness (chiefly in terms of frequencyof resisting arrest) between those "high" on marijuanaand those arrested for sale or for possession. As mentionedpreviously, the officers indicated that generally they have avery difficult time distinguishing those who are"high." The officers interviewed generally work on[arresting] pushers, and dealers. Their attention is usually notdrawn to individuals because of the particular conduct they mightbe exhibiting, but rather because the individual is dealing inmarijuana. When pot parties where everyone is high have been[broken up], Sergeant 0 of D reported that the places raided haveusually been on the peaceful side. Another officer, K, on thenarcotics detail in D, felt that users are usually "veryeasy to arrest. With others, such as pushers, and sellers,however, officers have to -be more careful." Captain L of Mdisagreed, however, maintaining that those under the influencemust be watched more closely and are usually more aggressive andviolent because of a lessening of concern for the consequencesand a lack of ability to make sound judgments. Deputy Chief N ofthe 0 Police Department pointed out that In 0 at any rate, thereis a certain "show" which those arrested feel they mustput on; "it is hard to separate this show from the effectsof the marijuana," Lieutenant P of the 0 Police Departmentsaid his experience indicated that those under the influence hadto be watched closely. He has arrested people, [when they were]"high" three of four times without incident; the fifthtime, however, he felt they might go wild. In response to a question of whether they felt that somepersons smoke pot before engaging in crimes against property,such as robbery, ten of the officers replied that they didbelieve that this occurred often. Seven of these could citespecific examples of people who had been picked up for stickups,car thefts, etc. and who reported using marijuana beforehand tobolster their courage, or sharpen their senses. However, theother three of the ten had only heard of such conduct. Theremaining six officers answered that they did not think this wascommon, and had never seen any examples. . . . None (of the officers) believed however that marijuana wasresponsible for any long-term effects resulting in aggressivebehavior. The relationship between marijuana and aggression, theyfeel, is limited strictly to the period of time during which theuser is under the influence. In terms of long-range effects ofmarijuana on aggression, the reactions of the officers confirmthat, if anything, there is a negative correlation. That is,marijuana leads to nonaggressive, non-competitive, passiveconduct, when viewed in the context of chronic use. Whatever limitations and qualifications one can cite regardingthe conclusions drawn by law enforcement officers, one thingremains certain: they do believe that the use of marijuana leadsin a significant number of cases to aggressive behavior (Kaplan,1971, citing Schofield: 110-115). In seeking to present to the public as much information aboutmarihuana and its effects, from as many different sources andapproaches as possible, the Commission sponsored the design andexecution of two opinion surveys of the criminal justiceCommunity. In addition to soliciting their current opinions aboutthe relationship of marihuana to aggressive or violent behavior,and to infer from them the extent to which their professionalexperience with marihuana users may have changed over the years,the Commission sought to determine the extent to which currentopinions and attitudes of the criminal justice community reflectthe growing body of empirical evidence on the subject. To these ends, nationally representative samples ofprosecuting attorneys, judges, probation officers and courtclinicians were surveyed by mail. The questionnaires mailed tothese officials contained items relative to the relationshipbetween marihuana use and aggressive or violent behavior. Theresults of these surveys show that more than three fourths of the781 judges, probation officers and court clinicians responding toa mail survey (InTech, 1971) regarded as either questionable or" probably untrue" the statement that "mostaggressive acts or crimes of violence committed by persons whoare known users of marihuana occur when the offender is under theinfluence of marihuana. More than 60% however, regard as equallyquestionable or untrue the statement that most such aggressiveacts or crimes of violence occur when the offender is not tinderthe influence of the drug but is attempting to obtain it or themoney to buy it. Table 3 shows the percentage of each of thethree groups of respondents answering in this manner. (InTech,1971). These figures give the impression that neither judges,probation officers nor court clinicians are certain of the roleof marihuana in the commission of violent crime. Their tendencyto deny both statements suggests that at the least, therelationship, to the extent that it does exist, is a tenuous one. Table 3.-CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICIALS, BELIEFS ABOUT THERELATIONSHIP OF MARIHUANA USE TO AGGRESSIVE ACTS (Figures in Percentages) A. "Most aggressive acts or crimes of violence committedby persons who are known users of marihuana occur when theoffender is under the influence of marihuana.', Probably Probably Not sure true not true Judges 17.3 44.2 29.5 Probation officers 14.5 60.0 21.8 Clinicians 6.1 76.5 13.0 Total 15.2 51.2 26.0 B. "When the offender is not under the influence ofmarihuana but is attempting to obtain marihuana or the money tobuy it." Probably Probably Not sure true not true Judges 35.6 30.6 25.0 Probation officers 27.3 44.5 21.8 Clinicians 20.0 60.9 15.7 Total 32.1 37.0 23.2 In its survey of state prosecuting attorneys, the Commissionlikewise found a tendency for these officials to deny a causalrelationship between marihuana use and aggressive behavior; 52%of the respondents stated that they either did not believe orwere uncertain about the proposition that use of marihuana causesaggressive behavior. Of those who did believe in a causalrelationship, however, two-thirds of the respondents' beliefsstemmed front other than personal observation of aggressivebehavior exhibited by marihuana users. These opinion surveys reveal that at least these members ofthe criminal justice community have begun to reexamine theirearlier beliefs. The data suggest that, in their professionalexperience, they have not found marihuana users to be aggressiveor violent to such an extent as to elicit strong and consistentopinions about the causal relationship between marihuana use andviolence. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding WT01-B24-48IA086-000614-B047-304http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1k.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022814 text/html 26347HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:28:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:15 GMTContent-length: 26129 Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Marihuana and Sexual Behavior Since the mid-1930's, Americans have, at one time or another,either acclaimed or decried marihuana as an aphrodisiac, laudedits ability to intensify and enhance enjoyment of sexualexperiences and accused it of heightening sexual aggression andinciting the commission of sexual offenses. Even today, there isno consensus among Americans regarding what they consider to bethe effects of marihuana on sexual desire, arousal andperformance. Rather, what evidence exists on the subjectcontinues to reveal the existence of diverse and ofteninconsistent beliefs and experiences. Society's concern about the effects of marihuana on sexualbehavior, however, does not generally center on the drug'sinherent ability to produce or heighten sexual arousal per se buton the relationship between sexual arousal and the likelihood ofsexual excess on the part of the user. The key question is theextent to which and the conditions under which marihuana acts asa catalyst to sexual aggression, profligacy, promiscuity andother aberrant sexual behavior. MARIHUANA AND PSYCHOSEXUAL STIMULATION The numerous medical and clinical observations, experimentalinvestigations and survey studies reviewed by the Commission showthat the belief regarding the stimulant effects of marihuana andthe use of hemp drugs to achieve sexual arousal, the improvementof sexual powers and the prolongation of coition have existed forcenturies and have be-en documented (Chopra and Chopra, 1939;Bouquet, 1950; Robinson, 1967; Grinspoon, 1971) ; The proportionof the population actually aroused sexually by marihuana,however, is difficult to assess. Relevant research findings arebased on widely divergent research procedures, differing criteriaof arousal, and variations in the amount of arousal experienced.Nonetheless, it is fair to state that marihuana producesheightened sexual interest, desire and arousal in substantialproportions of both male and female users (Bromberg, 1934;Allentuck, 1944; Johnson, 1968; Goode, 1969; Hochman and Brill,1971). It is equally accurate to state, however, that marihuanadoes not increase and in fact may decrease sexual desire orstimulation in significant proportions of users (Walton, 1938;Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Taylor, 1963; Brenner, Coles andMeagher, 1970; Goode, in press). At best, the available evidenceis inconclusive. In a study of regular marihuana users conducted by threephysicians, for example, "heightened sexual feeling"and "increased sexual arousal" while under theinfluence of the drug were reportedly experienced"usually" by one-third of the subjects (34%, and 33%,respectively) and each of these effects was experienced"occasionally" by 59% of the sample (Halikas, Goodwinand Guze, 1971). In another more recent study by physicians, "increasedsexual appetite" was reported by 60% of the chronic usersand 43% of the occasional users of marihuana. Responses to asimilar question regarding "decreased sexual appetite,"revealed that 75% of the chronic users and 70% of the occasionalusers reported that this never occurred (Hochman and Brill,1971). The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) likewise attemptedto assess the effects of marihuana on sexual interest and sexualstimulation. Its clinical studies of 72 male prisoners conductedat the Welfare Hospital in New York City revealed that"although there was an undeniable increase in overt sexinterest following the ingestion of marihuana, . . . This sexinterest seems to have been due primarily to the fact that thesemen have been imprisoned for various periods and had not hadaccess to women" (p. 130). With respect to marihuana'seffect on sexual stimulation the Committee indicated thatalthough "some evidence of eroticism" was reported (inabout 10% of the 150 instances in which marihuana wasadministered), there was no "frank expression of sexualstimulation" despite the presence of female nurses,attendants and others associated with the experiment (p. 38). More recently, Professor Goode published the results of aninformal survey of about 200 marihuana users in which he inquiredabout the relationship of marihuana to both sexual desire andsexual activity. To the question, "Do you think that beinghigh on marihuana stimulates your sex interest, or not?",38% said that their interest in sex while high was no differentin degree from their normal interest in sex; 5% stated that beinghigh on marihuana had a negative effect, i.e., that "ittended to turn them off sexually"; 13% replied that theeffect depended on either their mood, their partner or both; and44% (39% of the men and 50% of the women) reported that it"definitely increases their sexual desire" (1970: 162). Perhaps the most conclusive and consistent finding to emergefrom studies of the effects of marihuana on psychosexualstimulation is that the degree of sexual interest, desire andarousal induced by marihuana is dependent on the characteristicsof the user and the extent to which he comes to expect oranticipate such an effect. Research shows that women are morelikely to report heightened sexual desire than are men (Goode,1969) ; that young people more frequently report arousal than doolder persons (Bloomquist, 1968; Brenner, Coles and Meagher,1970) ; 2 that frequent users are more likely to report increasedsex interest than infrequent users (Goode, 1970) ; that personswho are more sexually experienced are more likely to be sexuallyaroused by marihuana than are those less sexually experienced(Brenner, Coles and Meagher, 1970; Hochman and Brill, 1971; Goodein press) and that those who expect to be sexually aroused by thedrug are more likely to be so aroused than those who do not(Goode, 1969; Fort, 1970; Grinspoon, 1971). There is nothing inherent in the drug itself which producesheightened sexual interest, desire or arousal, nor is there anyphysiological evidence to show that marihuana directly orspecifically acts on either the, sexual centers of the brain orthe sexual organs. As one observer has noted, marihuana "isnot a sexual stimulant; that is, in the, sense that it will notexcite mindless, laboratory-located animal tissue" (Goode,1969: 20). In short, marihuana is not an aphrodisiac. HOW MARIHUANA INFLUENCES SEXUAL RESPONSE It has already been stated that marihuana is not, in itself,an aphrodisiac although a substantial number of persons reportincreased sexual interest, desire and arousal following use ofthe drug. To what, then, are these effects attributable? Researchhearing on this question suggests that to the extent thatmarihuana influences these respouses, it does so indirectly byacting on the higher centers of the brain to relax inhibitionsand reduce, the usual restraints on behavior. By so doing, theuser is placed in the position of being freer to respond to hissexual needs and desires (Walton, 1938; Allentuck and Bowman,1942; Ausubel, 1958; Brown, 1961; McGothlin, 1966; Rosevear,1967; Bloomquist, 1968; Oursler, 1968; Goode, 1969; Fort, 1970).The extent to which these responses occur, however, are dependentupon individual expectation and knowledge (Fort, 1970) and thesocial situation (set and setting) in which the marihuana usetakes place (Goode, 1969). As Professor Goode has stated, Man'ssomatic responses are often influenced more by what he thinksthan by biological and chemical imperatives; in fact, it canhappen that what he thinks actually becomes his biological andchemical imperative (1969, p. 20). In addition to its effects on sexual inhibition and restraints(the extent and consequences of which will be examined later),marihuana is also reported to intensity aesthetic experiences andto enhance sensual activity. As one observer has noted, it isperhaps the principal effect of marihuana to take one moreintensely into whatever experience - ." (Trocchi, 1967:108). One observer points out, however, that most of the users ofmarihuana in this country are youths between the ages of 14 and25 and that "this age span needs no aphrodisiac to stimulateeither interest or capacity to perform" (Bloomquist, 1968:183). It is this fact (which probably explains why substantialproportions of marihuana users characterize their sexualexperiences under the influence of the drug as particularlyintense, prolonged, sensuous and pleasurable (Johnson, 1968;Goode, 1969; Brenner, Coles and Meagher, 1970; Hochman and Brill,1971; Tart, 1971; Abelson, et al., 1972). In one study of marihuana users conducted by a psychologist,65% reported a heightened sense of touch, 55% stated that"touch takes on new qualities," and 56% replied that"sexual orgasm was very often or usually more exciting thanwhen "straight"' (Tart, 1971). Of the approximately 500marihuana users surveyed by Goode, 68% (74% of the men and 62% ofthe women) reported that marihuana "Generally acted as apleasure enhancer (and) usually increased their sexualenjoyment" (Goode, in press, pp. 8-9). In still another study of marihuana users, both occasional andchronic, "increased sexual pleasure" was the secondmost common response, by the chronic users and the eighth mostcommonly reported effect by the occasional users; 83% of theformer and 50% of the latter reported that increased sexualpleasure was often or always experienced after smokingmarihuana.' Interesting too, was the finding that 85% of thechronic users and 78% of the occasional users reported neverexperiencing "decreased sexual pleasure" following useof the drug (Hochman and Brill, 1971:7). In the Commission's National Survey, respondents were asked toindicate whether or not they believed that marihuana increasessexual pleasure. Of those adults admitting they had triedmarihuana at least once (15%), 52% thought that the drug doesincrease sexual pleasure. Both adults and youth in general,however, seem to be less certain of this effect. Only aboutone-fourth of all respondents (24% of adults and 26% of youth)indicated agreement with the statement while slightly tinderone-half of those surveyed (48% of the adults and 49% of theyouth) expressed uncertainty about marihuana's ability toincrease sexual pleasure (Ableson, et al., 1972: 25-33). 3 The students were also asked to assess the degree ofimportance attached to a number of possible motivations for usingmarihuana. As might be expected from the findings regardingmarihuana and sexual enjoyment, significantly more of the usersthan the nonusers attached at least some degree of importance tomarihuana's perceived ability to enhance sexual experiences. Tothe item: "for better sexual experiences," 12% of thenon-users, 40% of the occasional users and 70% of the chronicusers felt that it was of some importance or "very"important in motivating use of the drug (Hochman and Brill,1971). The research bearing on the effects of marihuana on sexualpleasure suggests that marihuana is not usually perceived by thegeneral public to increase sexual enjoyment, that users aresignificantly more likely to believe that marihuana has thiseffect than are non-users, that those who expect to receiveincreased sexual pleasure are more likely to experience it thanthose who do not, and that frequent or regular users aresignificantly more likely to have actually experienced thiseffect than are those who use the drug less frequently. THE EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA ON OVERT SEXUAL BEHAVIOR As noted at the beginning of this discussion, society ingeneral and policy makers in particular are primarily concernedabout the extent to which and the conditions tinder whichmarihuana is likely to generate or increase, the likelihood ofsexually aberrant or aggressive behavior. Marihuana has alreadybeen shown to increase psychosexual stimulation in substantialproportions of users and to serve as a relaxer of inhibitions andrestraints. The questions as yet unresolved, however, relate to(a) the importance of sexual arousal in generating sexualactivity-particularly deviant sexual acts, and (b) the extent towhich inhibitions and restraints, which normally serve to protectthe individual and society from sexual excess and abuse, arelowered by marihuana to the point of being inoperative. The available evidence suggests that (a) although marihuanausers are more sexually active and sexually permissive than arenonusers, marihuana does not generally stimulate sexual activity,appreciably alter established patterns of sexual behavior orserve as a catalyst to sexual promiscuity; (b) the marihuana useris rarely sexually aggressive; and (c) persons arrested formarihuana law violations generally do not have previous orsubsequent criminal records for the commission of sexual offenses(Walton, 1938; Brown, 1961; White House Conference on NarcoticDrug Abuse, 1962; Blunt et al., 1969; Bremner, Coles and Meagher,1970; Goode, 1972; Goode, in press). Before summarizing the research forming, the basis of theseassertions, however, it should be noted that there, are severalcontradictory research findings with respect to (a) above. In onerecent study, for example, two Philadelphia physiciansinvestigating the effects of marihuana on adolescents and youngadults reported that the drug was directly responsible for sexualpromiscuity in 13 of their female patients. In the words of theseclinicians: This group is singled out because of the unusual degree ofsexual promiscuity, which ranged from sexual relations withseveral individuals of both sexes, and, sometimes, individuals ofboth sexes on the same evening. In histories of all of theseindividuals, we were struck by the loss of sexual inhibitionsafter short periods of marihuana smoking. Seven patients of thisgroup became pregnant (one on several occasions), and fourdeveloped venereal diseases. . . . In no instance was theresexual promiscuity prior to the beginning of marihuana smoking. .. . We take these results to indicate marihuana's effects onloosening the superego controls and altering superego ideals(Kolansky and Moore, 1971: 491). During 1970, another researcher (Goode, in press) distributedquestionnaires on drug use to between 500 and 600 undergraduatesin a large lecture course at a State University. Four measures ofsexual activity were employed: (1) engagement in premaritalintercourse, (2) the respondent's total number of differentsexual partners, (3) the age of first intercourse and (4) theaverage frequency of intercourse during the six months prior tothe study. The three indices of drug use employed were whether ornot the respondent had ever smoked marihuana, the frequency ofmarihuana use during the six months prior to the survey, and thetotal number of drugs or drug types ever used by the respondent.The researcher found that "all measures of sexual activitycorrelated significantly -and powerfully with all measures ofdrug use" (p. 12). More specifically, marihuana users werefar more likely to have engaged in premarital intercourse (72%)than were non-users (34%) ; the greater the frequency ofmarihuana use and the greater the number of drugs ever tried, theearlier was the first intercourse, the greater was the frequencyof intercourse and the greater was the number of sexual partners. As the researcher suggests, one might be tempted to concludefrom these findings that marihuana, as well as other drugs,causes early sex, frequent sex and sex with a number of differentpartners were it not for the fact that similar findings point toa relationship in the opposite direction. That is, not only weremarihuana users and drug experimenters more likely to experiencesex early in their lives, but "it is also the sexuallyprecocious who are more likely to use drugs, includingmarihuana" (p. 14). Of all respondents reporting intercourseby age 16, for example, 7% stated that they had never tried anyillegal drug, but total absence of illicit drug use was found in47% of the virgins (p. 14). Professor Goode concludes that "using marihuana or otherillegal drugs no more 'causes' sexual behavior than sexualbehavior 'causes' drug use" (p. 14). Rather, he suggests, Both sexual permissiveness and marihuana use as well as, tosome extent, experimentation with certain other illegal drugs-areindicators of the young person's involvement in and with asubculture which is tolerant toward a wide range ofnontraditional values and activities . . . Quite clearly,marihuana use grows out of a specific life style, which is, inturn, partly dependent on specific sociocultural backgroundfactors and permissive sexual behavior (branded as"promiscuous" by those who disapprove of it) is a partof this life style (pp. 14, 16). Similar to Goode's findings are those obtained from a mailsurvey of 1400 undergraduate students at UCLA (Hochman and Brill,1971). The data show that marihuana users have their first sexualexperience earlier than do non-users (50% of the users and 30% ofthe non-users had their first experience before age 18) ; havemore sexual experience than non-users; have a greater number ofsexual partners than do nonusers (twice as many users asnon-users had five or more sexual partners) ; and have moreliberal attitudes toward sex than do non-users. One of the questions asked of the students was: "In yourexperience or opinion, do you think that marihuana usage over along period results in sexual promiscuity?" Over half of thenon-users (54%) and almost three-fourths (73%) of the usersbelieved this happened rarely or not at all while 12% of thenonusers, 3% of the occasional users and 2% of the chronic usersbelieved that extended use of marihuana frequently leads tosexual promiscuity. Although the users more often suffered from venereal diseasethan did the nonusers (7% vs. 2%), there were no differencesbetween the groups in the average frequency of sexualintercourse, the number of concurrent sexual partners, the numberof pregnancies, miscarriages and illegitimacies, or the incidenceof homosexuality. A more middle-of-the-road position regarding the associationbetween use of marihuana and sexual promiscuity was revealed in aCommission sponsored mail survey of 781 judges, probationofficers and court clinicians (InTech, 1971). In an effort todevelop a profile of the regular marihuana. user, respondentswere asked: "In light of your professional experience, doyou, think all, most, some or just a, few of the people whoregularly use marihuana are sexually promiscuous?" Tabulation of the responses revealed, among all three groups,considerable uncertainty and ambivalence as manifested in thefindings that 23% of the total sample either did not answer thequestion or stated that they did not know, and that three-fifthsof those who responded (70%) would answer no more categoricallythan to say that only some" could be characterized in thismanner. The percentages of each of the three groups ofrespondents stating that all or most, some and few or none of theregular marihuana users are sexually promiscuous are shown inTable 4. The Commission has found several studies dating from 1939which support the assertions that the marihuana user is rarelysexually aggressive and that he rarely has a criminal record forthe commission of sexual offenses. A survey of the criminal records of 379 Greek offenders eithersentenced or arrested for the public use of hashish between 1919and 1950 (Gardikas, 1950) revealed no link between the use ofhashish and the commission of sexual offenses. Lambo (1965) compiled a list of crimes which occurred during arecent two-year period in three West African countries. Of the472 "offences against women" committed during theperiod of study, 26% were claimed to have been committed by usersof cannabis. In a, study conducted by the Kinsey Institute for SexResearch, 1500 incarcerated sex offenders were interviewed abouttheir sexual offenses. The researchers found that in markedcontrast to the role of alcohol in the commission of theiroffenses, particularly aggressive sex crimes, marihuana was avery insignificant factor. While the presence of alcohol wasreported in relation to 67% of all sexually aggressive actsagainst children and 39% of such aggressive acts against adultwomen, marihuana was mentioned in only eight sexual offenses outof a total of 2,022 such offenses committed by the respondents(Gebbard, Gagnon, Pomeroy and Christenson, 1967: 761-819). Two recent systematic studies of rape cases recorded by thepolice in Philadelphia (Amir, 1971) and Denver (MacDonald, 1971)gave no indication that marihuana was specifically linked tothese offenses. It should be noted, however, that the involvementof marihuana in these cases, unlike the involvement of alcohol,was not specifically explored. Table 4--JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURT CLINICIANSWHO BELIEVE THAT REGULAR MARIHUANA USERS ARE SEXUALLY PROMISCUOUS (Figures in Percentages) All or Some Few or most none Judges (N =408) 23.8 58.3 17.9 Probation Officers (N=87) 21.9 58.6 19.5 Clinicians (N = 106) 11.3 65.1 23.6 Total (N=701) 21.3 59.6 19.1 In two Commission-sponsored studies of the relationshipbetween marihuana and crime, no evidence was found to suggestthat marihuana is a significant factor in or contributor to thecommission of sexual offenses. A study of 1,776 youthfuloffenders (16 to 21 years of age) arrested for marihuana lawviolations in five New York counties between 1965 and 1969revealed that none of the offenders had either a previous orsubsequent criminal record for the commission of sexual offenses(Weitzner, et. al., 1971). In another study sponsored by the Commission, interviews with559 male residents (16 to 34 years of age) of West Philadelphia,revealed that six respondents, or about one in 100, admitted tohaving committed the offense of "forcing sexualintercourse," three having reportedly committed it more thanonce but none having been apprehended for these offenses (Goode,1972; 29a). In an effort to assess the role of marihuana in theseoffenses, respondents were asked whether or not they had used thedrug within the 24 hours preceding the commission of both theirfirst and most recent offenses. In contrast to alcohol, which wasreported to have been consumed within 24 hours prior to one-thirdof the first and most recent offenses of forcing sexualintercourse (two out of six and one out of three, respectively),none of the offenders reported smoking marihuana within 24 hoursof either the first or most recent time they committed thisoffense (Goode, 1972: 29a). Research findings which are available lend little support tothe thesis that marihuana either causes or is a significantfactor in the heightening of sexual aggression or the commissionof sexual offenses. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding